6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 1/454
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Cottage Grove, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 1003, passed April
17, 2019. Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are
in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 679
CITY OF COTTAGE GROVE
COUNTY OF WASHINGTON
STATE OF MINNESOTA
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF
COTTAGE GROVE, MINNESOTA
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Cottage Grove, Minnesota, a Municipal Corporation:
Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City Code of the City of Cottage Grove, Minnesota, prepared
by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., contained the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to said
ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official Code
and Law of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose leaf type of binding together with the option of
supplement service, whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or
deleting provisions of the Official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each of the
official copies, one (1) copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for
inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly open.
Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official City Code shall be considered as a continuation of said
ordinance provision, and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to
cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness of ordinances included in said Official City Code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in
full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be
included in the Official City Code.
Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of
such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will
cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby.
Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 6: This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
approval in accordance with law, as printed and published in book form by order of the Mayor and City Council.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 2/454
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
This codification of the ordinances of the City of Cottage Grove may be referred to and cited as THE COTTAGE GROVE CITY
CODE. (2000 Code)
1-1-2: NUMBERING SYSTEM:
A. Numbering System Explained: For the purposes of internal references in the Code and citation by its users, each section of the
legislation included in this Code has been assigned a number that indicates the title in which the legislation is included, the
chapter or article as the case may be in which it is found and the location of the section within that chapter or article, as follows:
Example: 5-1A-2
First number ( 5-1A-2) Title of Code
Second number (5- 1A-2) Chapter of Title
Letter (5-1 A-2) Article of Chapter
Third number (5-1A- 2) Section of Chapter and/or Article
B. Referencing Code Provisions: References or citations made in a form other than the foregoing will not defeat the intent of a user in
citing this Code when that intent is otherwise clear. This Code is to be construed liberally to carry out its intent and purpose. (2000
Code)
1-1-3: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
Statutes or administrative rules or regulations of the State of Minnesota and codes and ordinances adopted by reference in this Code
are adopted pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes section 471.62. At least one copy of any item so adopted, but not
less than the number of copies required by law, must be kept in the office of the City Clerk for use by the public. (2000 Code)
Chapter 2
LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE; SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: ORDINANCE ENACTMENT AND EFFECTIVE DATE:
A. Enactment Of Ordinances: Ordinances are enacted in accordance with the procedures set forth in Minnesota Statutes chapter
412.
B. Effective Date: Ordinances are effective on the day following publication in the official newspaper of the City or on a later date
specified in the ordinance. (2000 Code)
1-2-2: REPEALED AND SPECIAL ORDINANCES:
A. Ordinances Repealed And Ordinances Saved From Repeal:
1. All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this Code are repealed, except those ordinances that are
included in this Code or are by necessary implication reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the
following sections), and excluding the following ordinances which are not repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special
rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of
obligations; salary ordinances; fee ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real
estate by or from the City; and all special ordinances.
2. The City Council may direct that special ordinances and others be included in appendices to this Code.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 3/454
B. Limitations On Repeal: The repeal of the ordinances as provided in subsection A1 of this Section does not affect any debt or fee
which is accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding commenced under or by virtue of the
ordinances repealed or the term of office of any person holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor shall the repeal
of any ordinance have the effect of reviving any ordinance heretofore repealed or superseded.
C. Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances: An ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or
relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities is not repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Code or by virtue
of subsections A and B of this Section, excepting as this Code contains provisions for such matters, in which case, this Code is to
be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2000 Code)
1-2-3: ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE; INTEGRATION INTO CODE:
A. Form Of Ordinances Amending Code: An ordinance amending this Code must specify the chapter, article, section, subsection or
clause to be amended. Language to be added must be underlined; language to be repealed must be stricken. An ordinance
repealing an entire chapter, article, section, subsection or clause need refer only to that chapter, article, section, subsection or
clause, and the text need not be reproduced. The text of an ordinance adding only new provisions to the Code need not be
underlined.
B. Integrating Ordinances Into Code:
1. Ordinances are to be integrated into this Code in accordance with this Chapter.
2. When an ordinance is integrated into this Code, the following matters may be omitted:
a. Title.
b. Enacting clause.
c. Section numbers.
d. Validation and repealing clauses.
e. Validating signatures and dates.
f. Punctuation and other matters not an integral part of the text of the ordinance.
g. Penalty provisions.
C. Source Notes: When an ordinance is integrated into this Code, a source note will be added where appropriate indicating the
ordinance number and passage date from which the changed language was derived. (2000 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
1-3-1: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the
context makes such meanings repugnant thereto:
CITY: The City of Cottage Grove, County of Washington, State of Minnesota.
CODE, THIS CODE OR CODE OF ORDINANCES: The City Code of the City of Cottage Grove adopted by ordinance as organized,
compiled and codified herein.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and
including the last, unless the last day falls on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, and then it is also excluded.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the City Council of the City of Cottage Grove.
COUNTY: The County of Washington, State of Minnesota.
IN THE CITY: Means and includes all territory over which the City now has, or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 4/454
its police powers or other regulatory powers.
OFFICERS: A reference to an elected or appointed City officer includes the duly authorized representative of that officer.
OWNER: In the case of personal property, a person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to personal property. In the
case of real property, the term means the fee owner of land, or the beneficial owner of land whose interest is primarily one of
possession and enjoyment in contemplation of ultimate ownership. The term includes, but is not limited to, vendees under a contract
for deed and mortgagors.
STATE: The State of Minnesota. (2000 Code)
1-3-2: STATUTORY DEFINITIONS; DOCUMENTS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
For purposes of this Code, the terms defined in Minnesota Statutes sections 645.44 and 645.45 have the meanings given them by
those sections, and terms defined by statutes, rules or regulations, and ordinances adopted by reference have the meanings given
them therein. (2000 Code)
1-3-3: INTERNAL DEFINITIONS:
Terms defined in other sections of this Code have the meanings given them by those sections. (2000 Code)
1-3-4: INTERPRETATION; CONFLICTS:
A. Common Word Usage: Words and phrases used in this Code are to be interpreted and understood in accordance with common
and accepted usage, but any technical words or phrases or such others as have acquired a specific or peculiar meaning are to be
interpreted and understood in accordance with such meaning.
B. Application Of Statutory Rules: It is the intent of the City Council that the rules and canons of construction, presumptions and
miscellaneous provisions relating to statutory construction contained in Minnesota Statutes chapter 645 apply to this Code and
govern its interpretation, and that all questions of meaning, construction and interpretation of this Code be resolved by application
of the rules contained in said chapter 645. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes chapter 645 are adopted by reference and are as
much a part of this Code as if fully set forth herein.
C. State Regulations; Regulations Of Other Municipalities:
1. References in this Code to Minnesota Statutes are to the most current Minnesota Statutes and Laws of Minnesota, unless
otherwise provided in this Code.
2. References in this Code to rules and regulations of State agencies, codes and ordinances of other municipalities are to those
documents in effect upon the adoption of this Code, unless otherwise provided.
D. Catchlines; Cross-References: Chapter, section and subsection titles, catchlines and cross-references are not substantive parts of
this Code, but merely matters to expedite and simplify its use.
E. Greater Restrictions: It is the intent of the City Council that the provisions of this Code are the fullest exercise of the regulatory and
other powers granted to it by State law. Where this Code imposes a more stringent rule or standard of conduct than contained in
similar provisions of State law, rule or regulation, it is the intent of the Council that the provisions of this Code prevail over that
State law, rule or regulation to the extent permitted by law. (2000 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
A. Violation; Penalties: Violation of a provision of this code is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both. Each act
of violation and each day on which a violation occurs or continues is a separate violation. (Ord. 931, 5-7-2014)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 5/454
B. Definition Of Misdemeanor And Petty Misdemeanor: A "misdemeanor" is an offense or crime that the city council is empowered to
punish with fine or imprisonment; a "petty misdemeanor" is as defined by law. (2000 Code)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. It is the intention of the city council that the penalty provided by this chapter or any other section of this code applies to any
amendment of any section of this code whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance unless otherwise
provided in the amendatory ordinance.
B. Where a provision of this code or a statute adopted by reference herein sets a lesser penalty or a different period constituting a
violation than set out in section 1-4-1 of this chapter, the code provision will prevail. (2000 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
The penalty imposed by this chapter does not apply to the failure of a city officer or employee to perform a duty imposed by this code
unless a penalty is specifically provided for such failure. (2000 Code)
ARTICLE A. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES, CITATIONS AND CIVIL
PENALTIES
1-4A-1: SCOPE:
This article shall govern administrative offenses, citations and civil penalties for violations of this code. (Ord. 646, 5-7-1997)
1-4A-2: PURPOSE:
The city council finds that there is a need for alternative methods of enforcing this code. While criminal fines and penalties have been
the most frequent enforcement mechanism, there are certain negative consequences for both the city and the accused. The delay
inherent in that system does not ensure prompt resolution. Citizens resent being labeled as criminals for violations of administrative
regulations. The higher burden of proof and the potential of incarceration do not appear appropriate for most administrative
violations. The criminal process does not always regard city code violations as being important. Accordingly, the city council finds
that the use of administrative citations and the imposition of civil penalties is a legitimate and necessary alternative method of
enforcement. This method of enforcement shall be in addition to any other legal remedy which may be pursued for city code
violations. (Ord. 646, 5-7-1997)
1-4A-3: DEFINITION:
"Administrative offense" is a violation of any section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this code when one performs an act
prohibited, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited, and is subject to the penalty set forth in subsection 1-4A-5C of this
article. Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 646, 5-7-1997)
1-4A-4: MISDEMEANORS AND ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES:
Offenses that are declared misdemeanors by this code may be charged as administrative offenses, at the election of the city, when
notice of violation is issued pursuant to subsection 1-4A-5A of this article, and there is a scheduled penalty established. (Ord. 646, 5-
7-1997)
1-4A-5: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION:
A. Notice Of Violation: Any member of the public safety department and any other person employed by the city with authority to
enforce this code shall, upon determining that there has been a violation, notify the violator or person responsible for the violation,
either in person or by mail, or, in the case of a vehicular violation, by attaching to said vehicle notice of the violation, said notice
setting forth the nature, date, time of the violation, the name of the official issuing the notice and the amount of the scheduled
initial penalty and, where applicable, any charges relating thereto.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 6/454
B. Administration Procedure: The city administrator or his/her designee shall adopt procedures for administering an administrative
citation program. (Ord. 646, 5-7-1997)
C. Scheduled Penalties: Penalties shall be imposed for a violation of the scheduled administrative offenses according to a schedule
established by ordinance of the city council. The city council is not bound by the established administrative fee schedule when
matters are appealed to a hearing officer. The city council may adopt a schedule of fees to be paid to the administrative hearing
officer. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
D. Payment Of Fine; Late Charges: Once such notice is given, the person responsible for the violation shall, within seven (7) days of
the time of issuance of the notice, pay full satisfaction of the stated violation schedule to the city finance director. The penalty may
be paid in person or by mail, and payment shall be admission of the violation. A late charge of fifteen percent (15%) shall be
imposed for each seven (7) days the penalty remains unpaid after the first seven (7) day period.
E. Failure To Pay: If a violator fails to pay the penalty and interest imposed, the issuing official shall issue an ordinance complaint as
authorized by law, and the violation shall be processed as a crime by the Washington County Municipal Court as provided for in
Minnesota Statutes section 488A.18, subdivision 7(2). Failure to pay a fine is grounds for suspending or revoking a license. (Ord.
646, 5-7-1997)
1-4A-6: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
A. Request For Hearing: Any person aggrieved by this Article may request, within seven (7) days of the time of issuance of the
notice, to be heard by the hearing officers who shall hear and determine the grievance.
B. Hearing Officer: The City Administrator shall designate a hearing officer, and the hearing officer is authorized to hear or determine
a case of controversy under this Article. The hearing officer is not a judicial officer and is a public officer as defined by Minnesota
Statutes section 609.415 and subject to Minnesota Statutes relating to public officers.
C. Determination Of Case: The hearing officer shall have the authority to dismiss the violation for cause, reduce or waive the penalty
upon such terms and conditions as can be agreed upon by the parties; however, reasons for such dispositions shall be stated, in
writing, by said hearing officer. If the violation is sustained by the hearing officer, the violator shall pay satisfaction of the penalty
or shall sign an agreement to pay upon such terms and conditions as set forth by the hearing officer. The decision of the hearing
officer is final without any further right of administrative appeal. (Ord. 646, 5-7-1997)
1-4A-7: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Enforcement: In addition to all other duties set forth in this Code, the City Administrator may delegate and supervise the work of
any City employee implementing and administering this Article.
B. Records Kept: The City Administrator shall make and have custody of all records necessary and shall keep proper accounts of the
proceeds received.
C. Disposition Of Penalties: All penalties collected shall be paid over to the City Finance Director . The City Administrator may
receive negotiable instruments in payment of penalties as conditional payment and shall not be held accountable therefor. A
receipt shall be issued for cash payments. (Ord. 646, 5-7-1997)
Chapter 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1-5-1: ELECTION AND TERMS OF MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL:
The mayor and members of the city council shall be elected for terms of four (4) years during the city's regular biennial elections1.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 7/454
The mayor and two (2) council members shall be elected during one biennial election, and the two (2) remaining council members
shall be elected during the next biennial election, so that terms are overlapping. (2000 Code)
1-5-2: SALARIES:
Pursuant to the authority granted by Minnesota statutes section 415.11, effective January 1, 2017, the salary of the mayor is hereby
fixed at nine hundred four dollars ($904.00) per month, and the salary of each city council member at six hundred eighty one dollars
($681.00) per month. (Ord. 970, 10-5-2016)
1-5-3: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings:
1. Time And Place: Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Wednesdays of each calendar month
at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Any regular meeting falling upon a holiday shall be held on the next following business day at the
same time and place. The council may amend the regular meeting schedule at the first regular meeting of the year. All regular
meetings shall be held in the city hall.
2. Duties At First Regular Meeting Of Year: At the first regular city council meeting in January of each year the council shall
perform the following duties:
a. Designate the depositories of city funds.
b. Designate the official newspaper.
c. Choose an acting mayor from the council members who shall perform the duties of the mayor during the disability or
absence of the mayor from the city or, in case of vacancy in the office of mayor, until a successor has been appointed.
d. Approve the schedule of regular meetings for the calendar year.
B. Special Meetings: Special meetings of the city council may be called by any of the following means:
1. The mayor may direct the city administrator or city clerk in writing to schedule a special meeting; or
2. Any two (2) members of the city council may direct the city administrator or city clerk in writing to schedule a special meeting;
or
3. The city administrator, with the consent of the mayor or two (2) council members, may schedule a special meeting.
The city clerk shall provide notice of all special meetings in compliance with applicable law.
C. Emergency Meetings:
1. Definition: An "emergency meeting" is a special meeting called because of circumstances that, in the judgment of the city,
require immediate consideration by the city council.
2. Notice: For an emergency meeting, the city clerk shall make good faith efforts to provide notice of a meeting to each news
medium that has filed a written request for notice if the request includes the news medium's telephone number. Notice of the
emergency meeting shall be given by telephone or by any other method used to notify the members of the city council. Notice
shall be provided to each news medium which has filed a written request for notice as soon as reasonably practicable after
notice has been given to city council members. Notice shall include the subject of the meeting. Posted or published notice of an
emergency meeting shall not be required.
3. Discussions Of Matters Other Than Emergency: If matters not directly related to the emergency are discussed or acted upon at
the emergency meeting, the minutes of the meeting shall include a specific description of the matters.
D. Open To The Public: Except as otherwise provided by law for public meetings, all council meetings shall be open to the public.
E. Open Forum: Each regular meeting shall contain a segment for the purpose of receiving open forum comments. Persons may
address the city council on subjects that are not a part of the regular meeting agenda, but must limit remarks to the period of time
established by council resolution. The purpose of open forum is to provide an opportunity for the public to provide information to
or request action by the city council, and it may not be used to make personal attacks, to air personality grievances, to make
political endorsements, or for political campaign purposes. Open forum is limited to a total of fifteen (15) minutes. (Ord. 949, 10-
21-2015)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 8/454
1-5-4: PRESIDING OFFICER; APPEALS:
A. Officials Serve As Presiding Officer: The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council. In the absence of the mayor, the acting
mayor shall preside. In the absence of both, the clerk shall call the meeting to order and shall preside until the council members
present at the meeting choose one of their number to act temporarily as presiding officer.
B. Duties: The presiding officer shall preserve order, enforce the rules of procedure prescribed in this chapter and determine without
debate, subject to the final decision of the council on appeal, all questions of procedure and order. (1971 Code § 2-7)
C. Appeal Of Rulings Of Presiding Officer: Any member may appeal to the council from a ruling of the presiding officer. If the appeal
is seconded, the member may speak once solely on the question involved, and the presiding officer may explain his/her ruling,
but no other council member shall participate in the discussion. The appeal shall be sustained if it is approved by a majority of the
members present, exclusive of the presiding officer. The mayor or such other member of the council as may be presiding may
move, second and debate from the chair. The presiding officer shall not be deprived of any of the privileges of a council member
by reason of his/her acting as the presiding officer. (1971 Code § 2-8; amd. 2000 Code)
1-5-5: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
Each regular meeting of the council shall convene at the time and place appointed therefor. Council business shall be conducted in
the order established by the council from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 717, 7-17-2002)
1-5-6: AGENDA:
A. Filing Agenda: An agenda of business for each regular council meeting shall be prepared and filed in the office of the clerk no later
than two (2) days next preceding the meeting.
B. Distribution: The agenda shall be prepared in accordance with the order of business, and copies thereof shall be delivered to each
council member and to supervisory personnel as far in advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit.
C. Business Items Not On Agenda: No item of business must be considered unless it appears on the agenda for the meeting, but the
council may, at its discretion, consider matters not appearing on the agenda.
D. Consent Calendar:
1. All items of business which are expected to be adopted without comment shall be placed on the consent calendar.
2. The mayor or any council member may remove any item of business from the consent calendar by request to the clerk.
3. The consent calendar shall be approved by unanimous vote. (1971 Code § 2-12; amd. 2000 Code)
1-5-7: QUORUM; NONATTENDANCE:
At all council meetings, a majority of all the council members elected shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a
smaller number may adjourn from time to time. The council may punish nonattendance by a fine not exceeding fifteen dollars
($15.00) for each absence from any meeting unless a reasonable excuse is offered. (1971 Code § 2-13)
1-5-8: ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER:
Except as otherwise provided by statute or by this chapter, the proceedings of the council shall be conducted in accordance with
"Robert's Rules Of Order, Revised". (1971 Code § 2-14)
1-5-9: VOTING PROCEDURE:
The votes of the members on any questions before the council may be in any manner which signifies the intention of the members,
and the votes of the members on any action taken shall be recorded in the minutes. A roll call will be taken upon request of any
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 9/454
member of the council. The vote of each member shall be recorded on each appropriation of money, except for payments of
judgments, claims and amounts fixed by statute. (1971 Code § 2-16)
1-5-10: ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS:
A. Presentation And Reading Of Documents:
1. Each ordinance and resolution shall be presented in writing and shall be read in full before a vote is taken thereon if any
council member so requests.
2. All motions shall be recorded in the minutes and stated in full before they are submitted by the presiding officer to a vote. All
petitions and other communications addressed to the council shall be in writing and shall be read in full upon presentation to
the council. They shall then be recorded in the minutes by title and filed with the minutes in the office of the clerk. (1971 Code
§ 2-18)
B. Approval Of Ordinances; Vote Required: A majority vote of all members of the council shall be necessary for approval of any
ordinance, unless a larger number is required by statute. Except as otherwise provided by statute, a majority vote of a quorum
shall prevail in all other cases. (1971 Code § 2-17)
C. Validation And Filing Of Ordinances And Resolutions: Every ordinance and resolution passed by the council shall be signed by the
mayor, attested by the clerk, and filed by him/her in the ordinance or resolution book. Proof of publication of every ordinance shall
be attached to and filed with the ordinance. (1971 Code § 2-19; amd. 2000 Code)
D. Repeal And Amendment Of Ordinances And Resolutions: Every ordinance or resolution repealing a previous ordinance or
resolution, or a section or subdivision thereof, shall give the number, if any, and the title of the ordinance or resolution to be
repealed in whole or in part. No ordinance or resolution, or section or subdivision thereof, shall be amended by reference to the
title alone, but such an amending ordinance or resolution shall set forth in full each section or subdivision to be amended. (1971
Code § 2-20)
1-5-11: MINUTES:
A. Responsibility For Recording Minutes: Minutes of each council meeting shall be kept by the clerk. In the absence of the city clerk,
the presiding officer shall appoint a secretary pro tem. Ordinances, resolutions and claims need not be recorded in full in the
minutes if they appear in other permanent records of the city clerk and can be accurately identified from the description given in
the minutes.
B. Form; Distribution Of Copies: The minutes of each meeting shall be reduced to typewritten form, signed by the clerk, and copies
thereof shall be delivered to each council member as soon as practicable after the meeting.
C. Approval: At the next regular council meeting following such delivery, approval of the minutes shall be considered by the council.
The minutes need not be read aloud, but the presiding officer shall call for any additions or corrections. If there is no objection to
a proposed addition or correction, it may be made without a vote of the council. If there is an objection, the council shall vote upon
the addition or correction. If there are no additions or corrections, the minutes shall stand approved. (1971 Code § 2-15; amd.
2000 Code)
1-5-12: SUSPENSION, REPEAL OR AMENDMENT OF RULES:
The rules of this chapter may be temporarily suspended, either in part or in their entirety, by a majority vote of all the council
members, and shall not be repealed or amended except by a majority vote of the whole council after notice has been given at some
preceding council meeting. (1971 Code § 2-21)
1-5-13: ELECTED OFFICIAL MEETINGS:
A. Minnesota state statute 211B.10, subdivision 2, permits elected officials time off from their regular employment to attend meetings
required by reason of the public office. The city desires to provide clarification for city council members and their employers
regarding the duties and requirements of the office of city council member.
B. City council members are required to attend the following meetings in fulfillment of their duties as council members:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 10/454
1. Regular, special and emergency meetings of the city council;
2. Meetings of joint powers entities to which the city council member is appointed as the member representative of the city;
3. City committees to which the elected official is appointed by the city council as an official member; and
4. Other meetings at which the elected official appears in his or her official capacity and at the direction of the city council. (Ord.
868, 11-18-2009)
Chapter 6
CITY DEPARTMENTS
1-6-1: DEPARTMENTS AND OFFICES ESTABLISHED:
The administrative services of the City shall be divided into the following departments and heads thereof, and such departments and
positions are hereby created:
Department of Administration City Administrator
Department of Finance Finance Director
Department of Community Development
Department of Public Works Director of Public Works
Department of Public Safety Director of Public Safety
Department of Engineering City Engineer
Legal Department City Attorney
(Ord. 614, 6-7-1995; amd. 2000 Code)
1-6-2: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT AND DIVISION HEADS:
A. Each department or division head shall perform all duties required of the office by this Code, other ordinances or other laws, and
shall perform such duties not in conflict herewith as may be assigned by the City Council or the City Administrator.
B. Each department or division head shall be responsible for the preservation of all public records under the department's
jurisdiction. No public record, reports, correspondence or other data relative to the business of any department shall be destroyed
or removed permanently unless authorized by this Code or other law or ordinance or without the knowledge and approval of the
department's immediate supervisor.
C. The department and division heads shall be immediately responsible to the department's immediate supervisor for effective
administration of their department and all activities assigned thereto.
D. The City Administrator shall, by administrative rule, designate a succession of authority for each office established by this Chapter.
In the absence of a department or division head, the full authorities and responsibilities of the office shall be exercised by the
person or position so designated by the City Administrator. (Ord. 614, 6-7-1995)
1-6-3: DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION:
A. Composition: The Department of Administration shall be composed of the City Administrator and the following offices:
1. Division of personnel.
2. Division of Economic Development.
3. Office of the City Clerk.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 11/454
B. Department Duties Generally: The Administration Department shall perform all the duties that may from time to time to assigned
by the Council.
C. City Administrator:
1. Chief Administrative Officer: The City Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the City. The Administrator shall
be chosen by the City Council solely on the basis of training, experience, and administrative qualification.
2. Appointment And Removal From Office: The Administrator shall be appointed for an indefinite period by a majority of the City
Council. The Administrator may be removed from office after thirty (30) calendar days' written notice only by a majority vote of
the City Council, with or without cause. If the Administrator has served for more than one year, a public hearing shall be
provided, if requested by the Administrator, prior to the date the removal becomes effective. Following the public hearing, the
decision of the City Council shall be final.
3. Duties: The City Administrator shall perform the following functions:
a. Supervise the administration of all other departments, divisions and offices of the City. Such supervision shall include the
making of ministerial decisions affecting such departments, recommending procedures to the City Council for adoption, and
making recommendations to the City Council regarding the employment and dismissal of personnel. The City Council shall
make all final determinations in regard to the employment or dismissal of City employees; except, that temporary and parttime
personnel may be hired and discharged by the City Administrator.
b. Generate and issue all administrative rules, regulations and procedures necessary to ensure the proper functioning of all
departments within the department's purview. Such rules, regulations and procedures shall be consistent with State statutes,
City ordinances and Council policy. Such rules, regulations and procedures shall be effective upon issuance and shall
continue to be in effect until rescinded by the City Administrator or by express action of the Council.
c. Supervise the management and operation of the administrative office.
d. Annually submit to the City Council a recommended budget which shall include statements relating to projected revenue and
proposed sources, and all proposed expenditures to be made and obligations to be incurred by the City in the forthcoming
fiscal year.
e. Be responsible for the administration of such personnel policies which the City Council may from time to time adopt.
f. Advise the City Council of all matters pertaining to or affecting the operation of the City government or the City proper.
g. See that the laws, ordinances and resolutions of the City are enforced, and whenever necessary, make recommendations for
changes or additions to existing ordinances.
h. Be directly responsible to the City Council for the faithful and satisfactory performance of his/her duties. He/she shall perform
such additional functions and attend all meetings of the City Council and such committee meetings thereof as the Council
may direct.
i. Represent the City at all official or semi-official functions as may be directed by the City Council.
j. Enter into contracts on behalf of the City as authorized by Council policy or action.
D. Personnel Division:
1. General Duties: The Personnel Division shall be responsible for the planning and direction of the personnel activities and
program of the City. The Personnel Officer shall be responsible for maintaining conformance with national, State and local
guidelines governing personnel administration.
2. Director Of Personnel: The Director of Personnel shall serve as the Personnel Officer and shall maintain control over all
personal records of all employees of the City. The Director shall also:
a. Develop, interpret and recommend personnel policies and guidelines which are in the best interest of the City.
b. Counsel with the City Administrator and/or with department heads in matters of staffing, salary and benefits, union matters
and other pertinent personnel issues.
c. Under the direction of the City Administrator, represent the City in labor negotiations, with responsibility for interpretation and
administration of all collective bargaining agreements.
d. Develop, direct and administer training and orientation programs, as well as the employee performance review program for
all City employees.
e. Develop and maintain position descriptions which are up-to-date, accurate and reflect areas of responsibility and
accountability.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 12/454
f. Develop, maintain, and administer the City's equal employment opportunity policy.
E. Duties Of Economic Development Director: The Economic Development Director shall perform the following functions:
1. Establish and maintain network with organizations and individuals involved in commercial and industrial development.
2. Maintain current inventory of potential business location sites within the City.
3. Identify and contact prospective clients for location or expansion within Cottage Grove, and maintain contact with current
businesses to stay abreast of their future business plans and needs.
4. Prepare an annual budget and work program for submission to the economic development authority and City Council.
5. Serve as chief staff support to the economic development authority.
6. Maintain updated demographic data, promotional materials and existing business lists for economic development programs.
F. City Clerk:
1. Duties: The City Clerk shall perform the following functions:
a. Give the required notice of each regular and special election, record the proceedings thereof, notify officials of the election or
appointments to office, certify to the County Auditor all appointments and the results of all City elections.
b. Keep a minute book, noting therein all proceedings of the Council.
c. Keep an ordinance book, recording at length all ordinances passed by the Council.
d. Be the "responsible authority" for compliance with the Minnesota Government Data Practices Act1.
e. Be custodian of the City Seal and records.
f. Sign the City's official papers.
g. Post and publish notices, ordinances and resolutions, as may be required.
h. Be responsible for issuance of all licenses issued by the City in accordance with State laws and local ordinances and ensure
the maintenance of all related records.
i. Manage self-insurance programs (except benefit programs) and make recommendations on service and benefit levels; assist
in the administration of risk management and safety programs; identify exposures which could result in financial loss to the
City.
j. Perform such other appropriate duties as may be imposed by the Council.
2. Deputy Clerk: With the consent of the City Administrator and Council, the Clerk may appoint a Deputy for whose acts the Clerk
shall be responsible. In the Clerk's absence from the City or disability, the City Council, upon recommendation of the City
Administrator, may designate a Deputy Clerk. The Deputy may discharge any of the official and legal duties of the office of the
City Clerk. (Ord. 614, 6-7-1995)
1-6-4: DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE:
A. Department Duties Generally: The Finance Department shall perform the overall planning and administration of all financial
activities and records as required by State statutes and City policy, and in accordance with the generally accepted accounting
principles.
B. Duties Of Director: The Director of Finance shall:
1. Serve as the treasurer of the City, carrying out custody of City funds and the bookkeeping duties of the City as required by
State law.
2. Act as financial advisor to the City Administrator and assist in the preparation and presentation of the annual budget.
3. Monitor the City's cash flow situation and administer the investments program of the City.
4. Be responsible for the implementation of approved financial and accounting procedures and methods employed within the
Department and recommend accounting procedures to be followed by all City departments.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 13/454
5. Serve as the Purchasing Officer for the City, to ensure conformance with State statutes and existing policy.
6. Assist the City Administrator and City Clerk in the preparation of insurance specifications for all City insurance programs and
make recommendations on service or benefit levels; assist in the administration of the risk management program.
7. Coordinate preparation of the City's capital improvements plan, the preparation of sale of bonds, the preparation of special
assessments rolls and monitoring all phases of debt administration.
8. Monitor and develop internal control procedures which assure the accuracy and security of all records and assets.
9. Manage the City's information system including purchase recommendations and maintenance of hardware and software. (Ord.
614, 6-7-1995; amd. 2000 Code)
1-6-5: DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:
A. Composition: The Department of Community Development shall be comprised of the following divisions:
1. Planning Division.
2. Zoning administration.
3. Building Inspection Division.
4. Engineering administration.
5. Historic Preservation Division. (Ord. 614, 6-7-1995)
B. Department Duties Generally: The Department of Community Development is responsible for coordinating all activities related to
planning, implementation and development of land use, infrastructure, construction and long term maintenance of human-made
facilities and enforcing local, regional, State and Federal rules and regulations regarding the use of land. (Ord. 614, 6-7-1995;
amd. 2000 Code)
C. Duties Of Divisions:
1. Planning Division: The Planning Division shall be responsible for promoting orderly planning and development of residential,
business, industrial, recreational, agricultural and public areas in the City. This Division updates the City's Comprehensive Plan,
Critical Area Plan, specific area plans, and related implementing ordinances.
2. Duties Of Zoning Administration: The zoning administration is responsible for administering and enforcing the Zoning
Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, Sign Ordinances, Flood Plain, Shoreline and Wetlands Ordinances, Mining Ordinance and
other ordinances related to the Planning Division.
3. Duties Of Building Inspection Division: The Building Inspection Division reviews building plans and permits for compliance with
State and local building codes. The Division completes a wide range of field inspections and has considerable contact with
contractors and the general public. The Division is responsible for administering and enforcing the housing
maintenance/structure code and licenses home occupations and residential rental units.
4. Duties Of Historic Preservation Division: The Historic Preservation Division identifies, monitors, and provides recommendations
on historically significant archeological and architectural properties. These recommendations include the implementation of City
policies with response to the preservation, protection and potential use or adaptive reuse of these cultural resources. (Ord. 614,
6-7-1995)
1-6-6: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
A. Composition: The Department of Public Works shall be composed of a Director and Assistant Director of Public Works. The
Assistant Director shall also serve as Director of Parks and Recreation. The Department of Public Works shall consist of the
following divisions:
1. Streets Division.
2. Water and Wastewater Division.
3. Special Services Division.
4. Fleet and Building Maintenance Division.
5. Park Maintenance Division.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 14/454
6. Recreation Division.
7. Golf Course Division.
8. Ice Arena Division.
B. Duties Of Director: The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for the management and operation of all divisions within the
Department of Public Works and shall be responsible for providing supervision, direction, and planning for all activities and
services performed by divisions within the Public Works Department.
C. Duties Of The Assistant Public Works/Parks And Recreation Director:
1. The Assistant Public Works/Parks and Recreation Director is responsible for the current and long-range plan involving the
acquisition, development, maintenance and operation of the City's park and recreation system.
2. The Assistant shall assume responsibility for providing supervision, direction and planning for recreation, public works, golf
course, and ice arena personnel.
3. The Assistant shall perform duties as directed by the Director and shall assume the responsibilities of the Director in his/her
absence.
D. Duties Of Divisions:
1. Street Division: The Street Division shall be responsible for the maintenance of the City street and storm water systems.
2. Water And Wastewater Division: The Water and Wastewater Division shall be responsible for the maintenance and operation of
all sewer and water facilities of the City.
3. Park Maintenance Division: The Park Maintenance Division shall be responsible for the maintenance and development of all
City parks and playgrounds.
4. Special Services Division: The Special Services Division shall be responsible for the maintenance of street lights, signs, street
striping, forestry and weed enforcement.
5. Fleet And Building Maintenance Division: The Fleet and Building Maintenance Division shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all vehicles and equipment owned and operated by the City, and be responsible for the efficient operation and
maintenance of all City-owned buildings.
6. Recreation Division: The Recreation Division shall be responsible for implementing and supervising all City recreation
programs.
7. Ice Arena Division: The Ice Arena Division shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the indoor ice arena.
8. Golf Course Division: The Golf Course Division shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the City-owned golf
course, driving range and facilities. (Ord. 614, 6-7-1995)
1-6-7: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY:
A. Composition: The Department of Public Safety shall be composed of the Director of Public Safety, who also serves as the Chief of
Police, and the following divisions:
1. Police Division.
2. Fire Division.
3. Emergency Medical Services Division.
4. Public Safety Communications Division.
5. Animal Control Division.
6. Emergency Management Division.
B. Duties Of Director Of Public Safety:
1. The director of public safety shall provide and maintain leadership in the planning, development, implementation and
supervision of all modern, progressive public safety agencies and programs.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 15/454
2. The director of public safety shall serve as the chief law enforcement officer within the city and shall be responsible for the
protection of life and property in accordance with federal, state, county and local laws and ordinances.
C. Duties Of Divisions:
1. Police Division: The police division shall be responsible for the protection of life and property, the protection of the constitutional
guarantees of all persons, the prevention and detection of crime, the apprehension of offenders, the preservation of public
peace and order, the enforcement of all laws, the protection of people who are in danger of physical harm, assisting people
who cannot care for themselves, the utilization of social services as an alternative to arrest, the creation of a feeling of safety
and security within the community and to provide all other police services as requested or needed.
2. Fire Division: The fire division shall be responsible for the protection of life and property from fire, the suppression and
extinguishment of fires, the prevention of fires through educational programs and the enforcement of fire codes and local
ordinances, the neutralization of hazardous materials emergencies, rescue services for assistance in the delivery of emergency
medical services, the development of professional personnel through training, the creation of a feeling of safety within the
community through fire protection programs and services, the delivery of fire services which are responsive to the needs of the
community and to provide all other fire services as requested or needed.
3. Emergency Medical Services Division: The emergency medical services division shall be responsible for providing both basic
and advanced life support services.
4. Public Safety Communications Division: The public safety communications division shall be responsible for the operation of a
911 public safety answering point. The public safety communications center shall provide telephone and radio communication
for all divisions of the department of public safety.
5. Animal Control Division: The public safety animal control division shall be responsible for a safe and nuisance free environment
within the city through the licensing, regulation and the enforcement of all laws and ordinances regulating domestic animals.
(Ord. 614, 6-7-1995)
6. Emergency Management Division2:
a. The emergency management division shall be responsible for the protection of life and property through the establishment of
a coordinated and comprehensive emergency management program to ensure community readiness and emergency
response to natural and/or humanmade disasters.
b. The emergency management program shall include planning in accordance with federal and state mandates, the operation
of electronic and cable television warning systems, community educational programs and disaster exercises. (Ord. 614, 6-7-
1995; amd. 2000 Code)
1-6-8: DEPARTMENT OF ENGINEERING; DUTIES OF CITY ENGINEER:
The city engineer shall perform all engineering services of the city including those of engineering advisor to the city council. The
engineer shall:
A. Be responsible for the supervision of the design, planning and construction of all streets and alleys, sidewalks, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, lift stations and other city facilities.
B. Recommend establishment of street and sidewalk grades.
C. Prepare and maintain up to date maps of the city.
D. Act as project engineer on all improvement projects undertaken on behalf of the city.
E. Draw proper specifications for all construction work undertaken on behalf of the city.
F. Represent the City on any matters relating to engineering and public works which are under discussion with other governmental
agencies.
G. Act as liaison with the State Highway Department and the County Engineer on matters relating to State and County roads within
the City.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 16/454
H. Perform such other related functions as may be required by the City Council. (Ord. 614, 6-7-1995)
1-6-9: LEGAL DEPARTMENT; DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY:
The City Attorney shall perform all legal services of the City including those of a legal advisor to the City Council and the department
heads and the prosecution of all cases arising out of violation of the provisions of this Code, other City ordinances, and State laws
where the municipal attorney is designated as the prosecuting authority. The Attorney shall:
A. Represent the City in matters in which the City is interested in coming before any court or tribunal.
B. Prosecute or defend suits for or against the City or against its officers for causes arising from official acts.
C. Call to the attention of the City Council, City Administrator, and City department and division heads all matters of law affecting the
City or its officers.
D. Prepare and revise ordinances when so requested by any member of the City Council or the City Administrator.
E. Prepare for execution all contracts and other written instruments to which the City is a party.
F. Approve, as to form, all bonds and insurance required to be submitted to the City.
G. Attend City Council meetings as required by the City Council.
H. Attend Planning Commission and advisory commission meetings when requested.
I. Give a legal opinion upon matters submitted by the City Council or by any City officer. (Ord. 614, 6-7-1995)
Chapter 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-7-1: HOLD HARMLESS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
The city shall defend and hold harmless the city council members and all officers and employees from and against any claim,
demand or suit, of any nature whatsoever, whether groundless or not, arising out of any actual or alleged error, misstatement, act,
omission, neglect or breach of duty including misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by the individuals in the discharge of their
duties with the city, individually or collectively, excluding any fines or penalties imposed by law or by any court, excluding any claim:
A. Based upon or attributable to their gaining in fact any personal profit or advantage to which they were not legally entitled, including
remuneration paid in violation of law; or
B. Brought about or contributed to by fraud or dishonesty of the individuals, however, notwithstanding the foregoing, the individuals
shall be defended and held harmless as to any claims upon which suit may be brought against them by reason of any alleged
fraud or dishonesty unless a judgment or other final adjudication thereof adverse to the individuals shall establish that acts of
active or deliberate dishonesty or fraud committed by the individuals were material to the cause of action so adjudicated. (1971
Code § 2-4.2)
1-7-2: WORKERS' COMPENSATION COVERAGE:
Pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 176.011, subdivision 9(6), elected officials and members of the economic development
authority are hereby included in the coverage of the Minnesota workers' compensation act1. (Ord. 671, 10-20-1999)
1-7-3: POSITIONS AUTHORIZED TO ISSUE CITATIONS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 17/454
The following positions are authorized to issue citations: director of public safety, sworn police officers, police community service
officers, building official, building inspector, fire chief, fire inspector, director of community development, director of public works, and
code enforcement officers for each city department. (Ord. 650, 9-17-1997)
1-7-4: DRIVER'S LICENSE AND BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS:
A. Driver's License Investigations And Records: The director of public safety and city administrator and/or his/her designee are
authorized to conduct driver's license investigations of city employees and employment finalists for purposes of verifying
compliance with job position and insurance requirements and conducting disciplinary investigations relevant to such
requirements.
B. Employment Finalist Background Investigations: The Cottage Grove public safety department is hereby required, as the exclusive
entity within the city, to conduct a criminal history background investigation on finalists for the following employment positions
within the city, unless the city council or city administrator concludes that a background investigation is not needed: all regular
part time and full time employees of the city of Cottage Grove; paid on call firefighters; all other positions that work with children
or vulnerable adults. The background investigation will be performed in accordance with section 1-11-3 of this title. (Ord. 902, 5-
16-2012)
Chapter 8
HUMAN RESOURCES
1-8-1: ADOPTION OF SYSTEM:
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters, to attract to City service the best and
most competent persons available, to ensure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness and
to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, the personnel system outlined by this Chapter is hereby adopted.
(1971 Code § 18A-1)
1-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
Section:
CLASS; CLASSIFICATION: A group of positions sufficiently similar in duties, authority and responsibility to permit grouping under a
common title, with equity of common standards or selection.
COMPETITIVE SERVICE: All positions of employment in the service of the City except those specifically excluded by this Chapter.
DAYS: Calendar days, unless otherwise stated.
DEMOTION: The movement of an employee from one classification to another having a lower maximum rate of pay and/or reduced
responsibilities.
FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE: An employee who normally works more than thirty (30) hours per week.
LAYOFF: The separation of employees from the payroll due to lack of funds or work, or to the abolition of a position by the City
Council for such reasons or due to organizational change.
PART-TIME EMPLOYEE: An employee who normally works thirty (30) hours or less per week.
PERMANENT EMPLOYEE: An employee hired into a regular position who has completed his/her initial probationary period with the
City.
POSITION: A group of duties and responsibilities in the competitive service requiring the full-time or part-time employment of one
person.
PROBATIONARY PERIOD: A working test period during which an employee is required to demonstrate his/her fitness for the
position to which he/she is appointed by actual performance of the duties of the position.
PROMOTION: The movement of an employee from one position in a class to another in a class having a higher maximum rate of
pay and/or higher responsibilities.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 18/454
REGULAR POSITION: A position which is continuous in nature.
SEASONAL EMPLOYEE: An employee hired into a seasonal position.
SEASONAL POSITION: A position which recurs yearly or more often and which is not continuous in nature.
TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE: An employee hired into a temporary position or hired into a regular position for a limited period of time.
TEMPORARY POSITION: A position which does not normally recur and is limited in its duration.
TRANSFER: The change of an employee from one position to another position in the same class or a comparable class in the same
pay range.
VETERANS: Applicants and employees who are entitled to veterans' preference as outlined in Minnesota Statutes sections 197.455
to 197.481, the Veteran's Preference Law. (1971 Code § 18A-2; amd. 2000 Code)
1-8-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the City, except:
A. Elected officials.
B. Members of appointed commissions and committees.
C. Volunteer personnel, such as volunteer police persons.
D. Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or any other services.
E. Employees who are subject to collective bargaining agreements, as negotiated in accordance with the Public Employment Labor
Relations Act1, shall be exempt from those provisions of this Chapter which are inconsistent with such agreements and others
where specific exemption is mentioned.
F. Temporary employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire,
flood or natural disaster which threatens life or property. (1971 Code § 18A-3; amd. 2000 Code)
1-8-4: EFFECT OF PROVISIONS ON STATUS OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES:
A. Any person holding a position included in the competitive service who, on the effective date of this Chapter2, shall have served
continuously in such position or in some other position in the competitive service for a period equal to the probationary period
prescribed in the rules for his/her class shall assume permanent status in the competitive service in the position held on such
effective date and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this Chapter and the personnel rules.
B. Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance
of their probationary periods, as prescribed in the rules, before obtaining permanent status. The probationary period shall be
computed from the date of appointment or employment in a regular position. (1971 Code § 18A-4; amd. 2000 Code)
1-8-5: PROHIBITED GROUNDS FOR DISCRIMINATION:
No person in the competitive service or seeking admission thereto shall be employed, promoted, demoted or discharged or in any
way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations, race, color, national origin, religion, creed, sex,
marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability, age, when between forty (40) and sixty five (65) years of age, or
because of the exercise of his/her rights under the provisions of the Public Employment Relations Act3. (1971 Code § 18A-5; amd.
2000 Code)
1-8-6: PERSONNEL RULES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 19/454
A. Adoption And Amendments; Functions Regulated: Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council. Employees
shall be notified of policy resolution or regulation or amendment thereof proposed to be adopted by the City Council.
Amendments and revisions may be suggested by an interested party and shall be processed as provided in the personnel rules.
The policy shall establish regulations governing the personnel system, including, but not limited to:
1. The preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of position classification and pay plans covering all positions in the
competitive service.
2. Public announcement of vacant positions in the competitive service and acceptance of applications for employment.
3. The establishment of probationary periods.
4. The evaluation of employees during probationary periods.
5. The transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the competitive service.
6. The separation of employees from the City service.
7. The establishment of adequate personnel records.
8. The establishment of appeal procedures concerning the interpretation or application of this Chapter and any rules adopted
hereunder. (1971 Code § 18A-6)
B. Special Application: The provisions of the personnel rules relating to attendance and leaves shall apply to the incumbents of
regular positions not in the competitive service, unless otherwise specified. (1971 Code § 18A-7)
1-8-7: PERSONNEL OFFICER:
The City Council may designate an officer or employee of the City as the Personnel Officer and delegate any of the powers and
duties conferred upon him/her under this Chapter or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract, as
provided in Section 1-8-14 of this Chapter. The Personnel Officer shall:
A. Interpret and administer all the provisions of this Chapter and the personnel policies not specifically reserved to the City Council.
B. Prepare and recommend to the City Council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules.
C. Prepare or cause to be prepared position classification and pay plans, including class specifications and pay schedule and
revisions of the plans. The plans and any revisions thereof shall become effective upon approval by the City Council.
D. Provide for the publishing or posting of vacant positions in the competitive service and the receiving of applications therefor, in
accordance with the Administrative Code. (1971 Code § 18A-8; amd. 2000 Code)
1-8-8: APPOINTMENTS:
A. Upon approval of the City Council, appointments shall be made by the Personnel Officer.
B. Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments
and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness, to be ascertained insofar as is practicable. Examinations may be used to aid
in the selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of
candidates, such as achievement and aptitude tests, evaluations of daily work performance, personal interviews, performance
tests, physical agility tests, work samples, physical examinations or any combination of these or other tests. The probationary
period shall be considered an extension of the evaluation process. (1971 Code § 18A-9)
1-8-9: PROBATIONARY PERIOD; DISMISSAL:
All employees appointed to the competitive service and those promoted or transferred within the competitive service shall serve a
probationary period. The probationary period shall be considered an extension of the evaluation process. During the probationary
period, employees may be dismissed at any time, without the right of appeal or hearing, unless the employee is a veteran. If the
employee is a veteran, the procedure outlined in Minnesota Statutes section 197.46 shall be followed. A permanent employee
dismissed during the probationary period from a position to which he/she was transferred or promoted, but not dismissed from the
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 20/454
City service, shall be reinstated to the position from which he/she was transferred or promoted. (1971 Code § 18A-10; amd. 2000
Code)
1-8-10: DISCIPLINARY MEASURES:
The City shall have the right, for due cause, to discipline any employee, subsection 1-8-3E of this Chapter notwithstanding. Such
action may include, but is not limited to, dismissal, reduction in pay or suspension. Notices of disciplinary action shall be given as
outlined in the personnel system policies resolution of the City currently in force or as outlined under union contract. The provisions
of this Section shall not apply to reductions in pay which are part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages, nor to the
elimination of positions. (1971 Code § 18A-11)
1-8-11: LAYOFFS:
A. Layoffs Authorized: Whenever, in the judgment of the City Council, it becomes necessary to reduce the number of positions in the
competitive service, employees may be laid off. Such action will not be considered disciplinary, and there will be no right of
appeal.
B. Order Of Layoff: With the approval of the City Council, the order of a layoff of employees shall be established by the Personnel
Officer, the Affirmative Action Officer and the department head involved. The department head, Affirmative Action Officer and
Personnel Officer shall take into consideration the job performance and length of service of the employees in preparing a
recommended layoff list; provided, that no permanent or probationary employee shall be laid off from his/her position in any
department while any temporary employee is in service in the same class in that department.
C. Notice Of Layoff: Employees to be laid off shall be given at least fourteen (14) days' prior written notice.
D. Re-Employment:
1. The names of permanent and probationary employees laid off or demoted in lieu of layoff shall be placed upon re-employment
lists for one year for those classes requiring basically the same qualifications, duties and responsibilities of the class from which
layoff or demotion in lieu of layoff was made.
2. Persons whose names are placed on re-employment lists in accordance with this Section and who are re-employed within one
year shall be regarded as having been on leave of absence without pay during this period of absence and shall be entitled to
full seniority rights accruing from such leave. (1971 Code § 18A-13; amd. 2000 Code)
1-8-12: APPEALS:
A. Right To Appeal: Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal, through the grievance procedure as
outlined in the policies, any disciplinary action or alleged violation of this Chapter or rules adopted hereunder, except in those
instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this Chapter or the rules adopted hereunder.
B. Conduct Of Appeal: All appeals shall be concluded as expeditiously as possible and in accordance with the requirements and
procedures as set forth in the personnel rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter. (1971 Code § 18A-12)
1-8-13: POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
The political activities of City employees shall conform to State and Federal laws and to any pertinent documents. (1971 Code § 18A-
14)
1-8-14: SPECIAL SERVICES:
The Personnel Officer shall consider and make recommendations to the City Council regarding the extent to which the City should
contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The
City Council may contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following
responsibilities and duties imposed by this Chapter:
A. The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 21/454
B. The preparation of position classification and pay plans and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof.
C. The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive examinations.
D. The conduct of employee training programs.
E. Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. (1971 Code
§ 18A-15)
Chapter 9
ELECTIONS
1-9-1: BIENNIAL ELECTION DATE:
The regular City election shall be held biennially on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in each even-numbered
year. (1971 Code § 9-3)
1-9-2: REGISTRATION OF VOTERS:
A. Registration System Adopted: The system for the permanent registration of voters provided by Minnesota Statutes chapter 201 is
hereby adopted for the City. (1971 Code § 9-1)
B. Voters To Be Registered: No person shall be permitted to vote at any election held in the City unless he/she shall have registered
as provided in Minnesota Statutes chapter 201. (1971 Code § 9-2; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 10
FINANCE AND TAXATION
1-10-1: ANNUAL AUDIT:
Each year there shall be an audit of the city's financial affairs by the public examiner or a certified public accountant in accordance
with minimum auditing procedures prescribed by the public examiner. (1971 Code § 11-1)
1-10-2: SELF-INSURANCE FUND:
A. Fund Established: A self-insurance fund is hereby established for the city for the purposes herein set forth.
B. Purpose: The city establishes a fund to provide self-insurance against liability of the city and its officers, employees, agents and
servants under Minnesota statutes chapter 466 and sections 340A.603 and 340A.801 and any other laws for damages resulting
from its torts, including torts for which the city has immunity and those torts of its officers, employees, agents and servants. The
establishment of the fund, the allocation of funds to it or the expenditure of funds, or any other act in conjunction with the
establishing or operation of the fund, shall not waive any immunity granted to a political subdivision nor shall it waive any statutory
limitation on liability afforded a political subdivision.
C. Authorized Expenditures: The city council may authorize expenditures from the fund for any one or more of the following
purposes:
1. Payment of losses.
2. Costs of defense and investigation.
3. Premiums and deductible amounts when commercial insurance is purchased for a risk.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 22/454
4. Costs of loss control activities.
5. Any other costs customarily borne by commercial insurers under conventional insurance policies. (1971 Code § 2-4.5; amd.
2000 Code)
1-10-3: TAXING DISTRICTS:
A. Establishment And Determination:
1. Districts Established: The city hereby divides the area within its limits into an urban service district and a rural service district
constituting separate taxing districts for the purpose of all city property taxes except those levied for the payment of bonds and
judgments and interest thereon. (1971 Code § 11-3)
2. Determination Of Taxing Ratio: In the judgment of the city council the ratio which exists between the benefits resulting from tax
supported municipal service to parcels in the rural service district to parcels in the urban service district is seventy percent
(70%), plus any municipal property taxes levied for payment of bonds, and judgments and interest thereon.
B. Rural Service District:
1. Lands Included In Rural Service District: The rural service district shall include lands which need not be contiguous to one
another as in the judgment of the city council at the time of adoption of the ordinance are rural in character, and are not
developed for commercial, industrial, or urban residential purposes and for these reasons are not benefited to the same degree
as other lands by municipal services financed by general taxation.
The rural service district shall consist of the properties listed in resolution 00-94, or as amended from time to time by the city
council; provided, however, that the city council may subsequently remove properties from the rural service district by resolution
in accordance with this section.
2. Removing Properties From Rural Service District: Whenever any parcel of land included in the rural service district is platted for
urban development; or whenever application is made for a permit for construction of a commercial, industrial, urban residential
building or improvement; or whenever such improvement or building is commenced without a permit; or whenever the primary
use of a parcel of property changes to a use other than rural agricultural; the governing body shall make and enter an order by
resolution or ordinance transferring such parcel or part thereof from the rural service district to the urban service district.
C. Urban Service District:
1. Lands Included In Urban Service District: The urban service district consists of all properties within the boundaries of the city
that are not included in the rural service district. (Ord. 674, 1-19-2000)
1-10-4: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DEFERRAL:
A. Deferral Authorized: Pursuant to Minnesota statutes sections 435.193 through 435.195 senior citizens and retired, disabled
homeowners or military persons may defer special assessments levied against homestead property owned by the applicant if the
criteria set forth in subsection B of this section are met by the applicant.
B. Criteria: Any person sixty five (65) years of age or older or retired by virtue of a permanent and total disability for whom it would be
a hardship to make the payments or owned by a person who is a member of the Minnesota national guard or other military
reserves who is ordered into active military service, as defined in Minnesota statutes 190.05, subdivision 5b or 5c, as stated in the
person's military orders, for whom it would be a hardship to make the payments may defer special assessments levied against
real property for public improvements if all of the following conditions are met:
1. Ownership: The applicant must be the fee simple owner of the property or must be a contract vendee for fee simple ownership.
An applicant must provide either a recorded deed or contract for deed with the application to establish a qualified ownership
interest as required herein.
2. Homestead: The property must be the applicant's principal place of domicile and classified on the city's and county's real
estate tax rolls as the applicant's homestead.
3. Gross Income: The applicant's gross income and gross income of all other joint tenants, tenants in common or contract
vendees in title to the property may not exceed two hundred percent (200%) of the poverty level as published in the federal
register during the preceding year from the assessment levy. Gross income determinations shall be made under a formula as
set forth on a form provided by the city.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 23/454
C. Interest On Deferred Assessment: All deferred special assessments shall be subject to and charged simple interest at the interest
rate adopted at the time the assessment was originally levied. Said interest shall be payable upon termination of the deferral
status.
D. Termination Of Deferral Status: Special assessment payments deferred pursuant to the eligibility requirements set forth in
subsection B of this section shall become payable effective upon the occurrence of one of the following events:
1. Conveyance Of Property: The subject property is sold, transferred, subdivided, or in any way conveyed to another by the fee
owner qualified for deferral status.
2. Death Of Owner: The death of the fee owner qualified for deferral status unless a surviving joint tenant, tenant in common, or
contract vendee is eligible for the deferral benefit provided hereunder.
3. Nonhomestead Property: The subject property loses its homestead status for any reason.
4. No Hardship: The city council determines that there would be no hardship to require an immediate or partial payment of the
deferred special assessment. (Ord. 844, 9-3-2008)
1-10-5: CITY TO BE REIMBURSED FOR CONSULTANT FEES:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this subsection:
CONSULTANT FEES: Any charges billed to the city for services performed by those consultants under contract by the city,
exclusive of services performed as part of the consultant's normal retainer or by special agreement between the city and its
consultants.
OWNER: Any person who, personally or as representative of any property owner, developer or initiator of any project, seeks city
review or study of a project.
PROJECT: Any plan, study or proposed construction involving an extension or revision of a city service or utility, including, but not
limited to, streets, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water systems.
B. Fees To Be Reimbursed: Any owner that causes the city to expend monies for consultant fees on behalf of, or on account of, that
owner associated with a proposed project, shall reimburse the city for the actual consultant fees expended by the city on behalf
of, or on account of, such owner.
C. Escrow Fund:
1. Deposit: The owner shall deposit with the city an amount, as determined by the city administrator, necessary to cover the total
consultant fees associated with the proposed project prior to the performance of any such service by the city's employed
consultants.
2. Statement: The city will provide an itemized statement to the owner showing the city's expenditures for consultant services
associated with the proposed project together with the current balance of his/her escrow fund and a statement, if additional
funds are requested, to maintain the fund at the level established.
3. Deficits: The owner shall reimburse the escrow fund for any deficits caused in the amount actually expended or billed to the city
exceeding the escrow fund balance.
4. Refunds: The city shall refund any monies deposited in the escrow fund not expended for consultant fees within thirty (30) days
after completion of any consultant services associated with the project. Interest shall not be paid on the monies deposited in the
escrow fund. (1971 Code § 2-4.3; amd. 2000 Code)
1-10-6: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; PARTIAL PREPAYMENT:
A. This section governs prepayment of special assessments levied by the city under the authority of Minnesota statutes chapter 429.
B. The owner of any property against which a special assessment has been levied may, within thirty (30) days of adoption, pay a
portion of the assessment to the city finance director, subject to the requirements of this section.
C. Any partial prepayment made under this section must be in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or greater and no interest
will be charged on prepayment amounts.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 24/454
D. The remaining balance of the levied special assessment will be certified to the county auditor in the manner provided by
Minnesota statutes chapter 429. (Ord. 843, 9-3-2008)
Chapter 11
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
1-11-1: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY1:
All property lawfully coming into the possession of the city and unclaimed by its owner shall be disposed of as follows:
A. Storage Of Property: The department of the city into whose possession property comes shall arrange for storage of the same. If
city facilities for storage are unavailable or inadequate, arrangements for storage at privately owned facilities may be arranged.
B. Reclamation By Owner: The owner of the property may claim the same by exhibiting satisfactory proof of ownership and paying
the city any storage or maintenance costs incurred by the city. A receipt for the property shall be obtained upon release to the
owner. (1971 Code § 2-76; amd. 2000 Code)
C. Sale At Public Auction: In the event that the property remains unclaimed in the possession of the city for a period of sixty (60)
days, the property shall thereafter be sold to the highest bidder at a public auction. Such auction shall be held after ten (10) days'
published notice setting forth the time and place thereof and the property to be sold. (Ord. 722, 11-6-2002)
D. Proceeds Of Sale: Net proceeds from the sale of such property after deduction of storage costs incurred, if any, shall be placed in
the treasury of the city, subject to the right of the former owner to payment of the sale price to him/her from the fund upon
application and satisfactory proof of ownership within six (6) months of the sale. (1971 Code § 2-76; amd. 2000 Code)
1-11-2: SALE OF REAL ESTATE:
A. Park Land; Notice Of Sale:
1. Whenever, from time to time, the city deems it necessary to transfer title to park land owned by the city, the council shall cause
to be published one notice in the designated legal newspaper for the city, and such notice shall contain the following:
a. A legal description of the property and a common description, including address, if available;
b. A statement that offers for the purchase of the property from the city are being considered;
c. The last date an offer can be made to the city for the purchase; and
d. The date of the council meeting where the offers received will be considered, and such meeting shall not be sooner than
thirty (30) days after the date of publication.
2. In addition to such published notice, the notices shall be mailed to those property owners owning property within five hundred
feet (500') of the property considered for transfer.
B. Land Other Than Park Land: Where the city council intends to transfer title to land other than park land, the city council may, if the
council deems it to be in the best interest of the city, follow the procedures established in this section.
C. Right To Reject Offers: The council shall have the right to reject any or all offers for purchase submitted to the city and decline the
sale of the property until an acceptable offer is received.
D. Mailed Notices: For the purpose of giving mailed notice, owners shall be those shown to be such on the records of the county
auditor, but other appropriate records may be used for this purpose. No error or omission in such mailing shall invalidate the
council proceedings. (1971 Code § 2-80)
1-11-3: CRIMINAL HISTORY AND BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 25/454
A. Authorized Background Checks: The director of public safety may conduct investigations and background checks as authorized by
statute and this code.
B. Persons Subject To Checks: The director of public safety shall conduct investigations and background checks on individuals who
are considered for the following positions: children service workers who volunteer for the city, in accordance with the Minnesota
child protection background check act; finalists for employment as provided by section 1-7-4 of this title.
C. Background Checks On Licensees: The public safety department is required, as the exclusive entity within the city, to perform a
criminal history background investigation for the following licenses within the city, issued pursuant to the chapters of this code as
identified below:
License Type Title And Chapter
Gambling premises 3-2
Solicitor, peddlers and vendors 3-4
Secondhand goods dealers and pawnbrokers 3-5
Tobacco 3-6
Massage business and massage therapist 3-8
Liquor establishment 3-12
D. Applications: All persons applying for positions for which background checks are required shall complete an application which
shall contain the following:
1. Name, place and date of birth and residence address.
2. Whether the individual has ever used or been known by a name other than his or her present name, and, if so, what was such
name or names and information concerning dates and places where used.
3. Whether the individual is married or single. If married, the name, place and date of birth and residence of the individual's
present spouse shall be included.
4. Whether the individual, individual's spouse or a parent, brother, sister or child of either of them has been convicted of any
felony, crime or violation of this code or any other ordinance. If so, the individual shall furnish information as to the time, place
and offense for which convictions were had.
5. Such other information as the city council shall require.
E. Background Investigation Procedure:
1. Written Consent Required: Before the investigation is undertaken, the individual must authorize the public safety department by
written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of applicable data
privacy statutes regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the information.
2. Investigation Of Applications: In conducting the criminal history background investigation, the public safety department is
authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota bureau of criminal apprehensions (BCA) computerized criminal history
information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the public
safety department under the care and custody of the public safety director or his or her designee. The public safety director
may release a summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data the hiring or appointing authority, including the
city council, the city administrator, or other city staff involved in the hiring process.
F. Disqualification Due To Background Investigation: Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota statutes section 364.09, the city
will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant's prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the
position sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the
applicant's request on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
1. The grounds and reasons for the denial.
2. The complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota statutes section 364.06.
3. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 26/454
4. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication. (Ord. 902, 5-16-2012)
Chapter 12
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION
1-12-1: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood,
tornado, blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of
catastrophic measure, and in order to ensure that preparations of the city will be adequate to deal with such disasters, and generally,
to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the
people of the city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:
A. To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for city planning and preparation for emergency government
operations in time of disasters.
B. To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and disasters.
C. To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between the city and other political subdivisions of the state and of other states with
respect to the carrying out of emergency preparedness functions.
D. To comply with provisions of Minnesota statutes section 12.25, which requires that each political subdivision of Minnesota shall
establish a local organization for emergency management. (Ord. 676, 2-16-2000; amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
1-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
DISASTER: A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to the health and safety of any person, or a situation
which has resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for which traditional sources of relief and assistance
within the affected area are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for immediate action to prevent disaster emergencies from
developing or occurring.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which
military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire,
flood, tornado and other acts of nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous material mishaps. These
functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, emergency medical services, engineering warning services,
communications, radiological, and chemical, evacuation, congregate care, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned
functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civil protection, together
with all other activities necessary or incidental for carrying out of the foregoing functions. "Emergency management" includes those
activities sometimes referred to as "civil defense" functions.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES: The total personnel resources engaged in city level emergency management functions in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from city departments,
authorized volunteers, and private organizations and agencies.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION: The staff responsible for coordinating city level planning and preparation for
disaster response. This organization provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state and local jurisdictions relative to
disaster preparedness activities and assures implementation of federal and state program requirements. (Ord. 676, 2-16-2000; amd.
2000 Code; Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
1-12-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF ORGANIZATION; DIRECTOR:
There is hereby created within the city government an emergency management organization which shall be under the supervision
and control of the city emergency management director, hereinafter called the director. The director shall be appointed by the city
council for an indefinite term and may be removed at any time. The director shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration and operation of the emergency management organization, subject to the direction and control of the city council.
(Ord. 676, 2-16-2000; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 27/454
1-12-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
A. Develop Mutual Aid Agreements: The director, with the consent of the mayor, shall represent the city at any regional or state
conference for emergency management. The director shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political
subdivisions of the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt with
unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the council for its action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the
state emergency plan. (Ord. 676, 2-16-2000; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
B. Availability Of Resources: The director shall make studies and surveys of the human resources, industries, and facilities of the city
as deemed necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most efficient use in time of
an emergency or disaster. The director shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures, service staffs, boards
and subboards required, in accordance with state and federal plans and directions, subject to approval of the mayor.
C. Preparation Of Plan: The director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the emergency preparedness of the city and
shall present such plan to the council for its approval. When the council has approved the plan, it shall be the duty of all city
agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as
approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. The director shall coordinate the emergency management
activities of the city to the end that they shall be consistently and fully integrated with the emergency plan of the federal
government and the state and correlated with emergency plans of the county and other political subdivisions.
D. Training And Information Programs: In accordance with the state and city emergency plan, the director shall institute training
programs, public information programs and conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercise as may be necessary to
assure prompt and effective operation of the city emergency plan when a disaster occurs.
E. Utilize City Personnel And Equipment: The director shall utilize personnel, services, equipment, supplies and facilities of the
existing departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all city
departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the
city emergency organization and to the governor upon request. The head of each department or agency in cooperation with the
director shall be responsible for the planning and programming of such emergency activities as will involve the utilization of the
facilities of the department or agency.
F. Training: The director shall, in cooperation with those city departments and agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting,
and training of emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to carry out emergency plans for
the city and state. To the extent that emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or agency for
emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies and shall be under the administration and control of the
department or agency.
G. Assure Capabilities: Consistent with the state emergency service law, the director shall coordinate the activity of city emergency
management organizations within the city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs as required to assure
emergency operational capability in the several services provided by Minnesota statutes section 12.25.
H. Compliance With State Regulations: The director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued by the governor with
reference to emergency management.
I. Submission Of Reports: The director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency preparedness when requested by the mayor.
(Ord. 676, 2-16-2000; amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
1-12-5: LOCAL EMERGENCIES:
A. Declaration: A local emergency may be declared only by the mayor or his/her legal successor. It shall not be continued for a
period in excess of three (3) days except by or with the consent of the council. Any order, or proclamation declaring, continuing,
or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the city clerk.
B. Use Of Disaster Plans: A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of the response and recovery aspect of
applicable local or interjurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance thereunder.
C. Jurisdiction: No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement
under which the agency functions. However, an interjurisdictional disaster agency shall provide aid and services in accordance
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 28/454
with the agreement under which it functions. (Ord. 676, 2-16-2000; amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
1-12-6: EMERGENCY REGULATIONS:
A. Council Authority: Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for such an emergency for which adequate
regulations have not been adopted by the governor or the council, the council may by resolution promulgate regulations,
consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation, respecting the conduct of persons and the use of property during
emergencies, the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health, fire, and safety
regulations, drills or practice periods required for preliminary training, and all other matters which are required to protect public
safety, health, and welfare in a declared emergency.
B. Resolution Of Emergency Regulations: Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing; shall be dated; shall refer to
the particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited; and shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. A copy shall be kept
posted and available for public inspection during business hours. Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability
for inspection at the city clerk's office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the city hall or other headquarters of the city or
at such other places in the affected area as the council shall designate in the resolution. By resolution, the council may modify or
rescind any such regulation.
C. Time Limitation: The council may rescind any such regulation by resolution at any time. If not sooner rescinded, every such
regulation shall expire at the end of thirty (30) days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it relates,
whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule, or regulation inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the council
shall be suspended during the time period and to the extent such conflict exists.
D. Contracts And Obligations: During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provision of Minnesota statutes section 12.31 and
notwithstanding any statutory provision to the contrary, empowered, through its council, acting within or without the corporate
limits of the city, to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat such disaster by protecting the health and
safety of persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the victims of such disaster. The city may exercise these
powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the time consuming procedures and formalities
prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public works, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and
materials, limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds including, but not limited to,
publication of resolutions, publication of call for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to low bids, and
requirement for bid. (Ord. 676, 2-16-2000; amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
1-12-7: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION:
All functions and activities relating to emergency management are hereby declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of
this section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he/she would otherwise be entitled under this chapter,
or under the workers' compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any such person to receive any benefits or
compensation under any act of congress. (Ord. 676, 2-16-2000; amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
1-12-8: PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS:
The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or
indirectly for political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute. (Ord. 676, 2-16-2000; amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
1-12-9: FISCAL MATTERS:
There is hereby established an account in the general fund to be known as the emergency management account. Into this account
shall be placed the proceeds of taxes levied for emergencies, money transferred from other funds, gifts and other revenues of the
emergency management organization. From it shall be made expenditures for the operation and maintenance of the emergency
management organization. (Ord. 676, 2-16-2000; amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
1-12-10: VIOLATION; MISDEMEANOR:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation adopted thereunder relating to acts, omissions, or conduct
other than official acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 676, 2-16-2000; amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 29/454
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
2-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS:
Pursuant to State law, the following boards and commissions are hereby established:
A. Parks, Recreation and Natural Resources Commission, as authorized by Minnesota Statutes section 412.501;
B. Planning Commission, as authorized by Minnesota Statutes section 462.354.
By resolution, the Council may establish or dissolve any boards, commissions or committees as it deems appropriate. Each board,
commission or committee created by the Council shall follow the rules and procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
2-1-2: COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS; TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
A. Composition; Appointments; Terms: Unless otherwise stated herein or by separate resolution, each commission shall consist of
seven (7) members, each appointed by the Council for terms of two (2) years, except the Planning Commission. Planning
Commission members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. Term years shall begin on March 1. (Ord. 999, 1-2-2019)
No commission member may serve more than three (3) consecutive two (2) year terms on any one commission, with the
exception of the Planning Commission, in which no member may serve more than two (2) consecutive three (3) year terms. The
Council may, by special application, appoint a Commissioner for one term in excess of the limit provided in this subsection where
it is determined that such would serve the best interests of the City.
B. Vacancies: Appointments to fill a vacancy shall be only for the unexpired portion of such vacancy. Filling an unexpired term of one
year or less shall not be counted against the term limit. (Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
2-1-3: EX OFFICIO MEMBERS:
Ex officio members of the commission, who shall be nonvoting members, shall be the Mayor and members of the City Council. The
Council or Commission Chairperson may appoint ex officio, nonvoting members to the commission when such appointment, in the
sole discretion of the appointing authority, is deemed beneficial to aiding the commission to fulfill its assigned duties, such ex officio
member to serve for a term designated by the appointing authority. The Council may appoint up to two (2) youths (ages 18 or under)
to serve as ex officio members on any commission, who are residents of the community. The term of office for youth seats shall be
one year from the date of appointment, renewable for a second one year term by action of the Council. (Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
2-1-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS:
Each commission member shall be a resident of the City. It shall be the goal of the City to have one senior citizen (65 or older) on the
Parks, Recreation and Natural Resources Commission. (Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
2-1-5: ABSENCES AND REMOVALS:
A. Absence From Meetings: Unexcused absence from three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the commission or four (4) meetings
in any one year period (beginning March 1) shall be deemed to constitute a resignation of a member, and the vacancy thus
created shall be filled thereafter. To be excused, an absence must be requested in writing by the affected member, granted by the
commission chairperson (or the vice chair if the chairperson makes the request) and the council liaison and filed with the city
clerk. Absences may be excused for extenuating circumstances that prevent the member's attendance, such as business
demands, state of health, or personal emergencies. (Ord. 694, 5-2-2001; amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 30/454
B. Removal Of Members: The council shall, by majority vote, have the authority to remove any member of the commission from
office whenever in its discretion the best interest of the city shall be served thereby. A member removed from office shall, upon
request, have a right of appeal before the council. (1971 Code § 2-46; amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
2-1-6: ORGANIZATION:
A. Officers; Appointment, Election And Duties:
1. Chair: The commission chair shall be appointed by the city council. It shall be the duty of the chair to preside at all meetings of
the commission, to represent the commission before the council, other organizations and to the public, subject to the direction
and review of the council.
2. Vice Chair:
a. A vice chair shall be elected by the members of the commission at the annual meeting. (Ord. 598, 4-20-1994; amd. Ord. 955,
2-17-2016)
b. It shall be the duty of the vice chair to carry out the duties of the chair in his/her absence. (1971 Code § 2-51; amd. Ord. 955,
2-17-2016)
B. Staff Liaison: The city administrator shall designate a member of the city staff to serve as liaison and administrative support to
each commission. It shall be the duty of the staff liaison to keep minutes and records of all proceedings of the commission; to
render notice of all meetings of the commission; to communicate all recommendations to the council; to receive, record, report
and transmit all correspondence of the commission; to maintain permanent files and resource materials for the commission; to
issue, quarterly, a list of current members, which list shall include appointment dates and dates of expiration of office; and to
prepare proposed agendas for the annual, regular and special meetings. (1971 Code § 2-51.1; amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
2-1-7: RULES OF PROCEDURE:
Each commission shall adopt a set of rules to govern its meetings and procedures. The rules may be amended from time to time,
but: a) only at a regular meeting of the commission, b) only with the affirmative vote of at least five (5) members, and c) only after the
proposed amendment has received consideration for at least two (2) consecutive regular meetings. Proxy voting shall be prohibited.
(1971 Code § 2-52; amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
2-1-8: MEETINGS:
A. Annual Meeting: Each commission shall have an annual meeting at the first regular meeting in March of each year, at which time
appointments shall be received, officers elected, committees appointed and such other business transacted as the commission
may decide.
B. Regular Meetings: Each commission shall establish a day and week of the month as its regular meeting day, and shall hold its
regular meeting on the same day and week of each month thereafter, at a time to be set by the commission, in the city hall or at
such other place as may be designated in advance by the commission, until the next annual meeting ; provided, that the chair
may designate a different time and place upon at least ten (10) days' notice to each member.
C. Special Meetings: Each commission may hold special meetings at any time outside of the regular meetings upon: 1) the call of the
chair, 2) the call of the chair when directed by petition of at least four (4) commission members, or 3) the call of the council.
Special meetings shall require notice to all commission members, in writing, mailed at least five (5) days prior to such meeting or
personal notice at least twenty four (24) hours prior to such meeting.
D. Open Meetings: All commission meetings shall be open to the public. (1971 Code § 2-53; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
E. Quorum: A quorum shall consist of a majority of the appointed membership at the time of the meeting. (Ord. 622, 12-20-1995;
amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
2-1-9: POWERS AND DUTIES; ADVISORY CAPACITY:
Except as may otherwise be provided by this code, other ordinances or state statute, the powers and duties of the commissions are
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 31/454
of advisory nature only, and the commissions shall not have any powers or duties which conflict with or supersede the powers and
duties of other city commissions. (1971 Code § 2-48; amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
2-1-10: COOPERATION OF CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES:
All city officials, department heads, employees and appointees shall cooperate with each commission and render all reasonable
assistance. (1971 Code § 2-54; amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
2-1-11: COMPENSATION:
All commission members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for expenses incurred on behalf of the
commission. (1971 Code § 2-43; amd. Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
Chapter 2
HUMAN SERVICES/HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 955, 2-17-2016)
Chapter 3
PARKS, RECREATION AND NATURAL RESOURCES COMMISSION
2-3-1: PURPOSE AND DUTIES:
The purpose and duties of the Parks, Recreation and Natural Resources Commission shall be to:
A. Develop programs providing for maximum use of resources within the City as they relate to parks, recreation and natural
resources.
B. Aid and assist the City in formulating and following sound conservation and land use management practices.
C. Assist City staff and the Planning Commission in the preparation and implementation of a comprehensive park and open space
plan.
D. Aid the Assistant Public Works/Parks and Recreation Director, park planning consultants, and others in the preparation of site
plans for new and existing parks and open space areas, conservancy areas and scenic overlooks.
E. Make recommendations to the Assistant Public Works/Parks and Recreation Director and City Council regarding the care,
maintenance, and development of City parks.
F. Review all preliminary plats for commercial, industrial, and residential development within the City, to ensure that all park and open
space properties, trails, and other environmentally significant areas designated for acquisition and/or development are acquired
and preserved from urban development.
G. Act as liaison between the Council and City organizations that provide recreational programs; provide a forum for open discussion
of issues by the public.
H. Review all plans or applications submitted to the City that may affect any City natural resource.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 32/454
I. Review and provide feedback and direction on existing City recreation programs and assist the Recreation Division in the
development of new programs and services.
J. Review equipment needs of the City parks and playgrounds and make recommendations to the Council on the purchase of such
equipment.
K. Maintain and refine the City park profile.
L. Assist in the development of ordinances relating to parks, recreation and natural resources.
M. Assist the Assistant Public Works/Parks and Recreation Director in the prioritization and recommendation of capital improvement
projects within the parks and open spaces.
N. Provide a continuing analysis of programs and services to meet citizens' recreational needs, protect the environment and enhance
the quality of life in the community.
O. Participate in the planning and development of all State and regional parks and park reserves acquired and developed within the
City by the County, State, or Federal government.
P. Review engineering and site plans for City improvements that may in any way change the characteristics of any City park land.
(1971 Code § 2-58; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 4
PLANNING COMMISSION
2-4-1: PURPOSE AND DUTIES:
The purpose and duties of the planning commission shall be those vested in it by the statutes of the state and other ordinances of
the city. The commission shall also have responsibility for study and recommendation to the city council concerning sign variance
applications submitted pursuant to section 9-8-10 of this code. (Ord. 598, 4-20-1994)
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
AMUSEMENTS
(Rep. by Ord. 952, 12-16-2015)
Chapter 2
BINGO GAMES AND GAMBLING
3-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate and control the conduct of lawful gambling ("gambling") and to ensure that profits derived
therefrom in the City provide, to the fullest extent authorized by law, direct benefits to the City's citizens. (1971 Code § 5A-1)
3-2-2: STATUTES INCORPORATED:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 33/454
The definitions and provisions of Minnesota Statutes chapter 349, sections 609.75; 609.755; 609.76; 609.761; 349.31; 340A.410,
subdivision 5, 299L; 349A.02; 349A.06; and Lawful Gambling Rules And Regulations chapters 7861 through 7865, as amended, are
adopted and made a part of this Code. The provisions set forth herein are in addition to Minnesota Statutes to the extent that such
provisions do not conflict with the statutes. (1971 Code § 5A-2; amd. 2000 Code)
3-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the terms defined in Minnesota Statutes sections 349.12 and 349.16 are incorporated herein and by
reference.
BINGO OCCASION: A single gathering or session at which a series of one or more successive bingo games are played.
BOARD: The State Gambling Control Board.
CLUB: An incorporated organization organized under the laws of the State for civic, fraternal, social or business purposes, for
intellectual improvement or for the promotion of sports or congressionally charted veterans' organization which has been in existence
for at least three (3) years, and which has more than fifty (50) members, has owned or rented a building or space in a building for
more than one year that is suitable and adequate for the accommodation of its members and is directed by a board of directors,
executive committee or other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for that purpose, none of whose members,
officers, agents or employees receive any profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club or their guests,
beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the governing body.
GROSS PROFITS: Gross receipts collected from lawful gambling, less reasonable sums necessarily and actually expended for
prizes.
LAWFUL GAMBLING: The operation, conduct or sale of bingo, raffles, paddle wheels, tip boards and pull tabs. These are the only
forms of gambling (other than horse racing, private social bets and the State lottery) which may be conducted in the City. "Lawful
gambling" does not include casino nights, razzle dazzle games or other games such as slot machines, roulette wheels and crap
games.
NET PROFITS: Gross profit, less reasonable sums actually expended for allowable expenses.
ORGANIZATION: Any fraternal, religious, veterans' or other nonprofit group which has at least fifteen (15) active members and has
been in existence for the most recent three (3) years preceding the license application as a registered Minnesota nonprofit
corporation or as an organization designated as exempt from the payment of income taxes by the Internal Revenue Code. In
addition, the organization must not be in existence solely for the purpose of conducting gambling.
ORGANIZATIONAL LICENSE (LICENSE): A license for lawful gambling issued by the State Gambling Control Board ("Board").
PREMISES PERMIT: A permit issued to a licensed organization for the purpose of lawful gambling at a specific site within the City of
Cottage Grove. (1971 Code § 5A-3; amd. 2000 Code)
3-2-4: GAMBLING PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS; CITY PERMIT:
A. No person, except an organization which is licensed by or has a valid exemption permit from the State or has a permit from the
City shall conduct lawful gambling within the City. Such permit shall be obtained each time an exemption permit is sought from
the Charitable Gambling Control Board.
B. The following gambling activities exempt for licensure by Minnesota Statutes chapter 349 shall require a permit from the City:
1. Bingo conducted in connection with a civic celebration and if it is not conducted for more than twelve (12) consecutive days in a
calendar year. A "civic celebration" is an event which celebrates a recognized national holiday or occasion celebrating an event
proclaimed by the Cottage Grove City Council.
2. Bingo conducted by an organization which conducts four (4) or fewer bingo occasions in a calendar year.
3. Bingo conducted within a nursing home, senior citizen housing project or by a senior citizen organization if the prizes for a
single game do not exceed ten dollars ($10.00), total prizes awarded at a single occasion do not exceed two hundred dollars
($200.00), no more than two (2) occasions are held each week, only members or residents are allowed to play, no
compensation is paid for persons conducting the bingo, and a manager is appointed who must first register with the Board.
4. Raffles conducted by an organization and if the value of all raffle prizes awarded in a calendar year does not exceed seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), or if the raffle is conducted by a tax exempt health or social service organization under contract
to the State or a political subdivision if the prizes awarded are real or personal property donated by an individual, firm or other
organization.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 34/454
5. Lawful gambling may be conducted if the organization conducts gambling on five (5) or fewer days in a calendar year and does
not award more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in prizes. (1971 Code § 5A-4)
3-2-5: RECORDS AND INSPECTIONS:
A. Filing Records With City Required: Every organization permitted to conduct lawful gambling in the City shall file with the City Clerk
copies of all records and reports required to be filed with the Board pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapter 349 and the rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder. The records and reports shall be due the same time they are due to the Board.
B. Inspections:
1. The granting of a permit to an organization under this Chapter shall be deemed to be a consent by the organization to
inspection of the licensed premises by any police officer or any inspector of the City.
2. Employees of the Cottage Grove Police Division may inspect, at any reasonable time without notice or search warrant, all
records including gambling account and other bank records required by the Board to be maintained and preserved. (1971 Code
§ 5A-5; amd. 2000 Code)
3-2-6: PERMIT AND LICENSE APPLICATIONS; INVESTIGATIONS:
A. Application For Premises Permit:
1. An organization shall make application for a premises permit on a form prescribed by the board. In addition, the application
shall contain the following:
a. Name, address and telephone number of organization requesting permit.
b. Articles of incorporation and list of active members.
c. Address and dates of birth of officers and persons accounting for receipts, expenses and profits for the event.
d. List of employees conducting lawful gambling, duties and relationship to organization.
e. Name, address, telephone number and photograph of the gambling manager.
f. Documentation that the gambling manager has complied with the requirements of Minnesota statutes section 349.167.
g. Dates, hours and locations of intended gambling for which permit is requested.
h. Premises on which event will occur and a sketch of the premises showing the location of the lawful gambling.
i. A copy of the organization's charitable gambling license.
j. A copy of any rental or leasing arrangement connected with the event, including rent to be charged to the organization, and
all other services to be provided.
k. A copy of the bond or certificate of insurance which meets the requirements of Minnesota statutes.
l. Estimated value of prizes to be awarded.
m. Specific documentation regarding tax exempt number, or other proof of nonprofit status, if applicable.
2. An organization holding a premises permit must notify the city clerk in writing within ten (10) days of any material change in the
above information. The city clerk shall forward said information to the city police investigator.
B. License And Permit Renewals:
1. Applications for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration date of the license
and be made in the form approved by the city council.
2. The city shall not renew a permit issued under this section unless it receives verification that the license issued by the board
has been renewed pursuant to Minnesota statutes chapter 349. (1971 Code § 5A-6; amd. 2000 Code)
C. Investigations:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 35/454
1. All permit applications must be referred to the director of public safety, and to other city departments as the city council deems
necessary for verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application. The investigation includes, but is not limited
to, a criminal history records check. The background investigation will be performed in accordance with section 1-11-3 of this
code. The department of public safety must make a written report and recommendation to the city council which must include a
list of all violations of federal and state law or municipal ordinance and other facts that weigh upon the public interest in
considering the application. The city council may order additional investigation as necessary. The findings and
recommendations must contain a statement that the premises comply with all provisions of this section and the city's zoning
ordinance. (Ord. 902, 5-16-2012)
2. Any organization applying for or renewing a premises permit or bingo hall license must pay an investigation fee at the time of
application in the amount authorized under Minnesota statutes section 349.16, subdivision 8. (Ord. 631, 9-4-1996)
D. Action On Permit Application: The council shall act upon the permit application between thirty (30) days and sixty (60) days from
the date materials are submitted. (1971 Code § 5A-6; amd. 2000 Code)
3-2-7: PERMITS TO BE DISPLAYED:
All permits required by this chapter shall be displayed during the permit year at the premises licensed for the conduct of gambling
devices. (1971 Code § 5A-4)
3-2-8: PERMIT FEE:
All organizations which are exempt from the state licensing requirement under Minnesota statutes section 349.166, applying for a
permit to conduct lawful gambling in the city, must pay a permit fee in such amount as provided by ordinance of the city council from
time to time. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
3-2-9: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
A. Revenues And Expenditures: Gross receipts from lawful gambling by each organization at each permitted premises must be
segregated from all other revenues of the conducting organization and placed in a separate account. All expenditures for
expenses, taxes and lawful purposes must be made from the separate account except in the case of expenditures previously
approved by the organization's membership for emergencies as defined by board rule.
B. Monthly Reports: Each organization with a permit to conduct lawful gambling shall report monthly to its membership and to the city
council, its gross receipts, expenses and profits from gambling, and the distribution of profits itemized as required by this section.
C. Annual Audit: The city council may require an annual financial audit of any organization that conducts lawful gambling in the city at
the organization's expense. The audit shall include information on all gross receipts, profits, and expenses incurred by the
organization in the conduct of lawful gambling, as well as information on uses of profits. The audit report, if required, shall be
submitted to the city council at the time of the organization's permit application, but no later than ninety (90) days after the
premises permit expiration or renewal date.
D. Gambling Manager Required: Each licensed organization must designate one or more gambling managers. The gambling
manager designated by an organization shall supervise a gambling occasion and be responsible for the gross receipts from the
occasion and for its lawful conduct in compliance with all laws and rules. An organization may designate a different person to act
as manager for each type of lawful gambling conducted. An organization may not conduct lawful gambling without having a
gambling manager. The city must be notified in writing of a change in gambling managers, and said notification must be made
within ten (10) days of the date the gambling manager assumes the manager's duties. (1971 Code § 5A-7; amd. 2000 Code)
E. Contributions Required: (Rep. by Ord. 929, 3-19-2014)
F. Expenditures Of Gross Profits: Any organization conducting lawful gambling within the city must expend at least fifty percent (50%)
of the lawful purpose expenditures of gross profits that the organization derives from lawful gambling conducted at premises
within the city on lawful purposes located within the trade area as defined by this subsection. The trade area includes the cities of
Cottage Grove, Afton, Hastings, Inver Grove Heights, Newport, Rosemount, Saint Paul Park and Woodbury and the townships of
Denmark, Grey Cloud Island and Nininger. (Ord. 847, 11-5-2008)
3-2-10: CONDITIONS FOR ALLOWING PREMISES TO BE USED FOR GAMBLING:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 36/454
A. License And Permits Required: No organization or person shall, directly or indirectly, conduct, allow or permit lawful gambling
without a license or premises permit issued by the board, or an exemption from the board, and a permit issued by the city.
B. Gambling Permitted By Certain Bodies: No person, organization or business entity shall suffer or permit any gaming table, faro
board or gambling equipment to be set up or used for the purpose of gambling in any house, lot, yard or garden owned, occupied
or controlled by such person, organization or business entity, except for those organizations licensed pursuant to Minnesota
statutes chapter 349 and issued permits pursuant to this chapter, unless such person, organization or business entity is a lessor
of premises leased to an organization issued such license or permit for lawful gambling.
C. Information Required To Be Posted: The organization licensed to conduct gambling shall display its name at its gambling booth
and shall indicate that all profits from gambling are for that organization.
D. Construction, Maintenance And Control Of Gambling Operation: The gambling booth shall be constructed and maintained by the
organization licensed to conduct gambling, and shall be under the exclusive control of that organization. Whenever the
organization is not present, all gambling devices, money, and records shall be securely locked and shall be inaccessible to
employees and patrons. (1971 Code § 5A-8; amd. 2000 Code)
3-2-11: OWNED OR LEASED PREMISES:
A. Owned Or Leased Premises Required: An organization may conduct lawful gambling only on premises it owns or leases. (1971
Code § 5A-9; amd. 2000 Code)
B. Restrictions On Use Generally:
1. Leases must be for a period of at least two (2) years and must be on a form prescribed by the board. Copies of all leases must
be made available to the city with a premises permit application. The written lease shall be the complete agreement between
the parties, and there shall be no unwritten terms or conditions. There shall be no other compensation paid to the
establishment, directly or indirectly, other than the rental fee provided in the lease agreement. No lease agreement shall
provide for rent payments in excess of limitations established by Minnesota statutes chapter 349. An organization may conduct
raffles on a premises it does not own or lease. (Ord. 748, 11-5-2003)
2. No person, distributor, manufacturer, lessor, or organization other than the licensed organization leasing the space may
conduct any activity on the leased premises during the times when lawful gambling is being conducted on the premises. (1971
Code § 5A-9; amd. 2000 Code)
3. No lessor shall:
a. Permit more than one organization to conduct gambling at the same leased premises at the same time, except that a lessor
may allow one organization to sell pull-tabs at the same time that a different organization conducts a different form of lawful
gambling on the same premises. (Ord. 860, 6-3-2009)
b. Enter into a lease that provides for a lease payment that exceeds the amounts established by Minnesota statutes chapter
349. (1971 Code § 5A-9; amd. 2000 Code)
4. No organization licensed to conduct gambling at a leased location shall sell or solicit beyond the limits of the leased space.
(Ord. 748, 11-5-2003)
C. Copy Of Lease To City: The applicant for a gambling premises permit shall submit to the city a copy of the lease evidencing
compliance with subsections A and B of this section. (1971 Code § 5A-9; amd. 2000 Code)
3-2-12: ESTABLISHMENTS HOLDING LIQUOR LICENSES1:
A. If lawful gambling is to take place pursuant to a lease on the premises of an establishment holding a liquor license, the gambling
license holder must:
1. Be a nonprofit organization; or
2. Have a club liquor license.
B. No licensed liquor establishment shall keep, possess, operate or permit the keeping, possession or operation of any video games
of chance, or gambling device including slot machines, roulette wheels, punchboards and pinball machines which return coins or
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 37/454
slugs, chips, or tokens of any kind which are redeemable for merchandise, cash or other items of value on the licensed premises.
Social skill games and social dice games are permitted only if they satisfy all the requirements of state law.
C. The liquor licensee may permit lawful gambling on the licensed premises when such activity is licensed by the state pursuant to
Minnesota statutes chapter 349 and is conducted pursuant to the regulations contained in this code. No other forms of gambling
shall be permitted on premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
D. The organization, when conducting sales of pull-tabs, will maintain separate cash banks for each deal.
E. Pull-tab sales must comply with the following requirements:
1. Pull-tabs may be sold from a booth used solely by a licensed gambling organization.
2. Pull-tabs may be sold from a designated area of the bar.
3. Pull-tabs may be sold from a pull-tab dispensing device.
F. Where bingo is conducted on the premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages, the sale, display, consumption and
possession of alcoholic beverages may continue during a bingo game.
G. The licensee of any licensed liquor establishment shall be responsible for the licensed lawful gambling organization's conduct of
lawful gambling. The city council may suspend the licensee's permission to allow gambling on the premises for a period of up to
sixty (60) days for any knowing violation of state or local gambling laws or regulations that occur on the premises, including the
licensee or the licensed lawful gambling organization. A second knowing violation within a twelve (12) month period shall result in
the revocation of the gambling permission for a period of twelve (12) months. (Ord. 847, 11-5-2008)
3-2-13: COMPENSATION TO PERSONS CONDUCTING GAMBLING:
Compensation to persons who participate in the conduct of lawful gambling shall be in accord with Minnesota statutes chapter 349.
(1971 Code § 5A-11)
3-2-14: COPY OF STATE REPORT TO CITY:
The gambling license holder must submit to the city a copy of the monthly report submitted to the state within ten (10) days after
submission of the same to the state. (1971 Code § 5A-12; amd. 2000 Code)
3-2-15: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF PREMISES PERMITS AND BINGO HALL LICENSES; NUMBERS OF
PERMITS, LICENSES AND LOCATIONS:
A. Notice From State: The board shall notify the city council in writing in the manner required by law of each pending application for a
premises permit or bingo hall license. The applicant shall cooperate fully with city officials in supplying all information provided for
in this section. The city council shall determine whether the organization meets all the criteria provided for in this section
necessary to approve a premises permit or bingo hall license.
B. Number Of Permits And Licenses: No more than one premises permit or bingo hall license shall be issued at any location in the
city; except, that locations holding a bingo hall license may also have one or more premises permits. (1971 Code § 5A-14; amd.
2000 Code)
C. Number Of Locations Allowed: (Rep. by Ord. 847, 11-5-2008)
D. Prohibited Permits And Licenses: The city shall not approve an application to the board for a premises permit or bingo hall license
if: (1971 Code § 5A-14; amd. 2000 Code)
1. The liquor licensee, owner, or manager of the site has been convicted of any violation of the Minnesota statutes or Cottage
Grove city ordinances relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages, gambling, or morals and decency within the past thirty six (36)
months; or (Ord. 771, 4-6-2005)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 38/454
2. The city's investigation indicates that the organization or gambling manager failed to comply with the terms or conditions of any
other gambling license or indicates a history of noncompliance with state or local law regulating the organization's gambling
activities; or
3. The premises or bingo hall on which the gambling is to be conducted is not within a business zone; or
4. The leased premises does not comply with applicable zoning, building, fire and health codes of the city and other regulations
contained in this section; or
5. The property is not screened and landscaped if it abuts a residential use; or
6. Adequate off road parking and loading, screened and landscaped from any abutting residential use, is not provided on the
premises or bingo hall; or
7. There is noncompliance with requirements of this section or other stated factors, including, but not limited to, the health, safety
and welfare of the city.
E. Resolution To Deny Permit Or License: An application made to the board for a premises permit or bingo hall license to conduct
lawful gambling in the city may be denied by resolution of the city council if notification of such resolution is made to the board
within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the application by the city clerk. (1971 Code § 5A-14; amd. 2000 Code)
3-2-16: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Misdemeanor Gambling Violation; Penalties: Anyone who breaches the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of misdemeanor
gambling violations and shall be prosecuted under section 1-4-1 of this code or Minnesota statutes.
B. Revocation Of Premises Permit: Failure to make timely reports and payment required under sections 3-2-6, 3-2-8 and 3-2-9 of this
chapter may result in a recommendation to the board that the organization's premises permit should be revoked or not renewed.
(1971 Code § 5A-15; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 3
RESERVED
(Ord. 975, 2-15-2017)
Chapter 4
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
NONCOMMERCIAL ADVOCATE: A person disseminating religious, political, social, or other ideological beliefs, or exercising their
state or federal constitutional rights, and who may also attempt to solicit donations. The term noncommercial advocate shall also
include canvassing and pamphleteering intended for noncommercial purposes.
PEDDLER: A person who goes from place to place attempting to sell goods or services for which delivery or performance occurs
immediately.
PERSON: Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation, partnership, or similar association.
REGULAR BUSINESS DAY: Any day when city hall is open for conducting public business.
SOLICITOR: A person who goes from place to place attempting to sell goods or services for which delivery or performance occurs at
a later time.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: A person who temporarily sets up business at a stationary location attempting to sell goods or services.
(Ord. 969, 9-21-2016)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 39/454
3-4-2: EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms "peddler", "solicitor", and "transient merchant" shall not apply to:
A. Any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any product to a retail seller of that product.
B. Any person making deliveries on an established delivery route.
C. Any person making deliveries of publications to the community at large.
D. Any person conducting the type of sale commonly known as garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales.
E. Any person conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer.
F. Any officer of the court conducting a court ordered sale. (Ord. 969, 9-21-2016)
3-4-3: LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS:
A. County License Required: No person shall conduct business within city limits without first obtaining a license from the county, if
the county issues a license for the activity, as may be required by Minnesota statutes chapter 329.
B. City License Required: Except as provided for by this chapter, no person shall conduct business within this jurisdiction as a
peddler or transient merchant without first obtaining a city license. Solicitors need not be licensed, but are required to register with
the city pursuant to section 3-4-7 of this chapter.
C. Application: An application for a city license to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant shall be made on a form
available from the office of the city clerk. All applications shall be signed by the applicant or authorized representative and shall
include the following information:
1. The applicant's full legal name, whether an individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity. For purposes of this
chapter, the applicant is the entity directing business activity and collecting and paying applicable taxes on such activity, even if
the individuals conducting the activity are considered independent contractors by the entity.
2. Full legal names of all business operations owned, managed, or operated by the applicant, or for which the applicant is an
employee or an agent.
3. All other names under which the applicant has or does conduct business, or to which the applicant officially answers to.
4. Applicant's business address, e-mail address, and telephone number(s).
5. The local address, e-mail address and telephone number(s) where the applicant or authorized representative can be reached
while conducting business in the city.
6. The type of license the applicant is applying for.
7. The dates the applicant intends to conduct business.
8. A general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided.
9. list of the three (3) most recent locations where the applicant has conducted business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient
merchant.
10. A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or any individual proposing to operate on behalf of the applicant, has been
convicted within the last five (5) years of any felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor for violating any state or federal
statute or any local ordinance, other than minor traffic offenses.
11. Photocopy of driver's license or other acceptable form of identification and a completed general authorization and release of
private data form for each individual proposing to operate under the license.
12. Proof of any required county license.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 40/454
13. The address and written permission of the property owner or authorized representative for any location to be used by a
transient merchant.
14. Any additional information as may be deemed necessary by the city.
D. Fee: All applications for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by the fee established in the city licensing fee schedule
as may be amended from time to time.
E. Procedure: Upon receipt of the application and payment of the license fee, the city clerk will determine if the application is
complete. If the city clerk determines that the application is incomplete, the city clerk must inform the applicant of the information
that is missing. If the application is complete, the city clerk must order an investigation, including background checks, to verify the
information provided with the application. The city clerk must issue the license unless grounds exist for denying the license.
F. Duration: A license granted under this chapter to a peddler shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year from the date of
issuance unless a shorter period of time is requested. A license granted under this chapter to a transient merchant shall be valid
for a maximum of fourteen (14) consecutive days unless a shorter period of time is requested.
G. License Exemptions:
1. No license shall be required for a noncommercial advocate. This exemption will not apply if those activities falling under the
definition of a "noncommercial advocate" are merely incidental to what would properly be considered a commercial activity.
2. No license shall be required for any child under the age of eighteen (18) attempting to sell products or services when the child
represents a school, church, or other civic organization to which they belong.
3. No license shall be required for a person attempting to sell the products of a farm or garden occupied and cultivated by
themselves.
4. No license shall be required for a transient merchant whose activity is regulated under an interim conditional use permit from
the city of Cottage Grove, or whose activity is a permitted use in a commercial zoning district. (Ord. 969, 9-21-2016)
3-4-4: LICENSE DENIAL:
A. The following shall be grounds for denying a peddler or transient merchant license:
1. The failure of an applicant to truthfully provide any information requested by the city as part of the application process.
2. Conviction for any crime of violence as defined by Minnesota statutes section 624.712. Convictions by individuals proposing to
operate under the license are grounds for denial of the individuals.
3. A violation within the past five (5) years of the date of application of any federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local
ordinance, which adversely reflects upon the applicant's ability to conduct the business in a professional, honest and legal
manner. Such violations shall include, but are not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business
practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person. Violations by individuals proposing to
operate under the license are grounds for denial of the individuals.
4. The revocation within the past five (5) years of the date of application of any license or registration issued to an applicant for
the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant. Revocations of licenses or registrations to
individuals proposing to operate under the license are grounds for denial of the individuals.
5. When an applicant has a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad business reputation shall include, but is not limited to, the
existence of substantial complaints filed against an applicant with the city of Cottage Grove or other municipalities, the Better
Business Bureau, the office of the Minnesota attorney general or other state attorney general's office, or other similar business
or consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding five (5) years.
B. If the city clerk denies the license, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision, the reason for denial and the applicant's
right to appeal the denial as outlined in section 3-4-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 969, 9-21-2016)
3-4-5: LICENSE REVOCATION:
A. The following shall be grounds for revoking a peddler or transient merchant license:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 41/454
1. Subsequent knowledge by the city of fraud, misrepresentation or false statements provided by an applicant on the application
form.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course of the licensed activity.
3. Subsequent violation to which the granting of the license could have been denied under section 3-4-4 of this chapter.
4. Engaging in any prohibited activity or violation of any provision of this chapter.
B. If the city clerk revokes the license, the licensee shall be notified in writing of the decision, the reason for revocation and the
licensee's right to appeal the revocation as outlined in section 3-4-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 969, 9-21-2016)
3-4-6: APPEAL PROCESS:
A. Upon receiving notice of a license denial or revocation, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to appeal the denial or
revocation to the city council as follows:
1. Within ten (10) days of receiving the notice of license denial or revocation, the applicant or licensee shall request in writing to
appeal the license denial or revocation. For purposes of this chapter, the postmarked date of a mailed notice or the send date
of an e-mailed notice shall be considered the date of receiving the notice.
B. Within thirty (30) days of receiving the request to appeal the license denial or revocation, the city clerk shall schedule and the city
council shall hold a hearing to consider the appeal, and the applicant or licensee shall be notified of the date and time.
C. Denial of an appeal by the city council can be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota court of appeals for a writ of certiorari. (Ord.
969, 9-21-2016)
3-4-7: REGISTRATION:
A. Solicitors shall be required to register with the city prior to engaging in business activities. All aspects of registration shall follow
the licensing provisions of this chapter for a peddler except no fee is required. (Ord. 969, 9-21-2016)
3-4-8: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall conduct business in the following manner:
A. Calling attention by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other noise, so as to be
unreasonably audible.
B. Obstructing the free flow of traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, on any street, sidewalk, alleyway, or other public right of way.
C. Conducting business in a way so as to create a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of any individual or the general public.
D. Conducting business before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
E. Failing to provide proof of license, registration, or identification when requested.
F. Using the license or registration of another person.
G. Alleging false or misleading statements about the products or services being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement.
No person shall claim to have the endorsement of the city based on the city having issued a license or registration to that person.
H. Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or when the other party indicates they do not wish to engage in
the licensed activity.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 42/454
I. Otherwise operating in any manner that a reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive. (Ord. 969,
9-21-2016)
3-4-9: EXCLUSION BY PLACARD:
A. Unless specifically invited by the property owner or tenant, no peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, or other person engaged in
other similar activities shall enter onto the property of another for the purpose of conducting business when the property is
marked with a sign or placard:
1. Situated in a location clearly visible at the primary entrance to the structure.
2. Of sufficient size and with sufficient lettering to be clearly legible.
3. Stating "No Peddlers Or Solicitors", "Peddlers And Solicitors Prohibited", or other comparable statement.
B. No person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface, or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this
section. (Ord. 969, 9-21-2016)
3-4-10: PENALTY:
Any individual found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 969, 9-21-2016)
Chapter 5
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
AUTOMATED PAWN SYSTEM OR APS: A computer database operated by the Minneapolis police department, accessible from a
remote location, designated to input and retrieve data on pawnbroker transactions, by those municipalities that subscribe to the
system.
CONSIGNMENT: A written agreement between a dealer and a seller that authorizes the dealer to take possession of secondhand
property owned by the seller.
PAWN TRANSACTION: Any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the
pledged goods are left with the pawnbroker and may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period
of time.
PAWNBROKER: Any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods left in
pawn, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property to be left in pawn on the condition that it may be redeemed or
repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. The following are exempt from the definition of "pawnbroker":
Any bank regulated by the state of Minnesota, the comptroller of the currency of the United States, the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, the board of governors of the federal reserve system, or any other federal or state authority and their affiliates; any bank
or savings association whose deposits or accounts are eligible for insurance by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or any
successor to it and all affiliates of those banks and savings associations; any state or federally chartered credit union; and any
industrial loan and thrift company or regulated lender subject to licensing and regulation by the department of commerce.
PAWNSHOP: The location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker regularly conducts business.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity,
however organized.
PLEDGED GOODS: Tangible personal property other than choses in action, securities, bank drafts, or printed evidence of
indebtedness that are purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in
connection with a pawn transaction.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION: Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in which merchandise is received through a pawn,
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 43/454
purchase, consignment or trade, or in which a pawn is renewed, extended or redeemed, or for which a unique transaction number or
identifier is generated by their point of sale software, or an item is confiscated by law enforcement, is reportable, except:
A. The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a merchant, manufacturer, or wholesaler having an
established permanent place of business, and the retail sale of said merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must maintain a
record of such purchase or consignment which describes each item, and must mark each item in a manner which relates it to
that transaction record.
B. Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or
redemption periods have expired.
SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER: Any person whose regular business includes selling or receiving tangible personal property
which has been previously used, rented, owned or leased, specifically including, but not limited to, video games, compact discs,
sports memorabilia, collectible magazines, and coin collections, but excluding motor vehicles, furniture, clothing, and sporting
equipment. (Ord. 792, 6-7-2006)
3-5-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required; Fee: No person shall engage in the business of pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer within the city unless
such person is licensed under this chapter. Any pawn transaction made without benefit of a license is void. The annual fee for
such license shall be established by council ordinance from time to time.
B. Payment, Proration And Refund Of Fees:
1. Payment Of Fee; Proration: The license fee shall be paid in full before issuance. The fee for a pawnbroker or secondhand
goods dealer license granted after the commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a monthly basis. For the
purposes of establishing the prorated license fee, the month of the application is excluded.
2. Refunds: Upon withdrawal of the application for a license before approval of the issuance by the council, the license fee shall
be refunded.
C. Nontransferability Of License; Information Regarding Buildings: A license under this section shall authorize the licensee to carry
on its business only at the permanent place of business designated in the license. No license may be transferred to a different
location or to a different person. Any and all property or buildings used for storage of items related to the pawnshop or
secondhand goods dealership must be identified in the application for a license.
D. Pawnbrokers As Secondhand Goods Dealers; Secondhand Goods Dealers As Pawnbrokers: A pawnbroker may not operate or
engage in the business of secondhand goods dealer without having obtained a secondhand goods dealer license in addition to a
pawnbroker's license. A secondhand goods dealer may not conduct, operate, or engage in the business of pawnbroker without
having first obtained a pawnbroker license in addition to a secondhand goods dealer license.
E. Exemptions From License Requirements: The aforementioned license requirements do not apply to or include the following:
1. The sale of secondhand goods at events commonly known as "garage sales", "yard sales" or "estate sales", where all of the
following conditions are present:
a. The sale is held on property occupied as a dwelling by the seller, or owned, rented or leased by a charitable or political
organization;
b. The sale does not exceed a period of seventy two (72) consecutive hours;
c. Not more than two (2) sales are held either by the same person or on the same property in any twelve (12) month period;
and
d. None of the items offered for sale have been purchased for resale or received on consignment for purpose of resale.
2. Any person engaged in the business of dealing in secondhand motor vehicles or secondhand parts for motor vehicles.
3. The sale of goods at an auction held by a licensed auctioneer.
4. The business of buying or selling only those secondhand goods taken as part or full payment for new goods, and where such
business is incidental to and not the primary business of a person.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 44/454
5. A bulk sale of property from a merchant, manufacturer, or wholesaler having an established place of business or of goods sold
at open sale from bankrupt stock.
6. Goods sold at a public market.
7. Goods sold at an exhibition.
8. The sale of furniture, clothing and related accessories.
F. Multiple Secondhand Goods Dealer Licenses:
1. The owner of a business at which two (2) or more secondhand goods dealers are engaged in business by maintaining
separate sales space and identifying themselves to the public as individual dealers may obtain a multiple secondhand goods
dealer license for that location. A multiple license may not be issued unless the following requirements are met:
a. The businesses must have a single name and address.
b. The businesses must operate in a compact and contiguous space.
c. The businesses must be under the unified control and supervision of the one person who holds the license.
d. Sales must be consummated at a central point or register operated by the owner of the business, and the owner must
maintain a comprehensive account of all sales.
e. The full name, date of birth and address of all dealers must be disclosed at least ten (10) days prior to conducting business
at the time of original application and renewal.
2. The holder of a secondhand goods dealer license under this section for a business with more than one dealer at the same
location must comply with all of the requirements of this chapter, including the responsibility for police reporting and record
keeping, in the same manner as any other dealer licensed under this section. A dealer licensed under this subsection is
responsible to its customers for stolen or misrepresented goods sold at its place of business in the same manner as any other
dealer licensed under this section. (Ord. 792, 6-7-2006)
3-5-3: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
A. Application Filed; Fee; Distribution Of Copies: Every applicant for a license or the renewal of a license to maintain, operate, or
conduct a pawnbroker business or a secondhand goods dealer business shall file a completed application under oath with the city
upon a form provided by the office of the city clerk and pay a nonrefundable investigation fee established by city council
ordinance from time to time. The application, once accepted, shall be referred to the Cottage Grove police division for
investigation. Copies of the application shall be forwarded to such other city departments as shall be necessary for verification
and investigation of the facts set forth in the application.
B. Contents Of Application; Issuance Or Denial Recommended:
1. The director of public safety and such other department heads as necessary shall make a written recommendation to the city
council as to the issuance or nonissuance of a license within sixty (60) days following receipt of the completed application. The
city may order and conduct such additional investigation, as it deems necessary. If additional investigation is necessary, the
applicant shall pay the city the actual cost for the additional investigation. The license shall not be issued until any additional
investigation costs are paid. Every application for a license under this chapter shall be made on a form supplied by the city and
shall contain the following information:
a. Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership or other form of organization.
(1) If the applicant is a natural person:
(A) The true name, address, social security number, phone number, driver's license number, date of birth, and residential
address of the applicant.
(B) Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or a resident alien.
(C) Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other than his present true name and, if so, what was
such name or names and information concerning dates and places where used.
(D) The name of the business, if it is to be conducted under a designation, name or type other than the full individual name
of the applicant, and in such case, a copy of the certification, as required by chapter 333 of Minnesota statutes, certified
by the clerk of district court.
(E) The street address at which the applicant has lived during the preceding five (5) years.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 45/454
(F) The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant has been engaged during the
preceding five (5) years and the names and addresses of the applicant's employers and partners, if any, for the
preceding five (5) years.
(G) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any felony, crime, or violation of this code or any other ordinance,
other than traffic. If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place, and offense for which convictions
were had.
(H) The physical description of the applicant.
(I) Applicant's current personal financial statement and true copies of the applicant's federal and state tax returns for the
two (2) years prior to application.
(J) If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the
business and all information concerning each of them required in subsections B1a(1)(A) through B1a(1)(H) of this
section.
(K) Whether the applicant has ever been engaged as an employee or in operating a secondhand goods dealership,
pawnbroker, or similar business. If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place, and length of time.
(L) If the applicant is married, the true name of the applicant's spouse and all information regarding the applicant's spouse
as is required of the applicant under subsections B1a(1)(A), B1a(1)(C), and B1a(1)(E) through B1a(1)(I) of this section.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership:
(A) The names, addresses, and business addresses of all general and limited partners and all information concerning each
general partner as is required in subsection B1a(1) or B1a(3) of this section, as appropriate.
(B) The name(s) of managing partner(s) and the interest of each partner in the business.
(C) A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application. If the partnership is required to file a
certificate as to a trade name under the provisions of chapter 333 of Minnesota statutes, a copy of such certification by
the clerk of district court shall be attached to the application.
(D) A true copy of the federal and state tax returns for partnership for the two (2) years prior to application.
(E) If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the
business and all information concerning each of them as required in subsection B1a(1) of this section.
(3) If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
(A) Name of the corporation or business form, and if incorporated, the state of incorporation.
(B) A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of incorporation or association agreement and bylaws must be
attached to the application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate of authority as required by Minnesota
statutes, section 303.06, must be attached.
(C) The name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all information containing each manager,
proprietor or agent required in subsection B1a(1) of this section.
(D) A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess of five percent (5%) in such organization or business form
or who are officers of the corporation or business form and all information concerns said persons required in subsection
B1a(1) of this section. This subsection B1a(3)(D), however, shall not apply to a corporation whose stock is publicly
traded on a stock exchange and is applying for a license to be owned and operated by it.
(4) All applications shall include the following:
(A) The exact legal description of the premises to be licensed, together with a plot plan of the area showing dimensions,
location of buildings, streets, access, parking facilities and the location of and distances to the nearest church building
and school grounds.
(B) Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license from any other governmental
unit.
(C) Whether the applicant has previously been denied, or had revoked or suspended, a pawnbroker or secondhand goods
dealer license from any other governmental unit.
(D) The exact location of the business premises.
(E) If the applicant does not own the business premises, a true and complete copy of the executed lease.
(F) Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable for the premises to be licensed have
been paid, and if not paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 46/454
(G) Whenever the application is for premises either planned or under construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the
application must be accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed premises to be
licensed.
(H) The applicant's hours of operation.
(I) An executed data privacy advisory and consent form authorizing the release of criminal history information.
(J) Such other information as the city may require.
C. Manager: When a licensee places a manager in charge of a business, or if the named manager(s) in charge of a licensed
business changes, the licensee must complete and submit the appropriate application within fourteen (14) days. The application
must include all appropriate information required in this section. Upon completion of an investigation of a manager, the licensee
must pay an amount equal to the cost of the investigation to assure compliance with this chapter. If the investigation process is
conducted solely within the state of Minnesota, the applicant shall pay a fee established by council ordinance from time to time. If
the investigation is conducted outside the state of Minnesota, the city may recover the actual investigation costs not exceeding an
amount established by council ordinance from time to time.
D. False Information: No person shall make any material false statement in the application. In addition to other penalties, the
licensee's license may be revoked by the city council for giving false information on the application.
E. Expiration Of License; Change In Application; Additional Fee: All licenses shall expire on December 31 next after their issuance
unless earlier renewed. A new application fee shall be required whenever there is any change in the facts presented by the
application other than date, applicant's home address or building owner's address. (Ord. 792, 6-7-2006)
F. Background Investigation: All applicants requesting a license pursuant to this chapter shall be required to submit to a background
investigation, including, but not limited to, a criminal history check. The background investigation will be performed in accordance
with section 1-11-3 of this code. (Ord. 902, 5-16-2012)
G. Bond Required: Each application for a pawnbroker license shall be accompanied by a bond in the amount of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) executed by a corporation authorized to do business in this state and conditioned that in conducting such business
the licensee will observe all laws in relation to pawnbrokers and will conduct business in conformity thereto, and that the licensee
will account for and deliver to any person legally entitled any goods which have come into the licensee's possession through the
licensee's business as a pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof, will pay the reasonable value in money to the person. Such bond shall be
maintained so long as the pawnbroker does business and shall be for the benefit of the city or any person who shall suffer any
damage through the act of such pawnbroker and shall not be terminable without the bond company giving written notice thirty
(30) days in advance of termination to the city clerk. (Ord. 792, 6-7-2006)
3-5-4: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
A. Persons Ineligible: No license under this chapter will be issued to an applicant who is a natural person, a partnership if such
applicant has any general partner or managing partner, a corporation or other organization if such applicant has any manager,
proprietor or agent in charge of the business to be licensed, if the applicant:
1. Is a person not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;
2. Is a person under eighteen (18) years of age;
3. Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed by Minnesota statutes, section
364.03, subdivision 2, and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the
duties of a licensee under this chapter as prescribed by Minnesota statutes 364.03, subdivision 3;
4. Is a person who, within five (5) years of the license application date, had a pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license
revoked;
5. Is a person who the city council determines not to be of sufficient good moral character and repute; or
6. When the city council determines, after investigation and public hearing, that issuance or renewal of the license would
adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare.
B. Ineligible Locations: A license will not be issued or renewed under this chapter for any place or for any business:
1. If taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or the state on the licensee's business premises are delinquent and
unpaid;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 47/454
2. If the premises for a pawnbroker is located within three hundred feet (300') of a school or church; or
3. Where operation of a licensed premises would violate zoning ordinances. (Ord. 792, 6-7-2006)
3-5-5: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
A. Receipt Of Sale: Every pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer purchasing or receiving on deposit for a loan any article of
personal property shall give to the person selling or depositing such article a plain written or printed ticket or receipt for the article
sold or deposited, showing the terms of such sale or loan.
B. Records Required: At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals, extensions, or redemptions, every licensee must
immediately record in English the following information by using ink or other indelible medium on forms or in a computerized
record approved by the director of public safety or designee.
The records so kept shall include the following information about each transaction:
1. Description: A complete and accurate description of each item including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification
number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item.
2. Price: The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, asking price if consigned, or value attributed to item if accepted in
trade, for each item received.
3. Receipt Date And Transaction Identifier: Date and time the item of property was received by the licensee, and the unique alpha
and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the licensee's records.
4. Description Of Seller/Pledger: Full name, residence address, residence telephone number, date of birth and accurate physical
description of the person from whom the item of property was received, including: sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes, and
color of hair.
5. Maturity Date And Amount Due: For pawnbroker, the maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including monthly
and annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges.
6. Identification Documents Of Seller/Pledger: The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of
identification presented by the seller or pledger:
a. Current valid Minnesota driver's license.
b. Current valid Minnesota identification card.
c. Current valid photo identification card issued by another state or a province of Canada.
7. Signature: The signature of the person pledging or selling the item.
8. Photographic Records: The licensee must also take a color photograph or color video recording which meets acceptable video
standards as established by the public safety director or designee of:
a. Every customer involved in a "reportable transaction" as defined in this chapter; and
b. Every item that does not have a unique serial or identification number permanently engraved or affixed.
If a photograph is taken, it must be done in a format that will produce a picture at least two inches (2") in length by two inches
(2") in width and must be maintained in such a manner that the photograph, if the film is developed, or frame, if the film is
exposed but not developed, can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction to which it relates.
Such photographs or the undeveloped film containing them, must be available to the public safety director, or designee, upon
request. The major portion of the photograph must include an identifiable front facial close up of the person who sold,
consigned, traded or pawned the item. Items photographed must be accurately depicted.
The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being photographed by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a
conspicuous place on the premises.
If a video photograph is taken, the video camera must zoom in on the person selling or pawning the item so as to include an
identifiable close up of that person's face. Items photographed by video must be accurately depicted. Video photographs
must be electronically referenced by time and date so they can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of
the transaction to which they relate. The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being videotaped orally and by
displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee must keep the exposed videotape
for three (3) months.
9. Digital Images: Licensees may fulfill the color photograph requirements in subsection B8 of this section by generating them as
digital images, in a format specified by the public safety director, or designee, electronically cross referenced to the reportable
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 48/454
transaction the images are associated with. The licensee must keep the digital images on the premises available for inspection
for ninety (90) days. Notwithstanding that digital images may be captured from video recordings, this provision does not alter or
amend the requirements in subsection B8 of this section.
10. Records For Renewal, Extension And Redemption: For renewals, extensions and redemptions, the licensee shall provide the
original transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction, and the type of transaction.
11. Inspection Of Records: The records must at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the public safety director, or
designee. Records of all transactions shall be retained for at least three (3) years from the date of transaction. Entries of digital
images, when implemented, shall be retained a minimum of ninety (90) days.
C. Reports Required:
1. Pawnbroker: Upon connection to a multiple jurisdiction computerized/automated pawn data reporting system by the police
division, a pawnbroker licensee shall submit all information required for pawnbroker transaction records via computerized
transmission in accordance with the standards and procedures established by the director of public safety. All required
transactions record data shall be transmitted at the close of each business day. Upon connection to APS, the licensee need not
adhere to the written submission requirements unless the licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required reports by
modem. All licensees shall be required to convert to APS reporting within six (6) months after the police department notifies the
licensee that the police division APS system is in operation. All costs for set up, submittal per transaction, and any other
determined costs shall be the sole responsibility of the licensee. The records required herein shall be kept at the licensee's
place of business for four (4) years and shall be available for police inspection at any reasonable time.
2. Secondhand Goods Dealer: All secondhand goods dealers must submit to the director of public safety, or designee, a complete
list of the following recordable transactions, regardless of resale price, once per week, no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon
the first day of each business week, on a form approved by the director of public safety. The report shall include a description of
the goods received during the preceding week, together with the time received and a description of the person from whom the
goods were received:
a. Items with a serial number identification or "operation identification" symbol or number, or other identification number;
b. Cameras;
c. Electronic audio, including, but not limited to, audio equipment, video equipment, computers and computer related
equipment;
d. Precious jewelry or gems, and precious metals (including precious scrap metals);
e. Artist signed or artist attributed works of art;
f. Coin collections;
g. Sports memorabilia;
h. Guns and firearms; and
i. Items not included in the above, except furniture and kitchen or laundry appliances, which the secondhand goods dealer
intends to sell for more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 792, 6-7-2006)
3-5-6: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
Any person, firm or corporation licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall, at all times during the terms of said license, allow
the officers of the police force of the city police department or any other law enforcement agency to enter the premises where the
licensee is carrying on such business or at any property or buildings used for storage of items related to the business, for the
purpose of inspecting such premises and inspecting the goods, wares and merchandise therein for the purpose of locating goods
suspected or alleged to have been stolen or otherwise improperly disposed of. (Ord. 792, 6-7-2006)
3-5-7: BUSINESS TRANSACTIONS; REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Required Holding Period:
1. When the director of public safety, or any member of the police department designated by the director of public safety, or any
other law enforcement agency notifies any pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer not to sell any property received on
deposit or purchased by him or her, or not to permit the same to be redeemed, the pawnbroker shall not sell nor permit such
property to be redeemed until such property is released in writing by the director of public safety, or designee.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 49/454
2. No personal property deposited with or purchased by any licensee under this chapter shall be sold from the place of business
of licensee until thirty (30) days after the copy of the records required by section 3-5-5 of this chapter have been made
available to the director of public safety except upon written permission of the director of public safety.
3. No personal property deposited with or purchased by any licensee under this chapter shall be permitted to be redeemed from
the place of business of the licensee until three (3) working days after the copy of the records required by section 3-5-5 of this
chapter have been made available to the director of public safety except upon written permission of the director of public safety.
B. Report Of Stolen Or Lost Goods: If any goods, articles or things shall be advertised in any public newspaper of the city as having
been lost or stolen, and such goods, articles or things shall then be, or shall thereafter come into the possession of any licensee
under the terms hereof, said licensee shall, upon actual notice thereof, immediately thereafter, as a supplement to said licensee's
required report pertaining to that day to the director of public safety, give information in writing that certain goods, articles or
things advertised are in said licensee's possession, and shall not thereafter dispose of the same except upon written authority so
to do from the director of public safety.
C. Redemption Period: Any person who pawns an item shall have at least thirty (30) days to redeem the item before it may be sold.
D. Prohibited Transactions:
1. No pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer shall purchase or receive on deposit or pledge anything of value as security for a
loan of money from any person under age eighteen (18) nor knowingly from an intoxicated person or one of unsound mind.
2. A pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer may not receive goods unless the seller presents identification in the form of a
driver's license or other picture identification in the approved prescribed manner.
3. Prohibited Goods: No licensee under this section shall accept any item of property which contains an altered or obliterated
serial number or operations identification number or any item of property whose serial number has been removed.
E. Storage Of Firearms And Weapons: A pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer holding for sale a firearm or other dangerous
weapon shall store the firearm or dangerous weapon in a locked and opaque compartment except when being viewed by a
customer following a request to view the firearm or dangerous weapon. The licensee shall meet all local, state and federal
requirements prior to receiving or selling any firearm or dangerous weapon and make available to the director of public safety all
records and documents prior to engaging in such activity.
F. Method Of Payment: When a pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer accepts an item for purchase or as security for a loan,
payment shall be made by check only, made payable to the actual intended seller or borrower.
G. Camera Surveillance: Licensee shall be required to videotape all transactions and maintain a data copy of the recording for ninety
(90) days. The video recording shall include a clear view of the customer and shall display the date and time of the transaction.
The videotape recordings shall be provided to the police division or other law enforcement agency upon request. It shall be the
responsibility of the licensee to notify the customer of the videotaping and post in a conspicuous place that the tapes are made
available to the police division.
H. Burglar Alarm: Licensee shall maintain an electronic burglar alarm system for the licensed premises, such system must be
maintained in working order and properly licensed with the city clerk.
I. Labels: Licensee must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned, purchased or received in inventory from any reportable
transaction. Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies their transaction in the pawnshop
records, the transaction date, the name of the item, the model and serial number as they were reported to the police division, if
applicable, and the date the item is out of pawn care or can be sold, if applicable. The label must be of the type that can be
attached to a variety of surfaces and remains easily removable but of such construction that it may not be easily removed in one
piece. Labels shall not be reused. (Ord. 792, 6-7-2006)
3-5-8: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Any license under this chapter may be denied, suspended, or revoked for any of the following reasons:
1. The proposed use does not comply with the Cottage Grove zoning code.
2. The proposed use does not comply with any health, building, building maintenance provisions, or other provisions of this code
or state law.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 50/454
3. The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one or more provisions of this chapter.
4. The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a
background or financial investigation due to the unavailability of information.
5. Fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in securing or renewing a license.
6. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made in the application and investigation for, or in the course of the applicant's
business.
7. Violation within the preceding five (5) years, of any law relating to theft, damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled
substance, or unlawful operation of a business.
8. The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not qualify for a license under the terms of this chapter.
9. Any falsification on a license application shall result in the denial of a license. If the falsification is discovered after a license is
issued, the license is null and void without any further action by the city council. (Ord. 792, 6-7-2006)
3-5-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable
as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 792, 6-7-2006)
Chapter 6
TOBACCO SALES
3-6-1: PURPOSE:
Because the City recognizes that many persons under the age of eighteen (18) years purchase or otherwise obtain, possess, and
use tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices, and such sales, possession, and use are violations of both State and
Federal laws; and because studies, which the City hereby accepts and adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before
they reach the age of eighteen (18) years, and that those persons who reach the age of eighteen (18) years without having started
smoking are significantly less likely to begin smoking; and because smoking has shown to be the cause of several serious health
problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of government; this Chapter shall be intended to regulate the
sale, possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering
existing laws, to protect minors against the serious effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobaccorelated
devices, and to further the official public policy of the State in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke as
stated in Minnesota Statutes section 144.391. (Ord. 654, 3-11-1998)
3-6-2: DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION:
Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. The
singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular. The masculine shall include the feminine and neuter and
vice versa. The term "shall" is mandatory, and the term "may" is permissive. The following terms shall have the definitions given to
them:
COMPLIANCE CHECKS: The system the City uses to investigate and ensure that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco-related devices are following and complying with the requirements of this Chapter. "Compliance checks" shall
involve the use of minors as authorized by this Chapter. "Compliance checks" shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to
purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices for educational, research and training purposes as authorized by
State and Federal laws.
INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED: The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco product wrapped individually for sale. Individually
wrapped tobacco and tobacco products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose
tobacco in any form, and single cans or packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a
single pack or other container as described in this Section shall not be considered "individually packaged".
LOOSIES: The common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged cigarette.
MINOR: Any natural person who has not yet reached eighteen (18) years.
MOVABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS: Shall refer to any form of business operated out of a truck, van, automobile, or other type of
vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address, storefront or other permanent type of structure authorized for sales
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 51/454
transactions.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT: Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices are available to the
general public. "Retail establishments" shall include, but not be limited to, grocery stores, convenience stores, and restaurants.
SALE: Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other consideration.
SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING: Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices in any manner where
any person shall have access to the tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices, without the assistance or intervention of
the licensee or the licensee's employee. The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco,
tobacco product, or tobacco related device between the customer and the licensee or employee. "Self-service merchandising" shall
not include vending machines.
TOBACCO OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance or item containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes;
cigars; pipe tobacco; snuff; fine cut or other chewing tobacco; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready
rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff flowers; cavendish; shorts; plug and twist tobaccos; dipping tobaccos; refuse scraps;
clippings; cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf prepared in such manner as to be suitable
for chewing, sniffing, or smoking.
TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES: Any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling papers, or other device intentionally designed or
intended to be used in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing, or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric, electronic, or other type of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices upon the insertion of money, tokens, or other form of payment directly into the machine by the person
seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. (Ord. 654, 3-11-1998)
3-6-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; PROHIBITED LICENSEES:
No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related device without first having obtained a license to
do so from the city. No license shall be issued to a movable place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be
licensed under this chapter. (Ord. 654, 3-11-1998)
3-6-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices shall be made on a form provided by the
city. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant's residential and business addresses and telephone
numbers, the name of the business for which the license is being sought, and any additional information the city deems necessary. If
the clerk shall determine the application is incomplete, he or she shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the
information necessary to make the application complete. (Ord. 654, 3-11-1998; amd. 2000 Code)
3-6-5: ACTION ON APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION:
A. The council may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action for such reasonable period of time as necessary to
complete any additional investigation of the application or the applicant(s) it deems necessary. The public safety department shall
conduct a background investigation in accordance with section 1-11-3 of this code. (Ord. 902, 5-16-2012)
B. The city clerk shall forward the application to the director of public safety within a reasonable period of time, and the investigation
should be completed within ten (10) days.
C. The application and investigation results shall then be forwarded to the city council for action at a regularly scheduled council
meeting. If the council shall approve the license, the clerk shall issue the license. If the council denies the license, notice of the
denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant's right to appeal the council's decision.
D. The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this chapter; however, except as may
otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular grounds for denial does not mean that the city must deny the
license. If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was
ineligible for the license under this subsection.
1. The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
2. The applicant has been convicted within the past five (5) years of a violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance
provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products, or tobacco related devices.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 52/454
3. The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices revoked within the preceding
twelve (12) months of the date of application.
4. The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application, or provides false or misleading information.
5. The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law, ordinance, or other regulation from holding such a license. (Ord.
654, 3-11-1998; amd. 2000 Code)
3-6-6: LICENSE FEE:
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license fee shall be paid in full. The fee for a license under this
chapter shall be in such amount as provided by ordinance of the city council from time to time. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
3-6-7: TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWALS:
All licenses issued under this chapter will be valid from the date of issuance and shall expire on December 31. The renewal of a
license issued under this chapter shall be handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be
made at least thirty (30) days but no more than sixty (60) days before the expiration of the current license. The issuance of a license
issued under this chapter shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to
an automatic renewal of the license. (Ord. 654, 3-11-1998)
3-6-8: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Transfer Of License: Licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only on the premises for which the license was issued and
only for the person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or person shall be valid without
the prior approval of the council.
B. Display Of License: All licenses shall be posted and displayed on the licensed premises in plain view of the general public.
C. Prohibited Sales:
1. Prohibitions Generally: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product, or
tobacco related device:
a. To any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
b. By means of any type of vending machine, except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter1.
c. By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to make a verbal or written request to an employee
of the licensed premises in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device and whereby there is not
a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device between the licensee or the licensee's
employee, and the customer2.
d. By means of "loosies" as defined in section 3-6-2 of this chapter.
e. Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic,
toxic, or controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or added as part of an
otherwise lawful manufacturing process.
f. By any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or form prohibited by Federal, State, or other local law,
ordinance provision, or other regulation.
2. Vending Machines: It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this Chapter to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco-related devices by the means of a vending machine unless minors are at all times prohibited from entering
the licensed establishment.
3. Self-Service Sales:
a. It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this Chapter to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related
devices by any means whereby the customer may have access to such items without having to request the item from the
licensee or the licensee's employee and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or the
tobacco-related device between the licensee or his or her clerk and the customer.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 53/454
b. All tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices shall either be stored behind a counter or other area not freely
accessible to customers, or in a case or other storage unit not left open and accessible to the general public.
c. Any retailer selling tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices at the time this Chapter is adopted shall comply
with this subsection C3 within thirty (30) days.
d. The self-service restriction described in this subsection C3 shall not apply to retail establishments which cannot be entered
at any time by minors nor shall these restrictions apply to the sale of expensive cigars displayed in a humidor by
establishments which cannot be entered at any time by minors.
D. Responsibility Of Licensees For Employees: All licensees under this Chapter shall be responsible for the actions of their
employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices on the licensed premises, and the sale
of such an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as
prohibiting the City from also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this Chapter, State or Federal law,
or other applicable law or regulation.
E. Age Of Clerks: It shall be illegal for a retail establishment to cause or permit a minor to sell tobacco, tobacco products or tobaccorelated
devices unless there is an adult employee (18 years or older) on duty and present within the establishment.
F. Signage: Anyone holding a tobacco license under the provisions of this Chapter shall post and display in plain view of the general
public on the licensed premises a sign indicating that it is illegal to sell tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco-related devices to
anyone under the age of eighteen (18) years and that the possession and use of such items by minors are also illegal under both
State law and local ordinance. Said signs shall be approved by City staff and issued to a retail establishment at the time that a
license is obtained. The cost of said sign shall be included within the licensing fee. (Ord. 654, 3-11-1998; amd. 2000 Code)
3-6-9: COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS:
All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the City police or other authorized City official during regular business hours.
From time to time, but at least twice per year, the Police Division shall conduct compliance checks engaging, with the written consent
of their parents or guardians, minors over the age of fifteen (15) but less than eighteen (18) years, to enter the licensed premises to
attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall
be supervised by City designated law enforcement officers. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of violating
tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related device provisions when such items are obtained as part of the compliance check. No
minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to use false identification misrepresenting the minor's age, and all minors lawfully
engaging in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor's age asked by the licensee or his or her employee and
shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit compliance checks
authorized by State or Federal laws for educational, research, or training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular
State or Federal law. However, all such compliance checks must be coordinated through the Police Division. (Ord. 654, 3-11-1998;
amd. 2000 Code)
3-6-10: PROHIBITED ACTS:
Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be violations of this chapter:
A. Illegal Sales: For any person to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device to any minor.
B. Illegal Possession: For any minor to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. This
subsection shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
C. Illegal Use: For any minor to smoke, chew, sniff, or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device.
D. Illegal Procurement:
1. For any minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device.
2. For any person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items on behalf of a minor.
3. For any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco
product, or tobacco related device.
This subsection D shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 54/454
E. Use of False Identification: For any minor to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false form of identification,
whether the identification is that of another person or one on which the age has been modified or tampered with to represent an
age older than the actual age of the person. (Ord. 654, 3-11-1998)
3-6-11: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended as provided in sections 3-6-12 and 3-6-13 of this chapter, the
violations and penalties sections. (Ord. 654, 3-11-1998)
3-6-12: VIOLATIONS:
A. Notice: Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that
sets forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of his or her right to be heard on the accusation.
B. Hearings:
1. If a person accused of violating this chapter so requests, a hearing shall be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be
published and provided to the accused violator.
2. The city clerk or finance director shall serve as the hearing officer.
3. If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this chapter did occur, that decision, along with the hearing officer's reasons
for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under section 3-6-13 of this chapter, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of
which shall be provided to the accused violator. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds
for not imposing any penalty, such findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator.
C. Appeals: Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be filed in district court.
D. Misdemeanor Prosecution: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any
alleged violation of this chapter.
E. Continued Violation: Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 654, 3-11-1998; amd. 2000 Code)
3-6-13: PENALTIES:
A. Licensees: Any licensee found to have violated this chapter or whose employee shall have violated this chapter shall be issued an
administrative ordinance citation and fined an amount established by council ordinance from time to time. In addition, after the
third offense, the license shall be suspended for not less than seven (7) days.
B. Other Individuals: Other individuals, other than minors regulated by subsection C of this section, found to be in violation of this
chapter shall be issued an administrative ordinance citation and fined the amount established by council ordinance from time to
time.
C. Minors: Minors found in unlawful possession of, or who unlawfully purchase or attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices, shall be found in violation of this chapter and subject to appropriate penalties established by council
ordinance from time to time, which may include administrative ordinance citations, juvenile petty citations, and/or tobacco related
education classes, diversion programs, or community service.
D. Misdemeanor: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
3-6-14: EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES:
A. Exceptions: Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices to a minor
as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 55/454
B. Affirmative Defense: It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this chapter for a person to have reasonably relied on
proof of age as described by state law. (Ord. 654, 3-11-1998)
Chapter 7
ALARM SYSTEMS
3-7-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the City from unnecessary calls for public safety services resulting from the operation of
alarm systems.
B. This chapter regulates the use of alarm systems and establishes fees and a system of administration. (Ord. 994, 6-20-2018)
3-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have these meanings:
ALARM: A signal from an alarm system which directly or indirectly summons Department of Public Safety personnel.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanical, electrical or electronic device designed to be used for the prevention or detection of burglary,
robbery or fire on the premises.
ALARM USER: The person in control of any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm eliciting a response by Department of Public Safety personnel where a situation requiring a response does
not exist. A false alarm shall not include an alarm caused by a violent storm, vandalism or other unusual circumstances not subject to
the control of the alarm system or alarm user. A false alarm shall include, but not be limited to, failure of the alarm user or his/her
employees to turn off the alarm system, or the alarm user's failure to properly maintain the alarm system.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, corporation or other organization or entity. (Ord. 994, 6-20-2018)
3-7-3: ALARM USER REGISTRATION:
A. Registration Required: Once an alarm system within a business or industrial zoning district or on a residentially zoned property
possessing a conditional use permit generates a false alarm the alarm user will be required to register with the City for the
calendar year in which the false alarm occurred.
B. Application For Registration: Applications for registration shall be submitted to the City Clerk and shall specify:
1. The alarm user name, contact information, and address for the premises in which the alarm system is installed.
2. A list of available key holders who may be contacted after business hours.
3. Other pertinent information as may be required by the City.
C. Registration Fee: A registration fee in such amount as provided for by ordinance of the City Council shall be payable upon
application for registration for each alarm user who is required to register.
D. Exemptions: Any City, State or Federal alarm user shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 994, 6-20-2018)
3-7-4: FALSE ALARMS:
A. False Alarm Fees: When any alarm system that is required to be registered generates more than two (2) false alarms in a
calendar year, the alarm user will be charged false alarm fees in such amounts as provided for by ordinance of the City Council.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 56/454
B. Appeal Of False Alarms: Any alarm user may appeal a false alarm in writing to the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of
notice of the false alarm. The City Clerk has authority to make a final determination as to whether the false alarm and any
associated fee will be upheld or dismissed.
C. Payment Of False Alarm Fees: False alarm fees must be paid by the alarm user within thirty (30) days of issuance of a false alarm
invoice, or, in the case of an appealed false alarm, within thirty (30) days of notification that the false alarm has been upheld.
(Ord. 994, 6-20-2018)
3-7-5: PROHIBITIONS:
A. Alarm systems utilizing audible alarms, including, but not limited to, a siren, bell or loudspeaker, which do not automatically shut
off after fifteen (15) minutes of operation are prohibited.
B. Alarm systems utilizing flashing or brightly illuminated lights which do not automatically shut off after fifteen (15) minutes of
operation are prohibited. (Ord. 994, 6-20-2018)
Chapter 8
THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have these meanings:
APPLICANT: An individual, partnership, corporation or other organization or entity that is applying for licensure.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: An individual who practices therapeutic massage.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, corporation or other organization or entity.
STANDARDS OF PRACTICE: Standards of Practice published by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and
Bodywork.
THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE: The systematic manual manipulation of soft tissue to enhance health and well-being.
THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE BUSINESS: A business that offers therapeutic massage services. (Ord. 996, 10-3-2018)
3-8-2: THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE BUSINESSES:
A. License Required: No person shall operate a therapeutic massage business without a license. Licensed therapeutic massage
businesses may only provide therapeutic massage services by licensed massage therapists who are employed by the business.
No more than one business license shall be issued to any one person or for any one location in the City.
B. Application, Initial: Application shall be made on a form prescribed by the City, and shall include the applicant name, contact
information, and any other information related to the business required by the City or by State Statute. A completed application
shall also include the following:
1. Organization Information: If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, or other organization or entity, the applicant shall
provide proof of legal standing through State or Federal filing and shall provide the names of all individuals who hold an interest
in the organization.
2. Property Information: The applicant shall provide the legal description of the premises or the exact street address and suite
number, if applicable, of where the business will operate. If the applicant is not the owner of record of the business location, the
applicant must provide a lease agreement or other form of agreement entered into with the owner of record authorizing the
applicant to operate at that location.
3. General Authorization And Release Of Private Data: The applicant shall complete a general authorization and release of
private data form authorizing the City to perform a background check of the applicant in accordance with section 1-11-3 of this
Code. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, or other organization or entity, the applicant shall provide a general
authorization and release of private data form for each individual who holds an interest in the organization.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 57/454
4. License In Another Community: Whether the applicant (or anyone who holds an interest in the organization) has held, or has
held an interest in, a license in another community, and if so, when, where, and what for.
5. Other License Suspended Or Revoked: Whether the applicant (or anyone who holds an interest in the organization) has held,
or has held an interest in, a license that was suspended or revoked, and if so, when, where, and what for.
6. Felony, Crime, Or Violation Conviction: Whether the applicant (or anyone who holds an interest in the organization) has been
arrested for or convicted of any felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a minor traffic offense, and if so, when,
where, and what for.
7. Certificate Of Insurance: A certificate of insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for general liability
covering all aspects of the business operation shall be included.
8. Investigation Fee: An initial investigation fee as provided for by City ordinance shall be paid. If the applicant is an individual or
an organization whose sole interest is held by an individual, and that individual will be the sole licensed massage therapist
providing services at the business, the investigation fee shall be waived.
9. License Fee: An annual license fee as provided for by City ordinance shall be paid. If the applicant is an individual or an
organization whose sole interest is held by an individual, and that individual will be the sole licensed massage therapist
providing services at the business, the license fee shall be waived.
C. Application, Renewal: Application for renewal of an existing license requires the same information as an initial license application
except it does not require proof of legal standing through State or Federal filing for the organization, lease agreement or other
form of agreement for the business location, or payment of an investigation fee.
D. Application Submission: The completed application shall be submitted to the City Clerk's Office. Incomplete applications cannot
be accepted and will be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 996, 10-3-2018)
3-8-3: MASSAGE THERAPISTS:
A. License Required: No person shall provide therapeutic massage services without a license. A licensed massage therapist may
only provide therapeutic massage services as part of a licensed therapeutic massage business. A massage therapist license shall
only be issued to an individual and shall not be issued to a partnership, corporation or other organization or entity.
B. Application, Initial: Application shall be made on a form prescribed by the City, and shall include the applicant name, contact
information, and any other information required by the City or by State Statute. A completed application shall also include the
following:
1. Proof Of Education/Certification: The applicant shall have proof of at least one of the following education/certification
requirements sent directly from the institution, program, Examining Board or Certification Board to the City:
a. Graduation from an institution or program in massage therapy that is accredited by an accrediting agency recognized by the
United States Department of Education.
b. Passing results of Massage and Bodywork Licensing Examination (MBLEx) administered by the Federation of State
Massage Therapy Boards (FSMTB), or the National Certification Exam for Therapeutic Massage (NCETM) or National
Certification Exam for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork (NCETMB) administered by the National Certification Board for
Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork (NCBTMB).
c. Board Certification in Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork (BCTMB) from the National Certification Board for Therapeutic
Massage and Bodywork (NCBTMB). (Ord. 1003, 4-17-2019)
2. General Authorization And Release Of Private Data: The applicant shall complete a general authorization and release of
private data form authorizing the City to perform a background check in accordance with section 1-11-3 of this Code.
3. License In Another Community: Whether the applicant has held, or has held an interest in, a license in another community, and
if so, when, where, and what for.
4. Other License Suspended Or Revoked: Whether the applicant has held, or has held an interest in, a license that was
suspended or revoked, and if so, when, where, and what for.
5. Felony, Crime, Or Violation Conviction: Whether the applicant has been arrested for or convicted of any felony, crime, or
violation of any ordinance other than a minor traffic offense, and if so, when, where, and what for.
6. Investigation Fee: An initial investigation fee as provided for by City ordinance shall be paid.
7. License Fee: An annual license fee as provided for by City ordinance shall be paid.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 58/454
C. Application, Renewal: Application for renewal of an existing license requires the same information as an initial license application
except it does not require submission of proof of education/certification or payment of an investigation fee.
D. Application Submission: The completed application shall be submitted to the City Clerk's Office. Incomplete applications cannot
be accepted and will be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 996, 10-3-2018)
3-8-4: BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION:
A. The Public Safety Department will perform a background investigation of the completed application in accordance with section 1-
11-3 of this Code. (Ord. 996, 10-3-2018)
3-8-5: LICENSE APPROVAL/DENIAL:
A. Issuing Authority: The City Council is the issuing authority for license applications.
B. License Approval: Unless grounds exist for license denial, a license shall be issued for the calendar year.
C. License Denial: The following shall be grounds for denying a license application:
1. The business is not an allowed use in the zoning district for which it is proposed or does not have conditional use approval.
2. Failure of an initial applicant to meet education/certification requirements.
3. An arrest, charge or conviction of a crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes
section 364.03 subd. 2, and who has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform
the duties and responsibilities of a licensee as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes section 364.03 subd. 3.
4. Existence of disciplinary action against the applicant (or anyone who holds an interest in the organization) by the Minnesota
Department of Health Office of Unlicensed Complementary and Alternative Health Care Practice (OCAP).
5. The applicant has made fraudulent statements, misrepresentations, not fully disclosed information or made false statements in
the application or investigation for or in the course of the applicant's business. (Ord. 1003, 4-17-2019)
3-8-6: LICENSE PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. All licensed massage businesses and massage therapists must comply with the following performance standards:
1. Compliance with Minnesota Statute, section 146A, Complementary and Alternative Health Care Practices.
2. Compliance with Standards of Practice published by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork
(NCBTMB). Standards specific to the NCBTMB will only apply to individuals holding board certification with the NCBTMB.
3. Massage businesses must maintain general liability insurance covering all aspects of the business operation.
4. Licenses must be clearly posted at the place of business. Massage business licenses are effective for the compact and
contiguous space in the approved license application. A massage business license shall entitle the business to offer off-site
therapeutic massage services at an event that is open to the general public, such as a fundraiser, community festival or other
similar event, provided such services are performed by a licensed massage therapist employed by the business.
5. A massage business licensee shall be responsible for all aspects of the business operation and the conduct of its employees.
(Ord. 996, 10-3-2018)
3-8-7: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
A. The following conduct is prohibited:
1. Any conduct prohibited under Minnesota Statute, section 146A, Complementary and Alternative Health Care Practices.
2. Allowing an individual not licensed as a massage therapist to perform therapeutic massage. (Ord. 996, 10-3-2018)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 59/454
3-8-8: LICENSE SUSPENSION/REVOCATION:
A. Notice And Hearing: The City Council may consider suspension or revocation of a massage business or massage therapist
license when grounds exist. The City shall provide the licensee proper notice and a hearing prior to such suspension or
revocation.
B. Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation: Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license:
1. Conviction or adjudication of the licensee (or anyone who holds an interest in the organization), or any form thereof whose
disposition is pending, for any crime outlined in Minnesota Statute, sections 609.281 through 609.292, Sexual and Labor
Trafficking Crimes, and Minnesota Statute, sections 609.293 through 609.353, Sex Crimes.
2. Conviction or adjudication of the licensee (or anyone who holds an interest in the organization), or any form thereof whose
disposition is pending, for any conduct outlined in Minnesota Statute, section 146A.08 Prohibited Conduct.
3. Any disciplinary action against the licensee (or anyone who holds an interest in the organization) by the Minnesota Department
of Health Office of Unlicensed Complementary and Alternative Health Care Practice (OCAP).
4. Failure to follow license performance standards.
5. Engaging in, allowing, or failing to prevent prohibited conduct outlined in this chapter.
6. Negative findings revealed during the license period that affect the public safety, health, and welfare.
C. License Reinstatement: If the grounds for license suspension no longer exist, the City Council may consider reinstatement of a
suspended license with or without conditions. (Ord. 996, 10-3-2018)
3-8-9: LICENSE EXEMPTION:
A. A massage business license or massage therapist license is not required for the following:
1. Facilities licensed by the Minnesota Department of Health.
2. Licensed or registered health care practitioners that offer massage therapy services under the practitioner's license as outlined
by Minnesota Statute, section 146A.065, when the therapist is hired or employed by a medical professional licensed under
Minnesota Statutes chapter 147 or 148 or a dental professional licensed under Minnesota Statutes chapter 150A. A massage
therapist is not limited to providing treatment to patients of the medical or dental professional.
3. Persons licensed by the State of Minnesota Board of Barber Examiners as barbers or the State of Minnesota Board of
Cosmetology as cosmetologists, provided such persons do not hold themselves out as offering massage services and provided
any massage service is complementary to the licensed activity and is limited to the head, neck, hands, or feet. (Ord. 1003, 4-
17-2019)
Chapter 9
BUILDING CONTRACTORS
3-9-1: POLICY:
It is deemed in the interest of the public and the residents of the City that the work involved in building, alteration and construction
and the installation of various appliances and service facilities in and for such buildings be done only by individuals that have
demonstrated or submitted evidence of their competency to perform such work in accordance with the applicable codes and
ordinances of the City regulating the same. (1971 Code § 6-9)
3-9-2: LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. License Required:
1. No person, firm or corporation shall operate, maintain, conduct or engage in the following businesses or work, except in
accordance with State statutes, this Code and other applicable ordinances of the City:
a. General contracting in the business of building construction and remodeling.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 60/454
b. Masonry and brick work.
c. Roofing and siding (includes soffit, fascia and/or gutters).
d. Heating, ventilation and refrigeration.
e. Gas piping, gas services and gas equipment installation.
f. Blacktopping.
g. Water supply system installation and construction.
h. Excavation, including excavation for footings, basements, sewer and water line installation.
i. Demolition.
j. Sign erection, construction and repair, including billboards and electrical signs.
k. Fire suppression systems.
l. Swimming pool installers.
m. Framing.
n. Insulation installers.
o. Fencing contractors.
p. Landscape contractors.
q. Irrigation contractors.
2. This subsection shall not be construed as preventing any such qualified licensee from performing the work by an employee
under his/her supervision and control or by contract with another person qualified to perform the same; provided, that the
contractor is subject to the control of the licensee, and the licensee is at all times responsible for the work performed. A
contractor not subject to the control of a licensee shall be required to obtain a license. (1971 Code § 6-10; amd. 2000 Code)
B. Permit Required: For each of the businesses or occupations listed in subsection A1 of this Section for which the State of
Minnesota provides for the registration thereof, permits shall be granted only to holders of a State or City license; except, that the
owner of any property may perform work when work is performed in accordance with the codes and ordinances of the city, and for
such purpose, a permit may be granted to such owner without a license obtained. A nonlicensed person may install plumbing only
in a building which is already his or her own residence, and only in that part of the building which he or she is actually occupying.
A person may not install a plumbing system in a building which he/she intends to occupy as a residence in the future and may not
install the plumbing in any part of the building which is or will be occupied by someone else, i.e., a tenant or friend. (1971 Code
§ 6-15; amd. 2000 Code)
3-9-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
A. Contents Of Application; Insurance:
1. Application for license shall be made on forms provided by the building official. On such form, the applicant shall state the
following information:
a. His/her name and business and home addresses; and, if the application is made on behalf of a partnership, association or
corporation, the name and address of such partnership, association or corporation;
b. If the proposed licensee is a partnership, the names and home addresses of all partners; or if the proposed licensee is an
association or corporation, the names and home addresses of its principal officers and managers and of the owners (not to
exceed 10) or the largest shareholders of the business or enterprise; and
c. Such other information as is required to be furnished by ordinance or is reasonably required by the building official or other
applicable city departments.
2. The application shall include documentation indicating insurance coverage which shall remain in effect during the license term,
and noncancellation provisions which provide a minimum thirty (30) days' notice to the city prior to cancellation, as follows:
a. Comprehensive general liability insurance not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries including
accidental death to any one person, and subject to the same limit for each person in an amount of not less than three
hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) on account of any one accident;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 61/454
b. Property damage insurance not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for each accident and not less than one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) aggregated; and
c. Workers' compensation insurance coverage of employees as required by state law.
B. Signatures Required: The proposed licensee shall sign the application; or, if the proposed licensee is a partnership, an association
or corporation, at least one person having power under its bylaws to execute contracts of the association or corporation shall
sign.
C. Renewal Applications: Applications for renewals of licenses may, in the interest of brevity, substitute for any required information a
reference to statements contained in previous applications which are on file with the city.
D. Issuance Of License: The license shall be granted by the building official, after investigation and positive recommendation from
applicable city staff, upon proof of the applicant's qualifications, and compliance with section 3-9-4 of this chapter.
E. Denial Of License; Appeal: In the event the building official determines that the application does not comply with the ordinance
criteria, the report and recommendation of the building official and applicable staff shall be referred to the city council, together
with the reason or reasons for the proposed denial. A copy of the recommendation shall be supplied to the applicant. The
applicant may appear before the city council to respond to the reasons for the recommendation of denial. The city council shall
make appropriate findings and either issue or deny the license application. (Ord. 945, 4-1-2015)
3-9-4: STANDARDS FOR LICENSE ISSUANCE; TERM:
A. Standards For Issuance Generally; Term: Licenses and renewals thereof shall be issued after an investigation and verification of
the applicant's qualification and record in the performance and operation of the types of work for which the applicant seeks a
license. Licenses shall be issued for one calendar year from January 1 through December 31. New licenses will run from date of
issuance through December 31.
B. Investigation: All applications for license shall be referred to the director of public safety for verification and investigation of the
facts set forth in the application. Investigation shall include, but not be limited to, a driver's license and wants/warrants check
and/or a criminal history records check on the applicant. The director of public safety shall cause to be made such investigation of
the information requested in section 3-9-3 of this chapter.
C. Standards For Denial: Licenses and renewals thereof may be denied by the city council for any of the following reasons:
1. Failure to complete the application or file the required license fee or insurance policy.
2. Misstatement in the application.
3. Failure to comply with special conditions required by statute or ordinance for issuance of license.
4. Violation of licensing ordinances by applicant, or suspension or revocation of licenses held by the applicant in the city or
elsewhere.
5. Violation of any state statute or city code provision which creates a threat to the public peace, health, safety and welfare.
6. Disregard and violation of the building, housing, sanitary, health, and fire laws of the state, county or city.
7. Any conduct which is contrary to the public interest, including, but not limited to, fraud, misrepresentation, or other dishonest or
deceitful conduct. (1971 Code § 6-13)
3-9-5: LICENSE FEE; EXEMPTION:
The annual fee for license shall be established by ordinance of the city council from time to time. No license fee shall be required of
any person, firm or corporation, pursuant to this section, who, by state law, is required to attain standards of competency or
experience as a prerequisite to engaging in such craft or profession; provided, that the person shall provide evidence to the city that
the individual, firm or corporation has a license in good standing from the state, and further provides proof of insurance in effect
through the term of the license issued by the state. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
3-9-6: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 62/454
A. Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation: If any licensee violates or is in default of complying with any condition, requirement, duty
or rule of conduct imposed upon him/her by any statute or ordinance, or if any one or more of the following conditions exist, the
city clerk may initiate proceedings before the city council to suspend or revoke the licensee's license:
1. If the applicant for license or renewal thereof has knowingly made any false statements in the application for a license.
2. When the applicant has violated any state statute or city code provision which creates a threat to the public peace, health,
safety and welfare.
3. When there is disregard and violation of the building, housing, sanitary, health and fire laws of the state, county or city.
4. For failure to notify the city of any change in control of ownership, management or business name or location within thirty (30)
days of such change.
5. Conducting a building contracting business in any name other than the one in which the contractor is licensed.
6. Any conduct which is contrary to the public interest, including, but not limited to, fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonest or
deceitful conduct.
B. Procedure For Suspension Or Revocation: Procedure for suspension or revocation shall be as follows:
1. The licensee shall be provided with notice of the reasons for any proposed suspension or revocation. The notice shall provide
the licensee with an opportunity to explain the rationale for the proposed suspension or revocation.
2. The licensee shall be notified in advance of the date, time, place and purpose of the council meeting where the action on the
license will be considered. The licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard at the meeting. After making appropriate
findings, the council may continue the license in effect, impose conditions upon the license, suspend the license or revoke the
license. (1971 Code § 6-14)
3-9-7: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
No license will be required under this Chapter in the following circumstances:
A. For public service corporations performing work upon or in connection with their own property, except as may be provided by other
provisions of this Code.
B. For manufacturers for work incorporated with equipment as a part of the manufacturing, except as may be provided in other
provisions of this Code. (1971 Code § 6-16)
3-9-8: EFFECT ON LIABILITY:
This Chapter shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or liability for any party owning, operating, or installing the work
described in this Chapter for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the City be held as assuming
any such liability by reason of the licensing of persons engaged in such work. (1971 Code § 6-17)
Chapter 10
MINING; SAND AND GRAVEL OPERATIONS
3-10-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter is adopted for the purpose of:
A. Ensuring the restoration of the mined area consistent with existing and planned land use patterns, and to promoting appropriate
reuse of the mined areas.
B. Ensuring conformity of mining operations with the City's Critical Area and Comprehensive Plans.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 63/454
C. Controlling the effects of noise, dust, erosion, traffic, drainage, ground water pollution and other factors related to mining in
general. (1971 Code § 20-1)
3-10-2: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION; INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS:
A. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses; the singular number includes the plural and the plural
includes the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
B. In the event of conflicting provisions in the text of these regulations, the most restrictive shall apply.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
Section:
ENGINEER: An engineer registered with the Minnesota Board of Architecture, Engineering, Land Surveying-Landscape
Architecture, Geoscience and Interior Design.
LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered with the Minnesota Board of Architecture, Engineering, Land Surveying-
Landscape Architecture, Geoscience and Interior Design.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A landscape architect registered with the Minnesota Board of Architecture, Engineering, Land
Surveying-Landscape Architecture, Geoscience and Interior Design.
MINING: Includes the excavation, removal or storage of topsoil, sand, gravel, rock, soil, clay and other natural deposits within the
City. "Mining" shall not include the excavation, removal or storage of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other material for the purpose
of the foundation, cellar or basement of some pending structure, for which a permit has been issued and which is to be erected
immediately following the excavation, removal or storage. "Mining" shall not include the removal or moving of materials for
construction of roads, sewer lines, storm sewers, water mains, surface water drainage, agriculture or conservation purposes and
sod removal, nor shall "mining" include the moving of dirt for landscaping purposes on a lot used or to be used for residential
purposes.
PROCESSING: Includes the crushing, sorting, screening, washing, loading, hauling or any handling of material. (1971 Code § 20-
2; amd. 2000 Code)
3-10-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; REVIEW AND ACTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in mining within the City or for a property owner to permit a person to mine on his/her
property without first having obtained an annual mining permit. The annual mining permit shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission within sixty (60) days after the completed application has been accepted by the City. The Commission's
recommendation shall be forwarded to the City Council for formal action within thirty (30) days after this review. (1971 Code § 20-3;
amd. 2000 Code)
3-10-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
The application and twenty (20) copies of the annual mining permit required in Section 3-10-3 of this Chapter shall be filed with the
City. The application and accompanying documents shall be signed by the operator and property owner and submitted to the City no
later than sixty (60) days prior to the date for which the annual mining permit is to take effect. The application shall be made in the
names of the operator of the mine and the owner of the land to be mined. The application shall contain the following information:
A. The name and address of the applicant and of the owner of the land.
B. A legal description of the lands from which it is proposed to mine.
C. Names of all adjacent land owners within a one-half (1/2) mile radius.
D. Copies of any portions of agreements indicating the duration of any lease, if applicable.
E. The purpose of the removal.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 64/454
F. The estimated time required to complete the removal.
G. The highways, streets or other public ways within the City upon and along which the material removed shall be transported.
H. The plan of operation, including soil processing (any operation other than directed mining and removal), nature of the processing
and equipment, the area, depth and grade of such processing, the estimated quantity of earth deposits to be added to or
removed from the premises, location of the plant, source of water, disposal of water and reuse of water. In the event that water is
used in the operation of a pit, approval from the State Department of Natural Resources and other appropriate State or Federal
agencies shall be obtained as to the type, location and depth of such well and shall be contained within such application. A
separate map at a scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') or other scale as determined adequate by the Zoning
Administrator, prepared by a landscape architect or engineer, shall be submitted showing the following proposed activities for the
permit year:
1. Clearing operations, including a written statement describing removal and processing techniques and timing.
2. Stripping operations, including a written statement describing depth of soil and overburden, removal techniques and timing.
3. Stockpiling operations, including location of topsoil and overburden stockpiles, and a written statement describing timing and
simultaneous extraction and reclamation program, if any.
4. Extraction operations, including location of proposed drilling, blasting, loading, dewatering, proposed pit depths and crosssection
of typical pit area and slope bank.
5. Transportation facilities, including proposed on-site roads, proposed barge loading and fleeting areas, and estimated barge
capacity of each area.
6. Proposed sequence of extraction and reclamation by at least a ten (10) year interval, for the projected lifetime of the proposed
mining site.
7. An estimate of the total number of tons of material to be removed or stored on the site during the permit year.
I. To provide for an orderly, sequential rehabilitation of all land permitted to be excavated, and to prepare the mined land for its
ultimate reuse in accordance with City plans, policies and regulations, a reclamation plan shall accompany each annual mining
permit application. The reclamation plan shall be submitted by the applicant in three parts: 1) a general plan for reclamation; 2) a
reclamation contour plan; and 3) a description of reclamation and materials proposed for renewal of topsoil and planting.
1. General Plan For Reclamation: A general plan for reclamation, prepared by a landscape architect, engineer or surveyor, drawn
to a scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') or other scale as determined adequate by the zoning administrator,
shall be submitted showing:
a. Area and acreage of completely reclaimed land as of the date of the annual mining permit application.
b. Area and acreage of reclamation under way as of the date of the annual mining permit application.
c. Area and acreage proposed for reclamation during the proposed permit year.
d. Proposed final land use and supporting facilities, prepared in the same manner as described above.
2. Reclamation Contour Plan: A reclamation contour plan of the area to be reclaimed during the permit year shall be prepared by
a landscape architect, engineer or surveyor, and drawn to a scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') or other scale
determined adequate by the director of community development, indicating grading and sloping of mined areas, including:
a. Landform topography at two foot (2') contour intervals.
b. Specific slope of banks and cross sections of representative slopes.
c. Average depth of topsoil and overburden of reclaimed land forms.
d. Water impoundment areas, including surface acreage and elevations, public or private access and typical cross sections.
3. Topsoil And Replanting Plan: A general plan for replacement of topsoil and replanting during the permit year, prepared by a
landscape architect or engineer, and drawn to a scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') or other scale determined
adequate by the director of community development, and accompanied by a written report, shall be submitted describing the
following:
a. Seedbed and seed mix.
b. Species, size, quantity and location of trees, shrubs and grasses.
c. Planting season.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 65/454
d. Visual screening.
e. Wildlife species to be introduced, if any.
f. Required topsoil fertility. (1971 Code § 20-5; amd. 2000 Code)
3-10-5: INSPECTION AND REVIEW FEES:
An annual inspection and review fee shall accompany the mining permit application. This fee shall be used to defray the cost of
application review, inspections and monitoring to the city, including, but not limited to, the costs of professional engineering, planning,
zoning and legal services related to permit review, administration and monitoring. Within thirty (30) days following the last inspection
of the permit year, the city shall provide the operator with an itemized statement of the inspection and review costs. If, at year's end,
the submitted fee exceeds actual costs, the city will reimburse the difference to the operator. If the actual costs exceed the submitted
fee, the operator shall reimburse the difference to the city. The annual permit fee shall be in such amount as provided by ordinance
of the city council from time to time. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
3-10-6: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Bond:
1. The city council shall require the applicant, owner or user of the property on which the pit or excavation is located to execute
and file with the city clerk a bond or letter of credit. This bond shall be approved by the city attorney and be with a surety
company or bank licensed to do business in the state. The amount of the bond shall be as follows:
Tons Of Material Removed Bond Amount
Less than 100,000 $ 25,000.00
100,001 to 200,000 50,000.00
200,001 to 300,000 75,000.00
More than 300,000 100,000.00
2. Such bond shall have sufficient surety running to the City, conditioned to pay the City the extraordinary cost and expense of
repairing, from time to time, any highways, streets or other public ways where such repair work is made necessary by the
special burden resulting from hauling and travel in removing material from any pit or excavation, and conditioned further to
comply with all the requirements of this Chapter and the particular permit.
3. The City Council, for failure of any person to comply with any requirements made of it in writing, under the provisions of this
Chapter, as promptly as the same can reasonably be done, may proceed to cause such requirement to be complied with and
the cost of such work to be taxed against the property whereon the pit or excavation is located, or the City Council may at its
option proceed to collect such costs by an action against the person to whom such permit has been issued and his/her
sureties. (1971 Code § 20-9; amd. 2000 Code)
B. Insurance: The operator or lessor of the land involved shall secure and maintain such insurance from an insurance company
acceptable to the City and authorized to write casualty insurance in the State as will protect himself/herself, his/her agents and
the City from claims for bodily injury, death or property damage which may arise from operations under a mining permit duly
issued under this Chapter. A mining contractor shall not commence work under this Chapter and under a permit duly issued by
the City until he/she has obtained all insurance required under this subsection and shall have filed a certificate of insurance or the
certified copy of an insurance policy with the City. Each insurance policy shall contain a clause providing that it shall not be
cancelled by the insurance company without ten (10) days' notice to the City of intention to cancel. The amounts of such
insurance shall not be less than the following:
1. Worker's compensation and employer's liability, which shall be secured and maintained as required by the State.
2. Public liability, personal injury and property damage:
a. Injury or death of one person: $250,000.00.
b. Injury to more than one person in a single accident: $500,000.00.
c. Property damage: $200,000.00.
3. Automobile and truck public liability, personal injury and property damage, including owned and nonowned vehicles:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 66/454
a. Injury or death of one person: $250,000.00.
b. Injury to more than one person in a single accident: $500,000.00.
c. Property damage: $100,000.00.
d. Insurance for other hazards: The gravel contractor is responsible for any damage as a result of the work, operations, acts,
omissions, neglect, equipment failure or other causes arising out of his/her contract, including such damage as may be
caused by or result from water. Insurance for hazards other than protected by insurance herein specified is at the contractor's
option. (1971 Code § 20-10; amd. 2000 Code)
3-10-7: EXPIRATION, TERMINATION OF PERMIT:
A. Expiration: Annual mining permits shall expire on February 1 of each year. (1971 Code § 20-3)
B. Termination:
1. The City Council may terminate an annual mining permit for violation of this Code or any conditions of the permit, or for refusal
to renew the required permit or permits upon expiration.
2. To terminate a permit, the City Council or its designee shall give notice of the violation or other cause for the termination along
with an order that the condition be remedied. If the condition has not been corrected within the specified time, the City Council
shall hold a public hearing to determine whether the permit should be terminated.
C. No mining shall take place after the permit is terminated pursuant to this subsection. (1971 Code § 20-4)
3-10-8: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following minimum requirements shall apply to all excavation operations:
A. Outer Limits: Outer limits of excavation shall be determined by the following:
1. In zoning districts where commercial excavation is not a permitted use, but allowed by conditional use permit, the outer limit or
edge of any excavation shall not be closer than one hundred feet (100') to any abutting property line. (1971 Code § 20-6)
2. In the Commercial Excavation District, I-4, no excavation outer limit or edge shall be closer than one hundred feet (100') to any
property abutting a zoning district where excavation is not a permitted use. (1971 Code § 20-6; amd. Ord. 632, 9-18-1996)
B. Slopes:
1. Finished slopes of any edge contiguous to property owned by others shall not be less than a ratio of four feet (4') horizontal to
one foot (1') vertical for sand and gravel operations.
2. The slope of banks during the excavation of material shall be kept in such a condition so as not to be dangerous because of
overhangs, sliding or caving banks. Such dangerous conditions shall be declared to be a nuisance, and the City may give
notice to the operator or owner to abate the same.
C. Removal Of Materials:
1. All excavated materials shall be removed from the premises only upon and along such highways, streets or other public ways
as the City Council shall order and direct.
2. All trees, stumps and debris must be disposed of within thirty (30) days by removal or, if allowed, by burning. Rocks which are
not crushed and which are one-third (1/3) yard or larger in size shall be buried after termination of excavation operations.
D. Depth: The depth of excavation may be restricted in areas programmed for future public utilities. This restriction may be
necessary to ensure adequate utility service and routing. The City Engineer shall determine the maximum depth of excavation
allowed in these areas. No excavation shall be allowed below grade closer than one hundred feet (100') to the right-of-way line of
any existing street, road or highway; except, that excavating may be conducted within such limits in order to reduce the elevation
thereof in conformity to the existing or proposed street grades.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 67/454
E. Berms: In order to prevent contamination of freshwater lakes created as a result of mining, infiltration of flood water and storm
water shall be prevented by the use of an earthen berm where necessary. No berm will be required where it can be shown that
the natural topography will prevent such infiltration. When a berm is necessary, such berm may not be constructed in the required
setback. Berms shall be constructed at least to the height of the City's official flood protection elevation.
F. Water Bodies:
1. The operator shall replace any public or private well or water body which goes dry or is contaminated as a result of the mining
operation.
2. In order to prevent erosion and to preserve shore land aesthetics, mining within a strip two hundred feet (200') from a lake
shore, river or stream shall be prohibited. This zone shall be measured inland from the normal high water mark as determined
by the point where the natural vegetation changes predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial.
3. Excavations resulting in the accumulation of substantial water areas after rehabilitation must meet the following requirements:
a. All banks shall be sloped to the water line at a slope which shall not be steeper than four feet (4') horizontal to one foot (1')
vertical.
b. All banks shall be sodded or surfaced with soil of a quality at least equal to the topsoil of land areas immediately surrounding
and to a depth of at least three inches (3").
c. Such topsoil as required in subsection F3b of this Section shall be planted with trees, shrubs, legumes or grasses upon the
parts of such area where re-vegetation is possible.
d. In the event that a development plan is submitted which anticipates a lake about which lots will be platted, such lake must be
planned for at least a fifteen foot (15') depth. Any development plan indicating a lake development shall provide a means for
level control or computations which prove that the lake can contain drainage directly to it by free board storage utilizing a
100-year storm. It is understood that the water table in the area in question is unstable, and any problems arising regarding
the depth of the lake created shall be referred to the city engineer.
e. The bottom of a reclaimed lake shall be sloped to a grade not to exceed three feet (3') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical for a
distance of thirty feet (30') from the water's edge.
f. Swimming beaches and access areas shall have a minimum frontage of at least one hundred feet (100'). Water depth in
swimming beach areas shall not be in excess of ten feet (10') within one hundred feet (100') of the shore.
4. Excavations not resulting in water areas after rehabilitation, but which must be graded or backfilled, shall meet the following
requirements:
a. The graded or backfilled area shall not collect or permit stagnant water to remain therein.
b. The peaks and depressions of the area shall be reduced to a gently rolling topography in substantial conformity to the land
area immediately surrounding and which will minimize erosion due to rainfall.
c. Such graded or backfilled area shall be surfaced with soil of a quality at least equal to the topsoil of land areas immediately
surrounding, and to a depth of at least three inches (3").
d. Such topsoil as required by subsection F4c of this section shall be planted with trees, shrubs, legumes or grasses upon the
parts of such area where revegetation is possible.
e. New slopes on boundary areas shall not be steeper than four feet (4') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical. (1971 Code § 20-6;
amd. 2000 Code)
G. Noise And Air Pollution; Vibrations:
1. The operator shall maintain and operate all equipment in such a manner as to minimize noise and air pollution. Any emission
which can cause any damage to health, animals or vegetation or other forms of property or which can cause any excessive
soiling at any point or any emission of any solid or liquid particles in concentrations exceeding state pollution control agency air
quality regulations shall be prohibited. No noise resulting from the excavation shall exceed the most current state pollution
agency noise control regulations or title 4, chapter 9 of this code, whichever is the more restrictive. These regulations shall not
apply to incidental traffic or maintenance operations. (Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
2. Dust shall be controlled by watering as necessary.
3. Any vibration resulting in any combination of amplitude and frequencies beyond the "safe" range of the most current standards
of the United States bureau of mines for any structure shall be prohibited. (1971 Code § 20-6; amd. 2000 Code)
H. Hours Of Operation: Hours of operation shall be as follows:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 68/454
1. Excavation and processing may be conducted only between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. in
areas zoned I-4 commercial excavation district or as otherwise allowed by the city council of a license, application or permit
approval. In all other districts, hours of operation shall be limited to the hours in section 4-9-8 of this code.
2. Loading of barges, maintenance and repair of plants and equipment may be conducted twenty four (24) hours a day in areas
zoned I-4 commercial excavation district. In all other districts, such activities shall be limited to the hours in section 4-9-8 of this
code.
3. Operation of trucks may be conducted only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
weekdays. No truck loading is permitted on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays unless otherwise allowed by the city council
of a license, application or permit approval.
4. Hauling by truck of excavation materials from mines located in the city may be conducted only between the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. weekdays. No truck hauling on public roads within the city is permitted on
Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays unless otherwise allowed by the city council of a license, application or permit approval.
5. The foregoing hours and days of operation may be modified by the city administrator in case of public emergency upon request
of the permit operator or as allowed by city council of a license, application or permit approval. (Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
I. Traffic Hazards: Flagpersons may be required where a traffic hazard may exist as a condition of the annual mining permit.
J. Restoration Of Excavated Area: Upon termination of the operation, any pit or excavation created shall be regraded or modified
according to the reclamation plan.
K. Termination Or Abandonment Of Operation: Within a period of three (3) months after the termination of a sand and gravel
operation, or within three (3) months after abandonment of such operation, or within three (3) months after the expiration of a
sand and gravel permit, the operator or owner shall dismantle or remove buildings and structures incidental to such operation and
shall grade the site to the specifications of the final grade plan as well as complete all reclamation on the site as proposed by the
reclamation plan. (1971 Code § 20-6; amd. 2000 Code)
3-10-9: INSPECTIONS; REMEDIES:
Each excavation site shall be inspected by the city a minimum of two (2) times annually. The operator shall permit inspection of the
mining site and operations by the city staff or its representative at any time during the hours of permitted operation. The operators or
owners of any operation in violation of the requirements of this chapter shall remedy such violations within the time specified by
written notice from the city. (1971 Code § 20-7)
3-10-10: VARIANCES:
The standards of this chapter may be varied by the city council upon a finding that such variance will be consistent with the purpose
and intent of the comprehensive plan, critical area plan and reclamation plan, and will not cause any adverse impact on the public
health, safety or general welfare. (1971 Code § 20-11)
Chapter 11
FIREWORKS
3-11-1: RETAIL SALE OF FIREWORKS:
It is unlawful to sell fireworks in the city of Cottage Grove in violation of Minnesota statutes sections 624.20 through 624.25, inclusive,
which are adopted by reference. "Consumer fireworks" as defined in this chapter may, however, be sold upon issuance of a license
issued by the city. (Ord. 756, 2-4-2004)
3-11-2: DEFINITION:
For purposes of this chapter, "consumer fireworks" is defined to mean wire or wood sparklers of not more than one hundred grams
(100 g) of mixture per item, other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain seventy five grams (75 g) or less
of chemical mixture per tube or a total of two hundred grams (200 g) or less of multiple tubes, snakes and glowworms, smoke
devices, or trick noisemakers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops, each
consisting of not more than twenty five hundredths grain of explosive mixture. (Ord. 756, 2-4-2004)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 69/454
3-11-3: LICENSE PROVISIONS:
A. Sale Of Fireworks: It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, or sell at retail or wholesale or advertise for
the sale of any consumer fireworks in the city of Cottage Grove without a license.
B. Provisions Of State Law Adopted: The sales, use, and possession of all fireworks in violation of Minnesota statutes sections
624.20 through 624.25, inclusive, which are adopted herein by reference, is prohibited.
C. License Application: The applicant shall completely fill out and submit an application form for a consumer fireworks license.
Information to be submitted as part of the license application includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the following information:
full name, address, and telephone number of applicant; the address and telephone number of the location where fireworks will be
sold; a description of the consumer fireworks to be sold; the estimated quantity of consumer fireworks that will be stored on the
licensed premises, description of the premises and facility from which the fireworks are proposed to be sold, written approval of
the property owner, if different from the applicant. (Ord. 756, 2-4-2004)
3-11-4: PROCESSING APPLICATION:
The application must be filed with the city clerk together with the designated license fee. Following an inspection of the premises
proposed to be licensed, the city clerk shall issue the license if the conditions for license approval are satisfied and the location is
properly zoned. If the city clerk denies the license application, the license applicant may, within ten (10) days, appeal the decision to
the city council. (Ord. 756, 2-4-2004)
3-11-5: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A license to sell consumer fireworks shall be issued subject to the following conditions:
A. The license is nontransferable, either to a different person or location.
B. The license must be publicly displayed on the licensed premises.
C. The premises are subject to inspection by city fire and police employees during normal business hours.
D. The premises for which a license will be issued must be located in a zoning district permitting retail sales.
E. Storage of consumer fireworks on the licensed premises must comply with the Minnesota state fire code.
F. The premises must comply with the Minnesota state building code and Minnesota state fire code.
G. The retail sales of consumer fireworks must be allowed by the zoning district and comply with all zoning ordinance requirements
including signage.
H. Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall not sell consumer fireworks.
I. Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to a person under the age of eighteen (18). The age of the purchaser must be verified by
photographic identification.
J. Consumer fireworks shall not be used indoors. (Ord. 756, 2-4-2004)
3-11-6: LICENSE PERIOD:
Licenses shall be issued for a calendar year or portion thereof and shall expire on December 31 of each year. The license fee shall
be established by council resolution from time to time. License fees shall not be prorated. (Ord. 756, 2-4-2004)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 70/454
3-11-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Following written notice of an opportunity for a hearing, the city clerk may revoke a license for violation of this chapter or state law
concerning the sale, use, or possession of fireworks. If a license is revoked, neither the applicant nor the licensed premises may
obtain a license for twelve (12) consecutive months. (Ord. 756, 2-4-2004)
Chapter 12
LIQUOR CONTROL
3-12-1: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE:
The provisions of Minnesota statutes, chapter 340A, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on
consumption, provisions related to sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and
consumption of alcoholic beverages are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this chapter as if set out in full. The
council is authorized by state statute to impose, and has imposed in this chapter, additional restrictions on the sale and possession of
alcoholic beverages within its limits beyond those contained in Minnesota statutes, chapter 340A. (Ord. 975, 2-15-2017)
3-12-2: LICENSE/PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Except as provided below, a person must not directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by any device, sell, barter, keep for sale, or
otherwise dispose of alcoholic beverages as part of a commercial transaction without having obtained the appropriate license
from the city.
B. A business establishment or club that does not hold an on-sale intoxicating liquor license must not directly or indirectly allow the
consumption and display of intoxicating liquor or knowingly serve any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor
without first having obtained a permit from the city. (Ord. 975, 2-15-2017)
3-12-3: PERSONS OR ENTITIES ELIGIBLE:
A. A license may be issued only to a person or entity that is:
1. Eligible for a license under Minnesota statutes section 340A.402; and
2. A proprietor of the establishment for which the license is sought.
B. No license may be issued to a person or entity that is:
1. Ineligible under state law;
2. Not the real party in interest or beneficial owner of the business operated under the license;
3. The holder of an adult establishment license pursuant to title 11, chapter 5 of this code. (Ord. 975, 2-15-2017)
3-12-4: PLACES INELIGIBLE:
A. No license may be issued for any place or any business ineligible for a license under state law.
B. No license may be granted for operation on any premises on which taxes, assessments or other financial claims are delinquent
and unpaid. No application shall be considered until such delinquencies are paid in full.
C. No on-sale license, except a temporary license, shall be granted for premises located within three hundred feet (300') of any
school or church. The distance is to be measured in a straight line from the structure in which the business to be licensed is
located to the nearest point of the church or school building. The construction of a school or church within the prohibited area
after an initial application has been granted shall not, in and of itself, render such premises ineligible for renewal of the license.
The three hundred foot (300') distance may be reduced by council resolution in the event a highway, railroad, watercourse, large
structure or other physical barrier separates the premises to be licensed from the school or church in such manner as to
substantially reduce or eliminate noise or other objectionable elements.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 71/454
D. No off-sale intoxicating license shall be granted for premises located within one thousand feet (1,000') of another licensed off-sale
intoxicating premises as measured between the nearest building walls of the establishments.
E. No license shall be granted for premises that meet the definition of an "adult establishment" or "adult use", pursuant to title 11,
chapter 5 of this code. (Ord. 975, 2-15-2017)
3-12-5: TYPES OF LICENSES AND PERMITS:
A. 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Licenses: The city council may issue the following types of 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses:
1. On-Sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor License: On-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses obtained pursuant to this chapter will permit
the licensee to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors for consumption on the licensed premises and will be issued only to restaurants,
hotels, bona fide clubs and establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquors with the incidental sale of
tobacco and soft drinks.
2. Off-Sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor License: Off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses obtained pursuant to this chapter will permit
the licensee to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors in original packages for consumption off the premises only.
3. Off-Sale Brewpub 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor License: Off-sale brewpub 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses may be issued only to a
brewer who holds a state license issued under Minnesota statutes section 340A.301, subdivision 6, clause (d) and a city issued
on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license for a restaurant operated in the place of manufacture. The off-sale brewpub 3.2 percent
malt liquor license authorizes the off-sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor produced and packaged on the premises. The license is
subject to the requirements of this section and Minnesota statutes section 340A.301, subdivision 6(b).
4. Off-Sale Small Brewer 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor License: Off-sale small brewer 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses may be issued
only to a brewer who holds a brewer license issued by the state pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 340A.301, subdivision
6, clause (c), (i) or (j). The license authorizes the brewer to sell, at off-sale, 3.2 percent malt liquor that has been produced and
packaged by the brewer at its licensed premises in sixty four (64) ounce containers commonly known as "growlers" or in seven
hundred fifty milliliter (750 ml) bottles. The license is subject to the requirements of this section and Minnesota statutes section
340A.301, subdivision 6(d).
5. Temporary Licenses:
a. A temporary on-sale license for 3.2 percent malt liquor may be issued to a club or charitable, religious or nonprofit
organization subject to the following:
(1) Submission of a completed application to the city clerk at least sixty (60) days in advance of the event for which the
license is requested;
(2) Submission of a list of responsible persons who may be contacted in case of any emergency. Those persons must be
residents of the Twin Cities metropolitan area as defined by Minnesota statutes section 473.121, subdivision 2. At least
one of the listed persons must be present on the licensed premises during all hours of sale;
(3) Submission of other information as may be required by the city council.
b. The license may be issued for a specified period of time, not to exceed three (3) consecutive days.
c. The license may be issued for an event to take place on public property, including in or near any school building.
d. The application may include multiple dates for separate events to be held by the same organization within a calendar year.
6. Consumption And Display Permit: A consumption and display permit may be issued to an organization that complies with the
requirements of Minnesota statutes section 340A.414 and that has obtained a permit from the commissioner of public safety.
7. Exemptions: Any person holding an on-sale intoxicating liquor license may sell 3.2 percent malt beverages at on-sale without
obtaining a license under this section. Any person holding an off-sale intoxicating liquor license may sell 3.2 percent malt
beverages at off-sale without obtaining a license under this section.
B. Intoxicating Liquor Licenses: The city council may grant the following types of intoxicating liquor licenses:
1. On-Sale:
a. On-Sale Intoxicating License: On-sale intoxicating licenses may be issued only to hotels, clubs, and congressionally
chartered veterans' organizations and restaurants with the following conditions:
(1) A license may be issued to clubs and congressionally chartered veterans' organizations if they have been in existence for
at least three (3) years and liquor sales will only be to members and bona fide guests. An unlimited number of licenses
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 72/454
may be issued to these types of clubs and organizations.
(2) A restaurant that holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license may also operate under a caterer's permit issued by the
Minnesota commissioner of public safety, if the operation is in accordance with state law.
b. On-Sale Wine License: On-sale wine licenses may be issued to restaurants for the sale of wine not exceeding fourteen
percent (14%) alcohol by volume and for consumption on the licensed premises only in conjunction with the sale of food. An
on-sale wine license may only be issued to a restaurant that has seating for at least twenty five (25) guests at one time, to
licensed bed and breakfast facilities which meet the criteria in Minnesota statutes section 340A.4011, subdivision 1, and to
theaters that meet the criteria of Minnesota statutes section 340A.404, subdivision 1(b). The holder of an on-sale wine
license issued under this section is authorized to sell intoxicating malt liquor on-sale without an additional license, provided:
(1) The licensee must hold an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale license issued pursuant to this chapter; and
(2) The licensee affirmatively states in its application for an on-sale wine license that the licensee intends to make sales of
intoxicating malt liquor under this provision, and the license approving the on-sale wine license shall refer to allowing sales
of on-sale wine and intoxicating malt liquor.
c. On-Sale Brewer Taproom License: On-sale brewer taproom licenses may be issued only to the holder of a brewer's license
issued by the state and in accordance with Minnesota statutes section 340A.26.
d. On-Sale Brewpub License: On-sale brewpub licenses may be issued only to a brewpub in accordance with Minnesota
statutes section 340A.24.
e. On-Sale Microdistillery Cocktail Room License: On-sale microdistillery cocktail room licenses may be issued only to the
holder of a microdistillery license issued by the state of Minnesota and in accordance with Minnesota statutes section
340A.22.
f. On-Sale Culinary Class License: On-sale culinary class license may be issued to a business establishment that is not
otherwise eligible for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license and that, as part of its business, conducts culinary or cooking
classes for which payment is made by each participant or advance reservation required. The license authorizes the licensee
to furnish to each participant in each class, at no additional cost to the participant, up to a maximum of six (6) ounces of wine
or twelve (12) ounces of intoxicating malt liquor, during and as part of the class, for consumption on the licensed premises
only. All provisions of this chapter that apply to on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses apply to licenses issued under this
subsection B1f, except section 3-12-8 of this chapter and other provisions inconsistent with this subsection B1f.
2. Off-Sale:
a. Off-Sale Intoxicating License: Off-sale intoxicating licenses may be issued only to exclusive liquor stores and will permit "offsales"
of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor. Incidental sales of ice, soft drinks, and all forms of tobacco are
permitted.
b. Off-Sale Brewpub Malt Liquor License: Off-sale brewpub malt liquor licenses may be issued only to the holder of an on-sale
brewpub license, in accordance with Minnesota statutes section 340A.24. The off-sale brewpub malt liquor license authorizes
the off-sale of malt liquor produced and packaged on the premises.
c. Off-Sale Small Brewer Malt Liquor License: Off-sale small brewer malt liquor licenses may be issued only to a brewer who
holds a brewer license issued by the Minnesota commissioner of public safety, in accordance with Minnesota statutes section
340A.28. The license authorizes the brewer to sell, at off-sale, malt liquor that has been produced and packaged by the
brewer at its licensed premises in sixty four (64) ounce containers commonly known as "growlers" or in seven hundred fifty
milliliter (750 ml) bottles.
d. Off-Sale Microdistillery License: Off-sale microdistillery licenses may be issued only to a microdistillery in accordance with
Minnesota statutes section 340A.22. The license authorizes the microdistillery to sell, at off-sale, one 375-milliliter bottle per
customer per day of product manufactured on-site, subject to the requirements of Minnesota statutes section 340A.22. (Ord.
975, 2-15-2017)
3. Sunday Sales: A license for Sunday sales at on-sale may be issued only to a hotel or restaurant to which an "on-sale" license
has been issued. Sunday off-sales may only be made during the hours permitted for "Sunday sales" pursuant to Minnesota
statutes section 340A.504 subdivision 4, or as may be amended. No Sunday sales license is needed for "on-sale wine"
licenses. Except in the case of "on-sale wine" licenses, no on-sale Sunday sales of intoxicating liquor may be made without a
license for Sunday sales. (Ord. 980, 4-5-2017)
4. Consumption And Display Permit: A consumption and display permit may be issued to an organization that complies with the
requirements of Minnesota statutes section 340A.414 and that has obtained a permit from the commissioner of public safety.
5. Temporary Licenses:
a. Temporary On-Sale License: Temporary on-sale licenses may be issued only to: 1) a club or charitable, religious, or other
nonprofit organization that has been in existence for at least three (3) years or 2) a brewer who manufactures fewer than
three thousand five hundred (3,500) barrels of malt liquor in a year, in connection with a social event sponsored by the
organization holding the temporary license. The licenses are subject to the same conditions listed in subsection A5 of this
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 73/454
section except that the time period may not exceed four (4) consecutive days. The insurance requirements of Minnesota
statutes section 340A.409, subdivisions 1 through 3a, apply to a temporary license issued to a brewer under this subsection.
The number of temporary licenses issued may not exceed the number of temporary licenses established by state law.
b. Temporary Consumption And Display Permits: Temporary consumption and display permits may be issued for one day to
nonprofit organizations in conjunction with social events sponsored by the organization in the city. No more than ten (10)
temporary permits may be issued in one year. The permits are subject to the same conditions listed in subsection A5 of this
section.
c. Temporary Off-Sale Wine License: Temporary off-sale wine licenses may be issued to allow for the off-sale of vintage wine at
an auction. The wine must be at least five (5) years old and of a brand and vintage that is not commonly being offered for
sale by any wholesaler in Minnesota. No more than six hundred (600) cases of wine may be sold at any auction, and each
license may not exceed three (3) consecutive days.
d. Microdistillery Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License: Microdistillery temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses
may be issued to the holder of a state microdistillery license. A microdistillery temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license
authorizes the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the city sponsored by the microdistillery.
6. Special Provisions; Sports Facilities, Cultural Facilities, Community Festivals:
a. Sports Facility Or Cultural Facility: A holder of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the city may obtain a
temporary license to dispense intoxicating liquor at a convention, banquet, conference, event, meeting or social affair
conducted on the premises of a sports facility or cultural facility owned by the city, subject to the limitations in Minnesota
statutes section 340A.404, subdivision 4(a).
b. Community Festival: A holder of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the city may obtain a temporary license to
dispense intoxicating liquor off premises at a community festival held within the city. The area for the dispensing and
consumption of intoxicating liquor must be compact and contiguous, with proper separation to control ingress and egress.
The licensee must demonstrate that it has liability insurance as prescribed by Minnesota statutes section 340A.409 to cover
the event.
c. Wine Festival License: With the approval of the commissioner of public safety, the city may issue a temporary license to a
bona fide association of owners and operators of wineries sponsoring an annual festival to showcase wines produced by
members of the association. The temporary license shall comply with the requirements of Minnesota statutes section
340A.4175. (Ord. 975, 2-15-2017)
3-12-6: LICENSE APPLICATION:
A. Initial Application: Upon submission of an initial application or upon any change of ownership or business control of the licensed
premises, every person or entity desiring a liquor license or permit under this chapter must file with the city clerk a written
application in the form prescribed and approved by the commissioner of public safety of the state of Minnesota. In addition to the
information required on the application form and information required by any other officer or office of the state of Minnesota, the
application made to the city must include the items listed below. A person must not make a false statement or material omission
in a license application. Any false statement or material omission is grounds for denying or revoking a license.
1. Natural Person: If the applicant is a natural person, the applicant is required to provide the following information:
a. Full name, place, and date of birth;
b. Street residence addresses and phone number;
c. Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;
d. Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other than his/her true name, and if so, what was the name,
or names, and information concerning dates and places where used;
e. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor, misdemeanor, or local ordinance violation,
other than a nonalcohol related traffic offense. If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the time, place and offense
for each conviction;
f. Social security number;
g. If the applicant will not manage the business, the name of the managers or other persons in charge and all of the information
concerning each of them for subsections A1a through A1g of this section;
2. Partnership: If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant is required to provide the following information:
a. Names and addresses of all general and limited partners with more than five percent (5%) interest in the business and all of
the information concerning each of them for subsections A1a through A1g of this section;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 74/454
b. A copy of the partnership agreement;
c. Federal employer identification number and state tax identification number;
d. The name of the managers or other persons in charge and all of the information concerning each of them for subsections
A1a through A1g of this section;
3. Corporation: If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant is required to provide the following information:
a. The name of the corporation or business and state of incorporation;
b. A copy of the articles of incorporation or association agreement and bylaws; if the applicant is a foreign corporation, a
certificate of authority as required by Minnesota statutes section 303.06, must be attached;
c. Federal employer identification number and state tax identification number;
d. The name of the managers or other persons in charge and all of the information concerning each of them for subsections
A1a through A1g of this section;
e. Names and addresses of all persons who control or own an interest in excess of five percent (5%) in the business and all of
the information concerning each of them for subsections A1a through A1g of this section; this provision does not apply to a
corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a stock exchange;
4. Additional Information From All Applicants: All applicants must provide the following additional information:
a. Whether the applicant holds a current license from any other government unit;
b. Whether the applicant has any direct or indirect interest in a manufacturer, brewer, wholesaler;
c. If applying for off-sale, whether the applicant has any direct or indirect interest in another off-sale retail liquor store;
d. Whether the applicant has ever had a license in a city or state denied, revoked, or suspended, and the reasons therefor;
e. The name of the business, if it is to be conducted under a designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant
and a certified copy of the certificate as required by Minnesota statutes section 333.01;
f. The legal description of the premises to be licensed and a floor plan indicating where the alcoholic beverages will be sold. If
the floor plan is on file with the city due to a planning application, no additional plans need to be submitted;
g. If the applicant does not own the business premises, a complete copy of the executed lease for the premises;
h. Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable for the premises have been paid, and if not
paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid;
i. A written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in the application is true. If the
applicant is a corporation, an officer must sign the written declaration. If the applicant is a partnership, a general partner or
his or her designee, must sign the written declaration;
j. If the licensed activity requires prior approval from another government entity, provide evidence of that approval;
k. Other information as required by the city.
B. License Renewal: The application for renewal of an existing license must be made at least thirty (30) days before the date of the
expiration of the license. The applicant must update all information on file with the city and sign a written declaration under
penalty of perjury, that the updated information is true. If the applicant is a corporation, an officer must sign the written
declaration. If the applicant is a partnership, a general partner or his or her designee must sign the written declaration.
C. Amendment For Enlargement, Alteration Or Extension: The application for an amendment of an existing license must be made
prior to any enlargement, alteration, or extension of the licensed premises. The applicant must provide updated plans as required
by subsection A4f of this section and sign a written declaration under penalty of perjury, that the updated information is true. If the
applicant is a corporation, an officer must sign the written declaration. If the applicant is a partnership, a general partner or his or
her designee must sign the written declaration. (Ord. 975, 2-15-2017)
3-12-7: LICENSE FEES:
A. Fees Established: License fees shall be established by the city in the city licensing fee schedule.
B. Payment; Refunds For Denied Or Withdrawn Applications:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 75/454
1. Payment Of Fees: Except as stated in subsection C1b of this section, the annual license fee shall be paid in full and submitted
with the application for a license. All fees shall be paid into the general fund of the city.
2. Refunds Of Denied Or Withdrawn Applications: Upon denial of any application for a license, or upon withdrawal of an
application before approval by the city council, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant, except when denial is for a
wilful misstatement in the license application.
C. Proration; Refunds For Issued License; Reductions For License Fees:
1. Proration Of Fees:
a. The fee for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license granted after the commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a
monthly basis. On-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor, on-sale club, on-sale Sunday, on-sale wine, and off-sale licenses shall be
prorated on a quarterly basis.
b. When the license is for premises where the building is not ready for occupancy, the license fee for the initial license period
shall be calculated from when the certificate of occupancy is approved.
2. Refunds For Issued Licenses:
a. Except as provided by this subsection C2, no part of the fee paid for any license issued under this chapter shall be refunded,
nor shall any portion of the fee determined to be due for a license issued under this chapter be waived or canceled.
Applications for refund of liquor license fees may be considered by the city council when the operation of the licensed
business has ceased for any of the following reasons:
(1) Destruction of the licensed premises by fire or damage by fire to such an extent that the licensee ceases to carry on the
licensed business, or destruction or damage to such extent by any other catastrophe or cause.
(2) Discontinuance of the business of the licensee by reason of death or illness of the licensee.
(3) The business ceases to be lawful for a reason other than a license revocation.
(4) The licensee ceases to carry on the licensed business under the license.
b. In the event of application for refund for any of the foregoing reasons, which application shall be made within thirty (30) days
after the happening of any such event, the city council may, at its discretion, refund a prorated portion of such license fee.
3. Fee Reduction For Off-Sale Intoxicating Liquor Licenses: The license fee for an off-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be
reduced by one hundred dollars ($100.00) if the licensee meets all of the conditions outlined in Minnesota statutes section
340A.408, subdivision 3(c) and proof of compliance with all conditions is provided to the city at the time of application for a new
or renewal off-sale intoxicating liquor license. (Ord. 975, 2-15-2017)
3-12-8: FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY:
Licensee must demonstrate proof of financial responsibility with regard to liability imposed by Minnesota statutes section 340A.409 to
the city clerk at the time of application for a new license or renewal of the existing license. The proof must show that all coverage
meets or exceeds the requirements of Minnesota statutes section 340A.409, and must cover the entire license period or indicate that
coverage is continuous until canceled. If a new certificate of insurance is not filed with the city clerk during the applicable period after
notice of cancellation, the license will be suspended until a new certificate of insurance is filed with the city clerk and the Minnesota
commissioner of public safety. (Ord. 975, 2-15-2017)
3-12-9: INVESTIGATIONS:
A. Initial And Renewal Applications: All initial and renewal applications for licenses shall be referred to the police chief, and to such
other city departments as the city council shall deem necessary, for verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the
application. The police chief shall conduct a background investigation on the applicant and may conduct background
investigations on the managers and assistant managers, as well as all other information contained in the application, as deemed
appropriate and necessary. All background investigations will be performed in accordance with section 1-11-3 of this code. For
initial applications, the police chief shall make a written recommendation and report to the city council as to whether or not the
application should be approved or denied, including any facts that weigh upon the public interest in considering the application.
The city council may order and conduct such additional investigations as it deems necessary.
B. Fees:
1. Intoxicating Liquors: Each initial application for an intoxicating liquor license, except for temporary licenses, shall be
accompanied by the investigation fee established by the city council. No investigation fee is required for renewal applications.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 76/454
2. 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor: Each initial application for an on-sale license shall be accompanied by the investigation fee
established by the city council, except for temporary licenses. No investigation fee is required for renewal applications.
C. Refunds: Investigation fees are nonrefundable. (Ord. 975, 2-15-2017)
3-12-10: ISSUANCE; HEARING; TRANSFERABILITY:
A. Granting Or Denial Of Permit: The council, in its sound discretion, may either grant or deny the application for any initial license or
permit following a hearing as provided in this section.
B. Renewal Applications: The city clerk may administratively approve an application for a renewal license or permit upon receipt of
an updated application and upon receipt of a positive recommendation from the police chief following a background investigation.
If the background investigation results in a negative recommendation from the police chief, the application for renewal shall be
forwarded to the city council to consider renewing the license or permit, approving a provisional license or permit, approving the
license or permit with reasonable conditions, or denying the license or permit.
C. Public Hearing: No initial license or permit shall be issued, nor shall any license or permit be denied until the city council has held
a hearing as follows:
1. Public Hearing Notification: Upon receipt of the written report and recommendation by the police chief, the city clerk shall cause
to be published in the official newspaper, ten (10) days in advance, a notice of a hearing to be held by the city council setting
forth the day, time and place when the hearing will be held, the name of the applicant, the premises where the business is to be
conducted, the nature of the business and such other information as the city council may direct. No public hearing shall be
required for on-sale Sunday, off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor, temporary on-sale or off-sale licenses, or renewal applications.
2. Public Hearing Procedure:
a. At the city council meeting at which the application is considered, any person must be provided an opportunity to be heard
for or against the application. The city council may then take any of the following actions:
(1) Approve the application;
(2) Deny the application;
(3) Approve a provisional license or permit;
(4) Approve the license or permit with reasonable conditions; or
(5) Continue the application.
3. Denial Of License Or Permit: License or permit applications may be denied for one or more of the following reasons:
a. The applicant has failed to pay all of the appropriate fees related to the license or is delinquent on any other city fees;
b. The applicant has made fraudulent statements, misrepresentations, not fully disclosed information or made false statements
on the application or investigation for or in the course of the applicant's business;
c. Conviction of any crime or offense in the previous five (5) years involving or relating to the business that is licensed or the
type of licensed activity and the applicant or licensee has failed to show competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and
present fitness to perform the duties of the business;
d. The licensee has conducted the activity in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, menace to the health,
safety and public welfare, or a disturbance of the peace or comfort of the residents of the city, upon recommendation of the
police chief or an appropriate city official;
e. The licensee has violated any requirements of this chapter, this code, zoning code or state law related to the licensed activity
during the previous license period;
f. The licensee has violated terms and conditions of a previously issued license;
g. Expiration or cancellation of any required insurance;
h. The applicant's license or permit has been denied, revoked or suspended in the city, state or by another governmental unit;
i. Failure to comply with inspections of the licensed premises;
j. Real estate or personal property taxes on the business or business premises are delinquent and the property owner and the
applicant are the same person or entity or have common ownership;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 77/454
k. Based on the background investigation, granting a license or permit would be a menace to the health, safety, morals and
welfare of the public;
l. The activity has been conducted without a license or permit; or
m. Other good cause.
4. Provisional License Or Permit: The city council may issue a provisional license or permit or convert a regular license or permit
to a provisional license or permit to any existing business that has generated more than three (3) violations of this code or state
statutes within the preceding twelve (12) month period. At the time of approval of the provisional license or permit, the city
council shall approve a mitigation plan. The mitigation plan may include adding security measures, improving the exterior of the
property, reducing or changing the hours of operation, holding neighborhood meetings or other steps the council deems
appropriate. The license term for a provisional license or permit shall coincide with the license term of a regular license for the
same activity.
5. License Or Permit With Reasonable Conditions: The city council may add reasonable conditions upon approval of a license or
permit, in order to promote the public health, safety, and welfare, if deemed appropriate.
D. Restrictions On Issuance Of License:
1. Building To Be Ready For Occupancy: Where a license is granted for premises where the building is under construction or
otherwise not ready for occupancy, the city clerk shall not issue the license until notified by the building official that the building
is ready for occupancy.
2. State Approval Of Licenses And Permits: Licenses and permits that are approved by the city council but which are issued by or
require approval of the commissioner of public safety shall not be effective until approved by the commissioner.
E. Nontransferability: Licenses are not transferable from person to person or from place to place. Each license shall be issued to the
applicant only and each license shall be issued only for the premises described in the application. (Ord. 975, 2-15-2017)
3-12-11: LICENSE TERM:
All liquor licenses except temporary licenses shall expire on December 31. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms.
Consumption and display permits issued by the commissioner of public safety, and the accompanying city consent to the permit,
shall expire on March 31 of each year. (Ord. 975, 2-15-2017)
3-12-12: GENERAL CONDITIONS OF A LICENSE:
A. Generally: Every license is subject to the conditions in the following subsections, all other provisions of this chapter, and of any
other applicable regulations, ordinance or state law.
B. Maintenance Of Peace: Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of his or her place of business and the conditions of sobriety
and order in it. The act of any employee of the licensed premises authorized to sell intoxicating liquor there is deemed the act of
the licensee as well, and the licensee is liable for all penalties provided by this chapter equally with the employee, except criminal
penalties.
C. Display Of License: Every license to sell alcoholic beverages and permit for consumption and display must be posted in a
conspicuous place in the premises for which it is used.
D. Inspection: Every licensee must allow any peace officer, health officer, or properly designated officer or employee of the city to
enter, inspect, and search the premises of the licensee at reasonable hours without a warrant.
E. Possession Of Federal Stamps: No licensee may possess a federal wholesale liquor dealer's special tax stamp or a federal
gambling stamp.
F. Consumption On Premises: A person must not consume any intoxicating or 3.2 percent malt liquor on any licensed premises more
than thirty (30) minutes following the time established by law for cessation of the sale of liquor. No person, except an employee of
the licensed establishment, may remain on the premises or site more than thirty (30) minutes following the time established by
law for cessation of the sale of liquor.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 78/454
G. Removal Of Containers: No licensee may permit any glass, bottle, or other container containing intoxicating liquor in any quantity
to remain upon any table, bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more than thirty (30) minutes after the time when
a sale can legally occur, except as authorized by Minnesota statutes section 340A.404, subdivision 11, as it may be amended
from time to time, which allows the removal of certain wine at a restaurant with an on-sale intoxicating liquor or wine license.
H. Death Of Licensee: In the event of the death of a person holding a license, the personal representative of that person is allowed to
continue to operate the business within the terms of the license for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days after the death of the
licensee.
I. Hours And Days: A licensee must not sell or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages except in compliance with the hours
and days established in Minnesota statutes section 340A.504.
J. Consumption Outside Licensed Premises: A person must not possess open containers of alcoholic beverages or consume
alcoholic beverages on the premises under the licensee's control outside of the licensed structure or in any area of the licensed
premises that was not designated for these activities in the license application.
K. Mandatory Training Seminars:
1. Generally: On an annual basis, each licensee must have at least one representative attend a liquor license training seminar
approved by the city. The representative need not be the same person each time but must hold a position of responsibility in
either the ownership or management of the licensee.
2. New Licensees: For twelve (12) months after initial issuance of a license, each new licensee must have a city approved vendor
train all managers and employees who serve alcoholic beverages, within sixty (60) days after hire. The training must include
the laws pertaining to the sale of alcohol, the rules for identification checks, and the responsibilities of establishments serving
intoxicating liquors. An owner who works at the establishment is considered a manager for this requirement.
L. Changes In Required Information: Each licensee has the continuing duty to promptly notify the city clerk of any change in the
information or facts required to be furnished on the application for a license. This duty continues throughout the period of the
license and failure to comply with this section constitutes cause for revocation or suspension of the license.
1. Report Of Changes In Officers Or Ownership: Changes in the corporate or association officers, corporate charter or articles of
incorporation, or any change in ownership of five percent (5%) or more of the stock of the corporation, bylaws or partnership
agreement, as the case may be, shall be submitted to the city clerk, in writing, within ten (10) days after such changes are
made.
2. Change In Managers: For each new manager or assistant manager employed after the license is issued, each licensee must
notify the city clerk within ten (10) days after any new manager or assistant manager begins employment. This notification must
include the information required in subsections 3-12-6A1a through A1g of this chapter. Failure to provide complete and timely
information will subject the licensee to the penalties provided in this code and to potential denial of a renewed license. The
police chief may cause an investigation of the new managers and may reject the employment of these personnel by notice to
the licensee in writing. The licensee may appeal this decision to the city council by placing a request in writing to the city clerk
within ten (10) days after the issuance of the notice. A failure to request an appeal waives the licensee's ability to contest the
police chief's decision. After the appeal period has expired without an appeal, or the city council has upheld the police chief's
decision upon an appeal, no manager who has been rejected may operate in that capacity upon the licensed premises.
M. Outdoor Seating Area: Each outdoor seating area that is part of the licensed premises must be surrounded by a physical barrier
that prevents access to the area except through the licensed building.
N. Gambling:
1. Each licensee shall be responsible to verify a gambling licensee's valid license or permit before allowing any lawful gambling
on the premises; the licensee shall be responsible to see that lawful gambling is conducted in accordance with all applicable
laws.
2. The licensee may only permit lawful gambling on the licensed premises when such activity is licensed by the state pursuant to
Minnesota statutes, chapter 349 or permitted by the city and is conducted pursuant to the regulations contained in this code.
No other gambling shall be permitted on premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
O. Unobstructed View: All sales shall be made in full view of the public inside the licensed premises, and the view shall be
unobstructed by screens, curtains, stalls, partitions or other devices, but partitions, subdivisions or panels not higher than forty
eight inches (48") shall be permitted.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 79/454
P. Sales In Hotel Guestrooms: No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made to or in guestrooms of hotels, unless the rules of such
hotel provide for the service of meals in guestrooms, unless the sale of such alcoholic beverages is made in the manner in which
on-sales are required to be made, unless such sale accompanies and is incident to the regular source of meals to guests therein,
and unless the rules of such hotel and the description, location and number of such guestrooms are fully set out in the application
for a license. (Ord. 975, 2-15-2017)
3-12-13: MINORS AND OTHER PROHIBITED PERSONS:
A. A person must not sell, give, barter, furnish, deliver, or dispose of, in any manner, either directly or indirectly, any liquor in any
quantity, for any purpose to a minor, or to an intoxicated person. The person taking an order in a licensed establishment has the
responsibility for determining if the person placing the order is prohibited from receiving liquor under this section. If liquor is
provided in violation of this section, the person who takes an order from a prohibited person and does not refuse service to the
prohibited person is guilty of a misdemeanor, whether or not the person taking the order actually delivered the liquor.
B. A minor must not enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of liquor for the purpose of purchasing, or having served or
delivered to him/her any liquor or to consume any liquor, purchase or attempt to purchase or have another purchase for him/her,
any liquor.
C. A person must not misrepresent or mistake his/her age or identity, or the age or identity of any other person for the purpose of
inducing any licensee or any employee of any licensee, to sell, serve or deliver any liquor to a minor.
D. A minor must not have in his/her possession any liquor, with intent to consume the same at a place other than the household of
his/her parent or guardian. Possession of liquor at a place other than the household of the minor's parent or guardian is prima
facie evidence of intent to consume the same at a place other than the household of his/her parent or guardian.
E. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall sell or serve alcoholic beverages in any licensed premises. (Ord. 975, 2-15-2017)
3-12-14: LICENSE PENALTIES:
A. Authorization: Minnesota statutes section 340A.415, as it may be amended from time to time, authorizes a city council to impose
penalties upon the holder of a liquor license or permit who has failed to comply with an applicable statute or ordinance.
B. Hearing: Before penalties can be imposed, the city council or its designee must hold a hearing. At the hearing, the licensee has
the right to be represented by counsel, the right to respond to the charges, the right to present evidence through witnesses under
oath, and the right to confront and cross examine witnesses under oath. At least twenty (20) days' written notice of the time and
place of the hearing must be provided to the licensee and must state the grounds for the action proposed to be taken. The notice
must be served by certified mail to the address listed on the license application or where the business activity is conducted. Any
actions taken following the hearing shall be adopted by resolution with findings. In order to suspend or revoke the license or
impose financial civil penalties on the licensee, the city council must find that the license or permit holder has committed one or
more of the following violations:
1. Sold alcoholic beverages to another retail licensee for the purpose of resale;
2. Purchased alcoholic beverages from another retail licensee for the purpose of resale;
3. Conducted or permitted the conduct of gambling on the licensed premises in violation of the law;
4. Failed to remove or dispose of alcoholic beverages when ordered by the commissioner to do so under Minnesota statutes
section 340A.508, subdivision 3, as it may be amended from time to time; or
5. Failed to comply with an applicable statute, rule, or ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages.
C. Penalties: The penalties may include revocation of the license or permit, suspension of the license or permit for up to sixty (60)
days, the imposition of a civil penalty of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation, or any combination of these
sanctions. No suspension or revocation may take effect until the license or permit holder has been given an opportunity for a
hearing. Upon a finding that the license holder or permit holder has committed one of the above mentioned violations, the city
council shall impose a liquor license civil penalty pursuant to the following guidelines:
1. For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension,
sale of intoxicating liquor whether the only license is for 3.2 percent malt liquor, the license shall be revoked.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 80/454
2. After a hearing, if the city council finds that the licensee has committed a violation of subsection B of this section, the license
shall be suspended for at least the minimum periods as follows:
a. For the first violation within any two (2) year period, suspension for at least one day or, at the city council's discretion,
participation of all employees in an educational program approved by the public safety director, in addition to any criminal or
financial civil penalties which may be imposed.
b. For the second violation within any two (2) year period, suspension for at least three (3) consecutive days in addition to any
criminal or financial civil penalties which may be imposed.
c. For the third violation within any two (2) year period, suspension for at least seven (7) consecutive days in addition to any
criminal or financial civil penalties which may be imposed.
d. For a fourth violation within any two (2) year period, the license shall be revoked.
3. The city council shall select the day or days during which the license will be suspended.
4. Lapse or cancellation of required liquor liability insurance or bond, or withdrawal of a required deposit of cash or securities
pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 340A.409, shall result in an immediate suspension of any license issued under this
chapter or state law without further action of the city council. Notice of cancellation, lapse of a current liquor liability policy or
bond, or withdrawal of deposited cash or securities shall also constitute notice to the licensee of the impending suspension of
the license. The holder of a license who has received notice of lapse or cancellation of required insurance or bond, or
withdrawal of a required deposit, or of suspension or revocation of a license, may request a hearing thereon, and if such a
request is made in writing to the city clerk, a hearing before the city council shall be held at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the city, which in no case shall it be longer than fifteen (15) days after the city clerk has received the notice
requesting the hearing. Any suspension under this subsection shall continue until the council determines that the financial
responsibility requirements of state law and this chapter have again been met, regardless of any request for hearing.
D. Decision Final: The decision by the city council or its designee following a hearing is final. (Ord. 975, 2-15-2017)
Chapter 13
MOBILE FOOD UNITS
3-13-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to require an establishment preparing and serving food from a self-contained readily movable vehicle to
obtain a license from the city and to regulate the conditions from which the licensed establishment operates within the city for the
promotion of business within the city and for the protection of customers and the general public. (Ord. 976, 2-15-2017)
3-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
MOBILE FOOD UNIT: A. A self-contained food service operation, located in a readily movable motorized wheeled or towed vehicle
that is readily movable without disassembling and that is used to store, prepare, display, or serve food intended for individual portion
service; or
B. A mobile food unit as defined in Minnesota statutes section 157.15, subdivision 9. (Ord. 976, 2-15-2017)
3-13-3: LICENSE APPLICATIONS:
A. License Types: Each applicant must indicate whether it is applying for a temporary license or annual license. A temporary license
allows mobile food unit operations in the city for up to ten (10) days total each calendar year. An annual license allows mobile
food unit operations in the city for ten (10) days or more during any calendar year. A licensee will only be issued one temporary
license per calendar year, however nothing shall prohibit a temporary licensee from applying for an annual license within the
same calendar year.
B. License Fees: Fees for annual and temporary licenses shall be established by resolution of the city council and listed in the city's
fee schedule.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 81/454
C. Mobile Food Unit: It is unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food unit in the city without first obtaining a license from the
city. An application for a license shall be filed, along with any required fee, with the city clerk. The applicant must be the owner of
the mobile food unit. The application shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain the information requested by
the city, including the following:
1. A description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold and the license plate number and description for any
vehicle to be used in conjunction with the activity;
2. The name of the operator, if different than the owner, of the mobile food unit and the name of all persons working for the owner
and operator of the mobile food unit;
3. The applicant's full legal name, other names the applicant uses or is known by, date of birth and driver's license number, or
other legal identification with a photograph of the applicant;
4. The permanent and any temporary home and business address, phone numbers, and e-mail address of the applicant, with a
designation of a preferred mailing address for notices related to the license;
5. The name, address, and contact information for the commissary with which the mobile food unit is affiliated, if applicable;
6. If owner is an LLC or other similar business entity, the name of the business entity, all other names that the entity conducts
business as, and all of the applicable information required of an individual applicant for the business entity;
7. A certificate of insurance by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota, evidencing the
following forms of insurance:
a. Commercial general liability insurance, with a limit of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence. If
such insurance contains an annual aggregate limit, the annual aggregate limit shall be not less than two million dollars
($2,000,000.00);
b. Automobile liability insurance with a limit of not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) combined single limit. The
insurance shall cover liability arising out of any auto, including owned, hired, and nonowned vehicles;
c. Food products liability insurance, with a limit of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence;
d. Public liability insurance, with a limit of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence;
e. Property damage insurance, with a limit of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence;
f. Workers' compensation insurance (statutory limits) or evidence of exemption from state law; and
g. The city shall be endorsed as an additional insured on the certificate of insurance and the umbrella/excess insurance if the
applicant intends to operate its mobile food unit on public property, including public right of way;
8. The certificate of insurance must contain a provision requiring notification be sent to the city should the policy be canceled
before its stated expiration date;
9. Written consent of each private property owner from which mobile food unit sales will be conducted;
10. If the mobile food unit will be located on city property or public right of way, a signed statement that the licensee shall hold
harmless the city and its officers and employees, and shall indemnify the city and its officers and employees for any claims for
damage to property or injury to persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the terms of the license;
11. If applying only for a temporary license, the applicant must provide the exact dates and locations for its up to ten (10) days of
mobile food unit operations;
12. A copy of each related license or permit issued by Washington County and the state required to operate a mobile food unit;
and
13. A copy of the applicant's state sales tax ID number. (Ord. 976, 2-15-2017)
3-13-4: CONDITIONS OF LICENSING:
A. Locations: A mobile food unit may only operate in the locations set forth in this subsection. A mobile food unit may operate in a
private commercial or industrial parking lot and on private residential property, with the written consent of the private property
owner. When operations occur on private residential property, mobile food unit sales may only be for catering purposes (such as
a private graduation party or wedding) and not open for sales to the general public. A mobile food unit is prohibited from operating
on streets posted with no parking signs. A mobile food unit may only operate in a city park or on other city property with the prior
written approval by the city; additional permits may be required for such operations.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 82/454
B. Performance Standards: A mobile food unit licensee is subject to the following performance standards:
1. A mobile food unit with an annual license may not operate on the same property more than twenty one (21) days during any
calendar year.
2. Mobile food unit sales are prohibited between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
3. A mobile food unit must dispose of its gray water daily. Gray water may not be drained into city stormwater drains.
4. An out of service mobile food unit stored within the city must comply with all applicable zoning ordinance requirements.
5. The mobile food unit may have a maximum bumper to bumper length of no more than thirty feet (30').
6. A mobile food unit is not required to obtain a sign permit from the city. However, no additional signage is permitted beyond that
which is on the mobile food unit unless it meets the following requirements:
a. One single sandwich board style sign is permitted per mobile food unit;
b. The maximum sign size is eight (8) square feet;
c. The sign must be placed on the ground and within ten feet (10') of the mobile food unit;
d. The sign must not be placed in a manner that hinders passage upon any sidewalk;
e. The sign must not be placed within the improved travel surface of the public right of way except with the express written
permission of the city; and
f. The sign cannot project from the mobile food unit or be mounted to the roof of the mobile food unit.
7. A licensee must comply with all laws, ordinances, regulations, parking zones and posted signs.
8. A mobile food unit must provide an independent power supply that is screened from public view and that complies with city's
noise regulations.
9. Propane tanks must be attached or secured to the mobile food unit and must be adequately ventilated.
10. Licensees shall be responsible for the conduct of their employees and agents while operating a mobile food unit.
C. License: A mobile food unit license is nontransferable. Proof of license shall be displayed at all times in the mobile food unit.
D. Practices Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person engaged in the business of a mobile food unit operation to do the following:
1. Call attention to that licensee's business by crying out, blowing a horn, or by any loud or unusual noise;
2. Fail to display proof of license and produce valid identification when requested;
3. Remain on the property of another when asked to leave;
4. Claim endorsements by the city based on license; or
5. Conduct business in any manner as to create a threat to the health, safety, and welfare to a specific individual or the general
public. (Ord. 976, 2-15-2017)
3-13-5: LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. Term Of License: No license shall be issued for any period of time in excess of one year. All licenses shall expire on December 31
of the year in which the license is issued.
B. Reasons For Suspension Or Revocation: Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for any of the
following reasons:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements on the application form.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made during the course of the licensed activity.
3. When a licensee or their employees or agents conduct prohibited practices as defined by this chapter.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 83/454
4. When it appears that the licensee or its employees or agents have engaged in activities inimical to the best interests of the
inhabitants of the city.
C. Notice: Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written
notice of the alleged violation(s) and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on the alleged violation(s). Notice shall be
delivered in person or by mail to the preferred mailing address listed on the license application. Service shall be considered
complete as of the date the notice is delivered in person or placed in the mail.
D. Hearing: Upon receiving the notice provided in this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a hearing before the city
council. If no request for a hearing is received by the city clerk within ten (10) regular business days following service of the
notice, the city may proceed with the suspension or revocation. If a hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing
shall be scheduled at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting in which the hearing can be legally held.
E. Emergency: If, in the discretion of the city, imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may occur due to the actions of a
licensee licensed under this chapter, the city may immediately suspend the license and provide notice of the right to a subsequent
hearing as prescribed in subsection D of this section.
F. Appeals: Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this section shall have the right to appeal the decision to a
court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 976, 2-15-2017)
Title 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 1
NUISANCES
4-1-1: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED:
A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation or use of property which shall:
A. Annoy, injure or endanger the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public.
B. Offend public decency.
C. Unlawfully interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or tend to render dangerous for passage, a lake, navigable river, bay, stream,
canal or basin or a public park, square, street, alley or highway.
D. In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property. (1971 Code § 15-1)
4-1-2: NUISANCES PROHIBITED GENERALLY:
No person shall knowingly cause or create a public nuisance or permit any public nuisance to be created, to be placed upon or to
remain upon any premises owned or occupied by him/her. (1971 Code § 15-2; amd. 2000 Code)
4-1-3: NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH:
The following are declared to be public nuisances affecting health:
A. Tainted Food:
1. All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 84/454
2. Milk which is produced by cows which have not been tested and found free from tuberculosis within the year previous of the
offering of such milk for sale to the public.
B. Diseased Persons: All public exposure of persons having a contagious disease.
C. Common Cups Or Towels: The use of a common drinking cup or roller towel.
D. Medicine Samples To Minors: The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs to persons under twenty one (21) years of age.
E. Diseased Animals: All diseased animals running at large.
F. Animal Carcasses: Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within twenty four (24) hours after death.
G. Stagnant Water: All ponds or pools of stagnant water.
H. Offensive Premises:
1. Accumulations of manure or rubbish.
2. Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not flytight.
3. Septic tanks, drain fields and private sewage disposal facilities which malfunction, causing overflow, offensive odors or both.
I. Offensive Businesses: Offensive trades, businesses and firms as defined by statute or ordinance, not licensed as provided by law.
J. Water Pollution: The pollution of any public well, cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial
wastes or other substances.
K. Air Pollution: Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders in unreasonable quantities.
L. Weeds: All noxious weeds and other rank growths upon public or private property1. (1971 Code § 15-3; amd. 2000 Code)
M. Firewood In Residential Districts: All stacks or accumulations of firewood in residential zoning districts not meeting all of the
following standards:
1. The maximum amount of firewood which may be stored is six (6) fireplace cords or two hundred fifty six (256) cubic feet. One
fireplace cord shall be defined as a sixteen inch by four feet by eight feet (16" x 4' x 8') stack of wood. For properties where the
primary heating source is wood, six (6) cords are permitted. One cord shall be defined as a four feet by four feet by eight feet
(4' x 4' x 8') stack of wood. The city shall inspect and verify the primary heating source. Firewood shall be maintained in neat
and secure stacks, the height of which shall be no more than twice the width, with a maximum height of six feet (6') above
grade.
2. No wood shall be stored in a front yard.
3. Woodpiles shall be elevated a minimum of three inches (3") above the ground.
4. The setback for firewood stacks shall be the same as the setbacks for accessory structures in the zoning district.
5. Firewood stacks must be screened from view from public streets and adjoining properties, except that no screening is required
for a single fireplace cord stacked next to the principal structure. All such screening shall consist of a solid fence or wall, or
equivalent as approved by the community development director, not less than six feet (6') in height above grade. All such
screening shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner, including method of construction and materials and must be
maintained so as not to be dilapidated, decayed, unsightly or unstable.
6. The foregoing criteria shall not apply to stacks of wood which are stored or kept in a covered structure and impervious to the
elements or for the temporary storage of logs for up to thirty (30) days for the purpose of cutting and splitting logs into a size
usable in a residential wood burning device. (Ord. 713, 3-20-2002)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 85/454
N. Other Acts And Conditions: All other acts, omissions of acts, occupations and uses of property which are deemed by the director
of public safety or city council to be a menace to the health of the inhabitants of the city, or a considerable number thereof. (1971
Code § 15-3; amd. 2000 Code)
O. Land Spreading Septage: Land spreading septage on any property within the incorporated areas of Cottage Grove, Washington
County, Minnesota. (Ord. 943, 4-1-2015)
4-1-4: NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY:
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
A. Gambling:
1. All gambling devices, slot machines and punchboards.
2. Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in such occupations.
B. Disorderly Houses: All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of
ill fame and bawdyhouses.
C. Obscene Publications: All indecent or obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines and newspapers.
D. Profanity; Graffiti2: The public use of profane or obscene language, including, but not limited to, writing or printing in an area
exposed to public view.
E. Improper Conduct Of Animals: All domestic animals in the act of copulation exposed to public view.
F. Illegal Liquor Establishments: All places where intoxicating liquors are manufactured, sold, bartered or given away in violation of
law, or where persons are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking such intoxicating liquors as a beverage, or where
intoxicating liquors are kept for sale, barter or distribution in violation of law; and all liquors, bottles, kegs, pumps, bars and other
property kept at and used for maintaining such a place.
G. Liquor Consumption In Public: The drinking of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating liquor on public streets or alleys.
H. Vehicles Used Inappropriately: Any vehicle used for the illegal transportation of intoxicating liquor, for promiscuous sexual
intercourse or for any other immoral purpose or unlawful act. (1971 Code § 15-4)
4-1-5: NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY:
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
A. Snow And Ice Accumulations On Sidewalks: All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks twelve (12) hours after the snow
and ice have ceased to be deposited thereon.
B. Water, Ice And Snow Draining Onto Public Ways: Allowing rainwater, ice or snow to fall from any building or structure upon any
street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk.
C. Objects Overhanging Public Ways:
1. Tree Limbs: All limbs or trees which are less than eight feet (8') above the surface of any public walkway or nine feet (9') above
the surface of any street.
2. Utility Wires: All utility wires which are strung less than fifteen feet (15') above the surface of the ground.
3. Signs: All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets or sidewalks, or so situated as to endanger public
safety, not constructed and maintained as provided by ordinance.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 86/454
D. Storage Of Explosive And Inflammable Substances: All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances stored in
any manner or in any amount other than that provided by law.
E. Fireworks: All possession, use or explosion of fireworks, except as provided by law.
F. Noises And Vibrations: All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations.
G. Building Construction Violations: All buildings and all alterations to buildings made or erected in violation of the laws concerning
materials and construction.
H. Obstructing Public Ways:
1. Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, except
under such conditions as are provided by ordinance.
2. All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons from having a clear view of traffic approaching an
intersection from cross streets in sufficient time to bring a motor vehicle driven at a reasonable speed to a full stop before the
intersection is reached.
3. Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds
of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the streets or sidewalks, except as permitted by the City Council.
I. Barbed Wire Fences: All barbed wire fences which are located within any predominantly residential area.
J. Dangerous Machinery: All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated or operated on private property as
to attract the public. (1971 Code § 15-5)
K. Deteriorated Private Roads, Access Drives, Parking Lots, Alleyways, Trails, Sidewalks Or Other Paved Surfaces: Any private
road, access drive, parking lot, alleyway, paved trail, sidewalk, ramp or paved surface that serves one (1) or more commercial
property and is generally held open to the public for travel, when, as a result of damage or improper maintenance, the condition of
the paved surface is likely to cause injury to any person or damage to property. Evidence of such damage or improper
maintenance may include, but is not limited to, degradation of the driving or parking surface that is larger than thirty six (36)
square inches with a depth greater than two inches (2"), or cracks or trip hazards in sidewalks or walking surfaces that are not in
compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act. (Ord. 983, 6-21-2017)
L. Other Conditions: All other conditions or things which are liable to cause injury to the person or property of anyone. (Ord. 702, 7-
18-2001)
4-1-6: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Enforcement Officials: The City Council shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and may by resolution delegate to various
officers or agencies power to enforce particular provisions of this chapter, including the power to inspect private premises.
B. Notice To Abate:
1. In cases where emergency abatement of a public nuisance is not required, the enforcement officer will serve a notice on the
owner or responsible party, by regular mail, or by personal service, ordering the owner or responsible party to remove the
public nuisance. The notice will contain the following information:
a. Description of the property upon which the nuisance is situated;
b. The nature of the nuisance to be abated;
c. State that in the event the owner or responsible party does not comply with the notice, the necessary work may be performed
by the City;
d. State that if the owner or responsible party does not pay for the expense, the cost of the work will be assessed against the
property; and
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 87/454
e. A compliance deadline. The notice will require that the public nuisance must be removed within forty eight (48) hours after
the date of receipt of the notice unless another compliance deadline is stated.
2. If the owner of the property or responsible party cannot be found, the notice will be posted on the property for a period of forty
eight (48) hours, after which period the City may perform any necessary work. Notice by regular mail and notice by posting may
be done simultaneously.
C. Authority To Abate:
1. The enforcement officer is authorized to enter in or upon any property or structure for the purpose of enforcing and assuring
compliance with the provisions of this section.
2. If the public nuisance has not been removed by the compliance deadline, the City has the authority to enter upon the property
and abate the public nuisance. In abating the nuisance, the City may go to whatever extent necessary to complete the
abatement of the public nuisance. The City may call upon any of the City departments or divisions for whatever assistance is
deemed necessary or may by private contract cause the abatement of the public nuisance.
D. Costs To Owner: If the City performs the work pursuant to subsection C of this section, the City will maintain a record showing the
cost of the work attributable to each separate lot and parcel, including administrative costs. Abatement costs shall include, but are
not limited to the cost of the abatement, the cost of investigation, such as title searches, inspection and testing, the cost of
notification, filing costs and administrative costs including an overhead charge of up to twenty five percent (25%) for
administrative costs.
E. Costs A Special Tax: The City Clerk shall, at the direction of the Council, extend the cost of abating the nuisance as a special tax
against the lots or parcels upon which the nuisance was located, and such special tax shall, at the time of certifying taxes to the
County Auditor, be certified for collection as other special taxes are certified and collected. (Ord. 983, 6-21-2017)
Chapter 2
MIXED SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
4-2-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of the city council, by means of this chapter, to establish a system of solid waste management throughout the city so
that the disposal of such materials is accomplished in a sanitary manner, so that the health and sanitary conditions of the residents of
the city shall be properly safeguarded, and so that the city is in compliance with the city's 2030 comprehensive plan, the Washington
County solid waste management master plan 2012 - 2030 and any updates to those plans approved by the city or the county and
with the state and the county recycling and solid waste reduction mandates. In addition, the city council intends to establish a volume
based refuse collection system in order to improve waste management within the city. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BULKY WASTE: Shall have the meaning set forth in Minnesota statutes and is a subset of mixed municipal solid waste. Includes
household items and other discarded materials that due to their dimensions and weight are typically not collected as part of the
regular trash and recycling or for which there is a separate fee, such as furniture, carpeting, mattresses and appliances including
electronic devices.
CITY: The city of Cottage Grove, Washington County, Minnesota.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT: Any premises where a commercial or industrial enterprise of any kind is carried on, and shall
include, but is not limited to, restaurants, clubs, churches, and schools where food is prepared or served.
COMMERCIAL/MULTIPLE-RESIDENTIAL DWELLING/INDUSTRIAL/ROLL-OFF SERVICE SOLID WASTE HAULER AND
RECYCLER: A city licensed hauler who collects and hauls solid waste, including, but not limited to, garbage, recyclable materials,
and construction/demolition waste, from commercial, multiple-residential dwelling and industrial properties or who provides roll-off
box services.
COMMINGLED RECYCLABLES: Collection of recyclable materials whereby generators mix different types of recyclable materials in
a single container for collection by a licensed hauler.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 88/454
COMPOSTING: A method of recycling yard waste by allowing it to decay and then using it as a soil amendment.
CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION WASTE: Construction materials, packaging and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling,
repair and demolition of buildings and roads, as well as sand, earth, brick, stone, crockery, trees, tree branches of more than two
inches (2") in diameter and tree stumps.
CONTAINER: All containers for solid waste shall be made of metal, plastic, or other suitable material which is rodentproof, fireproof,
and waterproof, can be kept tightly closed, will not easily corrode and shall be of such size and weight that they can be handled by
one person. No container shall have ragged or sharp edges or other defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the
contents thereof.
COUNTY: County of Washington, Minnesota.
DAILY HAULING DISTRICT: A residential area in which garbage, recyclables and yard waste are collected on the same day, the
boundaries and day of collection of which are established by council resolution.
DUMPSTER: Large covered containers for large accumulations of garbage, recyclables or construction/demolition debris, including
compactors.
GARBAGE: See definition of Mixed Municipal Solid Waste (MMSW).
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Shall have the meaning defined in Minnesota statutes and includes any refuse, sludge, or other waste
material or combinations of refuse, sludge or other waste materials in solid, semisolid, liquid, or contained gaseous form which
because of its quantity, concentration, or chemical, physical, or infectious characteristics may: a) cause or significantly contribute to
an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or b) pose a substantial present or
potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise
managed. Categories of hazardous waste materials include, but are not limited to: explosives, flammables, oxidizers, poisons,
irritants, and corrosives. Hazardous waste does not include source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the atomic
energy act of 1954, as amended.
HOLIDAYS: Shall include only New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth Of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MMSW): Has the meaning set forth in Minnesota statutes and shall include garbage, refuse,
rubbish, trash, and other solid waste from residential, commercial, industrial, and community activities, that the generator of the
waste aggregates for collection. MMSW does not include auto hulks, street sweepings, ash, construction debris, mining waste,
sludges, tree and agricultural wastes, tires, lead acid batteries, motor and vehicle fluids and filters, and other materials collected,
processed, and disposed of as separate waste streams. Also commonly referred to as "garbage".
MULTIPLE-RESIDENTIAL DWELLING: Any building used for residential purposes consisting of five (5) dwelling units or more with
separate individual kitchen facilities for each dwelling unit.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Shall have the meaning set forth in Minnesota statutes and means materials that are separated from
MMSW for the purpose of recycling or composting, including, at a minimum, the targeted materials.
RECYCLING: Shall have the definition in Minnesota statutes, and means the process of collecting and preparing recyclable materials
and reusing the materials in their original form or using them in manufacturing processes that do not cause the destruction of
recyclable materials in a manner that precludes further use.
RECYCLING CONTAINER: A container for use in the city's authorized curbside recycling program.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING: Any single building consisting of four (4) or less dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each
dwelling unit.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING SOLID WASTE HAULER AND RECYCLER: A city licensed hauler who collects and hauls solid waste,
including, but not limited to, garbage, recyclable materials, and construction/demolition waste, from residential dwellings.
ROLL-OFF CONTAINERS: Open top dumpsters characterized by a rectangular footprint. The container is designed to be transported
by special roll-off trucks. Roll-off containers are commonly used to contain loads of construction and demolition waste or other waste
types.
SOLID WASTE: The general term for MMSW, recyclable materials, yard waste, bulky waste and SSCM.
SOURCE SEPARATED COMPOSTABLE MATERIALS (SSCM): Shall include food waste and other compostable organic materials
that are source separated by the waste generator for the purpose of preparing them for use as compost and as further defined in
Minnesota statutes. Also referred to as "food waste", "organics" and "source separated organics". The terms "food waste", "organics"
and "source separated compostable materials" do not include yard waste for purposes of this chapter.
SPECIAL PICK UP: Any collection of bulky waste and construction/demolition waste and excludes MMSW, recyclable materials, yard
waste or SSCM.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 89/454
TARGETED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Those recyclable materials identified in the Washington County standard list of residential
curbside recyclables.
VOLUME BASED BILLING: A graduated rate structure based upon the volume of MMSW, recyclable materials, SSCM collected from
a residential dwelling, multiple-residential dwellings or a commercial enterprise.
YARD WASTE: Garden wastes, leaves, grass and lawn clippings, weeds, shrub, tree waste and other materials as defined by
Minnesota statutes and council resolution. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall scavenge or otherwise haul or collect solid wastes including MMSW, recyclable materials, bulky wastes, SSCM, or
yard wastes for hire from public or private property, including residential, commercial, institutional or other uses, unless licensed
therefor by the city. However, nothing in this chapter shall prevent persons from hauling MMSW, recyclables, construction/demolition
waste, bulky waste, SSCM or yard waste from their own residence or business in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-4: CATEGORIES AND NUMBER OF LICENSES:
A. Categories Of Licenses: There shall be two (2) license categories:
1. Residential dwelling solid waste hauler and recycler.
2. Commercial/multiple-residential dwelling/industrial/roll-off service solid waste hauler and recycler.
B. Number Of Licenses: No more than three (3) residential dwelling solid waste hauler and recycler licenses shall be issued under
this chapter at any one time. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Application: Any person desiring to be licensed as a residential dwelling solid waste hauler and recycler or as a
commercial/multiple-residential dwelling/industrial/roll-off service solid waste hauler and recycler shall make application to the city
on a form prescribed by the city. Each hauler operating under a separate name or identity, regardless of whether the hauler entity
is a business entity related to another licensed hauler, shall apply for and obtain a separate license prior to collecting any solid
waste.
B. Vehicles And Equipment: The application shall include a list of vehicles and equipment utilized by the hauler while operating in the
city.
C. Insurance: The applicant must provide a certificate of insurance coverage meeting the minimum general liability coverage
requirements, and liability coverage requirements for each vehicle operated as part of the licensed activity, as established by
state statute or city council resolution, whichever is greater. The city shall be named as a certificate holder and as an additional
insured, and the certificate must contain a provision for notifying the city should the policy be canceled before its stated expiration
date.
D. Residential Dwelling Solid Waste Hauler And Recycler Applicants: Residential dwelling solid waste hauler and recycler applicants
shall provide the following information:
1. The volume based MMSW rate structure for thirty (30) gallon, sixty (60) gallon, and ninety (90) gallon service and other offered
services that would be implemented during the licensed period; and
2. The recycling fee that would be implemented during the licensed period.
E. City Clerk: The application and license fee shall be filed with the city clerk.
F. License Fees: The city council shall establish license fees by ordinance. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 90/454
If the conditions for license approval are satisfied, the city clerk shall issue the license. If the city clerk denies the application, the
applicant may, within ten (10) days, appeal the decision to the city council. A license granted under this chapter is subject to the
license provisions and any other applicable state statute, county or city code or ordinance. No license shall be issued or renewed if
the licensee, or individuals having interest in the business entity for which the license is sought, have any outstanding fees due to the
city, state or county for that business entity or another related business entity under the applicant's financial control. (Ord. 964, 7-6-
2016)
4-2-7: LICENSE PERIOD:
Licenses shall be issued for a calendar year or portion thereof and shall expire on December 31 of each year. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-8: GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR LICENSES:
All residential dwelling solid waste hauler and recycler and commercial/multiple-residential dwelling/industrial/roll-off service solid
waste hauler and recycler licenses are subject to the following conditions:
A. Vehicles: The licensee must have watertight vehicles in good condition to prevent loss in transit of liquid or solid cargo. The
licensee's vehicles must also be sufficiently covered so that solid waste remains contained in the vehicles and does not blow out
of or fall out or off of the vehicles in transit. The vehicles shall be kept clean and as free from offensive odors as possible and not
allowed to stand in any street longer than reasonably necessary to collect garbage, recyclable materials, SSCM, yard waste, or
construction/demolition waste. Each vehicle may be inspected by the city, at the city's discretion, for conformance with this
chapter.
B. Spills And Leaks: The licensee shall also ensure that the collection site is left free of litter and shall clean up solid or liquid spills or
leaks from vehicles within one hour. Each of the licensee's vehicles shall be equipped with materials and equipment to aid in the
cleanup of the spills and leaks.
C. Missed Collections: Licensees must respond to missed collections, regardless of the type of collection, within a reasonable time
period.
D. Insurance: The licensee must maintain insurance coverage meeting the minimum general liability coverage requirements, and
liability coverage requirements for each vehicle operated as part of the licensed activity, as established by state statute or city
council resolution, whichever is greater.
E. Display Of License: Each vehicle for which a hauler's license is issued shall carry a copy of the license in the vehicle.
F. Records:
1. Report To County: Each licensed hauler shall compile and retain MMSW, recyclable materials, bulky waste, SSCM and yard
waste weight slips and other data and report county required data to Washington County. In addition, the licensed hauler shall
furnish the city with copies of reports that are submitted to the county when requested.
a. Failure to keep accurate weights and/or to furnish this data to the county or the city within thirty (30) business days of it being
due shall entitle the city to suspend or revoke the hauler's license.
2. City Access To Records: Upon demand of the city, each licensed hauler shall produce any records which the city may require
to verify that all MMSW, recyclables, bulky waste, SSCM and yard waste have been disposed of in a lawful manner. Each
licensed hauler shall provide to the city, during normal business hours, access to books, documents, papers, and other records
of the licensee that are directly pertinent to the issuance and monitoring of the license and required reports.
G. No Vested Right To License: No hauler licensed pursuant to this chapter shall acquire a vested right in a license. The city may,
upon finding that public necessity requires, determine to establish other means of solid waste collection.
H. MMSW: Each licensee shall provide its customers with weekly collection of MMSW or more frequently as required by its
customers.
I. Recycling: Each licensee shall provide its customers with the opportunity to recycle through a weekly collection of "recyclable
materials" (as defined in section 4-2-2 of this chapter or by city council resolution). The collection of recyclable materials shall be
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 91/454
on the same day as collection of customer's MMSW and other refuse but may occur at a different time during that same day. The
recyclable materials collection shall be from a location at or near the customer's MMSW and other refuse collection site, or at
such other location as mutually agreeable to the hauler and the customer. No provision in this chapter shall be construed to
prevent the licensee from offering curbside collection for other recyclable materials in addition to the targeted recyclable
materials.
J. Right To Refuse Collection: The licensee may refuse to make collection from any premises when the fees are not paid within thirty
(30) days from the billing date. The licensee shall notify the public works director or their designee of the discontinuation of
service to any premises within two (2) days after service is discontinued.
K. Participation In City Tests: The licensee shall participate with the city in tests to confirm the methodology and accuracy of the
estimated weight of waste and recyclable materials and participation of residents in the recycling programs.
L. Hours: No collection of solid waste or construction/demolition waste shall be made except between the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., Monday through Friday. Operation during these hours may require that service be delayed one
day to accommodate holidays. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-9: CONDITIONS SPECIFIC TO RESIDENTIAL DWELLING SOLID WASTE HAULER AND RECYCLER
LICENSES:
A. Collection Days: Licensed haulers shall collect and haul solid waste from residential dwellings as established by the daily hauling
districts. The licensee shall notify customers of a specific day for collection of their solid waste consistent with the daily hauling
district in which the customer is located.
B. Collection Frequency: Licensed haulers shall make weekly collection of solid waste for all residential dwelling accounts within the
daily hauling districts on the days as established by council resolution.
C. Rates:
1. Volume Based Pricing: Every licensee's rates shall include a volume based MMSW rate structure for the following services
(other services may be provided):
a. Thirty (30) gallon service.
b. Sixty (60) gallon service.
c. Ninety (90) gallon service.
The licensee may offer the owner other services in addition to MMSW collection and hauling.
2. Rate Changes: Every licensee shall provide notification to the customer and the city at least two (2) weeks prior to any change
in the rates submitted with the application that will be implemented during the licensed period.
D. Recycling:
1. Service: The licenses shall provide curbside recycling to all accounts and collect, at a minimum, the targeted materials.
2. Fees: The licensee must also include a specific line item on the owner's billing statement that reflects the amount charged to
the owner for recycling. In accordance with state law, no residential customer may be charged more for recycling service than a
residential customer who does not recycle.
E. Special Pick Up: Residential "special pick up" as defined in section 4-2-2 of this chapter may take place on any day, Monday
through Saturday, six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., as arranged by the property owner and licensee. (Ord. 964, 7-
6-2016)
4-2-10: CONDITIONS SPECIFIC TO COMMERCIAL/MULTIPLE-RESIDENTIAL
DWELLING/INDUSTRIAL/ROLL-OFF SERVICE SOLID WASTE HAULER AND RECYCLER LICENSES:
A. Collection Frequency: Licensees shall make weekly collection of solid waste for all accounts at least once or more frequently as is
necessary to protect the public's health.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 92/454
B. Recycling: Licensees shall provide recycling collection to all accounts. At a minimum, licensees shall collect the targeted
materials. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prevent licensees from collecting other materials in addition to the
targeted materials.
C. Special Pick Up: Commercial "special pick up" as defined in section 4-2-2 of this chapter may take place on any day, Monday
through Saturday, six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., as arranged by the property owner and licensee. (Ord. 964, 7-
6-2016)
4-2-11: RENEWAL OF LICENSES:
A. Residential Dwelling Hauler And Recycler Licenses: In order to renew a residential dwelling hauler and recycler license, the
licensee must have at least two hundred (200) active accounts and must submit a list of all active accounts with its application
and fee for renewal.
B. All Licenses: In order to renew any license issued pursuant to this chapter, the licensee must not have any outstanding city fees,
state solid waste fees or county solid waste fees. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-12: TRANSFERABILITY AND ASSIGNABILITY OF LICENSE:
No license issued pursuant to this chapter may be transferred or assigned. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-13: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation Of License: The city council may suspend or revoke the license of any licensee whose
conduct is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable ordinance, law or regulations.
Suspension or revocation may also be based on other health, safety, and welfare concerns arising out of the performance of the
licensee, its employees, subcontractors and agents, its vehicles or its equipment.
B. Hearing Required: Suspension or revocation of a license by the city council shall be preceded by a hearing. The city council may
appoint a hearing examiner or may conduct the hearing itself. The hearing notice shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing, and shall include notice of the time and place of the hearing, and shall state the nature of the charge against the
licensee. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-14: GENERAL DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Disposal Required: All property owners are required to make adequate provisions for the sanitary disposal of solid waste by
means of a licensed private hauler. However, residents of residential dwelling units may dispose of solid waste and
construction/demolition waste in a manner which conforms to city and county ordinances and state statutes.
B. MMSW (Garbage): Property owners shall contract with a licensed private hauler to collect and haul MMSW to a state licensed
and/or county approved processing or disposal site in accordance with state and county rules and regulations.
C. Recyclable Materials: All separated recyclable materials must be transported to a licensed recycling facility or delivered to an end
market for sale or reuse, or brought to an intermediate collection center for later delivery to a licensed processing center or end
market for recycling. It is unlawful for any person to transport for disposal or to dispose of designated recyclables in an MMSW
disposal facility. No separated recyclables may be mixed with another waste material or incinerated or landfilled or composted or
made into fuel pellets.
D. Bulky Waste: Bulky waste must be disposed of by contracting with a licensed private hauler to haul the waste to a state licensed
or county approved processing or disposal site.
E. Yard Waste:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of yard waste into the MMSW, recyclable material, or bulky waste streams. Yard
waste shall be disposed of by:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 93/454
a. Contracting with a city licensed hauler to haul the yard waste to a properly permitted or licensed compost site;
b. The resident transporting the yard waste to a compost site; or
c. Composting the yard waste on the resident's property.
2. It shall be unlawful for a licensed private hauler to dispose of yard waste into the MMSW, recyclable materials, SSCM, or bulky
waste stream.
F. SSCM: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit SSCM to be removed from the property by an unlicensed hauler. A hauler of
MMSW may also be licensed for SSCM.
G. Disposal By Licensed Hauler: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit solid waste and construction and demolition waste to be
removed from the property by an unlicensed hauler.
H. Recycling:
1. Residents of residential dwelling units are strongly encouraged to separate recyclable materials from the waste stream for
recycling.
2. Owners and occupants of commercial buildings shall comply with Minnesota statutes and recycle at least three (3) types of
material.
I. Rules And Regulations:
1. The director of public works shall have the authority to make regulations concerning days of collection, type and location of
containers, recyclable materials to be collected and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal as
necessary, and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law; provided, however, that such regulations are
not contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
2. The director of public works shall have the authority to make such other reasonable regulations concerning individual collection
and disposal and relating to the hauling of other solid waste over city streets by outside haulers as necessary, subject to the
rights of appeal as set forth in section 4-2-20 of this chapter.
J. Payment Of Rates: The expense of garbage, recyclable materials, yard waste, bulky waste, and construction/demolition waste
collection and processing/disposal shall be paid to the hauler by the owner, agent, occupant, or tenant of the premises from which
they are collected. Such fees shall be full compensation for the hauler's services and in no event shall hauler seek payment from
the city. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-15: CONTAINERS:
A. Containers Required:
1. Garbage Containers:
a. All residential dwelling property owners shall provide one or more containers to hold and contain all MMSW required by the
city which may accumulate between times of collection.
b. Owners of commercial/multiple-residential dwellings/industrial establishments shall provide one or more containers to hold
and contain all garbage required by the city which may accumulate between times of collection.
(1) Dumpster Required: Where garbage volume exceeds three (3) 90-gallon containers per week, dumpster service shall be
utilized with the frequency of pick up being not less than once per week. The actual size of the dumpster or the frequency
of pick up shall be determined by need as established by the director of public works. The dumpster shall be a watertight
receptacle with a tightfitting cover to prevent exposure of its contents to potential fly or vermin infestation.
2. Recyclable Materials Containers:
a. Residential Dwellings: All owners of residential dwellings shall provide one or more containers to receive and collect all
recyclable materials required by the city which may accumulate between times of collection.
b. Commercial/Multiple-Residential Dwellings/Industrial Establishments: All owners of commercial, multiple-residential
dwellings and industrial establishments are required to provide containers for tenants to deposit recyclable materials for
collection by a licensed hauler.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 94/454
(1) Dumpster Required: For all commercial, multiple-residential dwellings and industrial establishments where the volume
exceeds three (3) 90-gallon containers per week, the owner shall utilize dumpster service with the frequency of pick up
being not less than once per week. The actual size of the dumpster or the frequency of pick up shall be determined by
need as established by the director of public works. The dumpster shall be a watertight receptacle with a tightfitting cover
to prevent exposure of its contents to potential fly or vermin infestation.
3. Roll-Off Containers:
a. Permit Required: The property owner shall secure at least one roll-off container at any construction or demolition site. The
owner shall pay the permit fee set forth by ordinance. In the event there is an open building permit for the property, no permit
fee is required.
b. Storage: No solid wastes or construction/demolition waste, whether generated at the site or elsewhere, shall be stored
outside the roll-off container.
c. Collection: The roll-off container shall be emptied within seven (7) days of the container being filled to capacity. Property
owners and their contractors shall be responsible for cleaning up and disposing of construction debris carried by the
elements onto neighboring property.
4. Composting Containers: Containers shall be of a durable material including, but not limited to, sturdy woven wire fencing, rot
resistant wood, or a commercially purchased composting unit which will provide for adequate aeration. Containers shall be
constructed and maintained in a structurally sound manner. Wood used in the construction of a compost container must be
sound and free of rot.
5. Yard Waste Containers: All yard waste to be picked up by a licensed hauler shall be placed in a container or in separate
compostable bags in compliance with Minnesota statutes and shall not contain garbage, recyclable materials, SSCM or
construction/demolition waste.
B. Storage And Placement Of Containers:
1. Location For Residential Dwellings: Residential dwelling MMSW and recyclable materials, when not placed for collection by the
hauler, shall be so located as to be out of public view in a secure place insofar as possible.
2. Location For Commercial/Multiple-Residential Dwellings/Industrial: Commercial/multiple-residential dwellings/industrial MMSW
and recyclable materials containers shall be kept in a trash enclosure or building. All new trash and recycling enclosures or
buildings constructed in compliance with this provision and all major alterations to such existing trash and recycling enclosures
and buildings shall be constructed in compliance with the provisions relating to trash and recycling enclosure structures in
subsection 11-6-3B of this code. Bulky waste shall be contained within the enclosure.
3. Residential Dwelling Composting Containers: The compost container(s) shall be located in the rear yard no closer than five feet
(5') to any rear or side property line and shall not be located closer than five feet (5') from the rear property line and shall not be
located in any required front or side yard as defined in the zoning code, nor closer than twenty feet (20') to any habitable
building(s) located off of the owner's property.
4. Yard Waste Containers: All yard waste when not placed for collection by the hauler shall be so located as to be out of public
view in a secure place insofar as possible.
5. Roll-Off Containers: Roll-off containers must be located in an accessible location on the owner's property. In no event may a
roll-off container be located in the right of way. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-16: SCAVENGING:
It is unlawful for any person or business to scavenge or otherwise collect garbage, recyclable materials, bulky waste, yard waste or
construction/demolition waste at the curb or from recyclable materials containers without a license from the city and an account
relationship with the owner of the premises. The licensee is also deemed the owner of recyclable materials, and upon collection, the
licensee may market them. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-17: COMPOSTING:
A. Locations: Composting is permitted only on residential dwelling properties.
B. Composting Area: The composting area must meet the following conditions:
1. The compost must be contained, secure against vermin and excess moisture and remain aerobic to allow for the
decomposition of the material; and
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 95/454
2. The compost is screened from view of adjacent property owners in containers and located pursuant to subsection 4-2-15B3 of
this chapter.
C. Compliance With State Law: Composting shall be accomplished in compliance with Minnesota statutes and the applicable
administrative rules of the Minnesota pollution control agency. Nothing contained in this chapter prohibits city licensed haulers
from offering collection and disposal of yard waste and SSCM at a properly licensed composting facility. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-18: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Unauthorized Accumulations: Any unauthorized accumulation of garbage, recyclable materials, bulky waste, SSCM, yard waste or
other solid waste or litter on any premises is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. "Unauthorized accumulation" shall
consist of garbage, recyclable materials, bulky waste, SSCM, yard waste, construction/demolition waste or litter in any of the
following circumstances:
1. Garbage or recyclable materials not stored in containers or compostable bags in the case of yard waste because containers or
compostable bags are not being used or because containers are of insufficient size to hold the garbage or recyclable materials.
2. Materials are not disposed of in conformance with this chapter.
3. Construction and/or demolition waste is not removed from the construction or demolition site within seven (7) days of the
container being filled to capacity.
B. Dumping Solid Waste: It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or dispose of solid waste, construction and demolition waste or
litter on any land, whether privately or publicly owned, within the limits of the city.
C. Littering:
1. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any garbage, recyclable materials, bulky waste, SSCM,
yard waste, or construction/demolition waste in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or onto any property within the city.
2. No person shall place garbage, recyclable materials, bulky waste, SSCM, yard waste, construction/demolition waste or other
waste upon any street, in any alley or other public place or upon any private property whether owned by such person or not,
unless it is in proper containers for collection or under express approval granted by the director of public works; nor shall any
person throw or deposit any garbage, recyclable materials, bulky waste, yard waste, construction/demolition waste or other
waste into any stream or other body of water.
D. Theft Of Service: No person shall deposit garbage, recyclable materials, bulky waste, SSCM, yard waste, construction/demolition
waste or other refuse in a dumpster or roll-off container unless he or she is the owner, occupant or authorized agent of the
premises providing such dumpster or container.
E. Burning: No burning or burying of solid waste, including garbage, bulky waste, recyclable materials, SSCM or construction and
demolition waste shall occur on any property in the city that is not expressly licensed for that activity. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-19: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent persons from hauling recyclable materials, SSCM, yard waste, construction/demolition waste or
bulky waste from their own residences or commercial properties, provided the following rules are observed: a) recyclable materials,
SSCM, yard waste or construction/demolition waste are hauled in vehicles with leakproof bodies and completely covered or enclosed
by canvas or other means of material so as to completely eliminate the possibility of loss of cargo; b) that recyclable materials be
disposed of at a recycling facility, an organized recyclable materials drive or through a licensed recyclable material hauler; and c) that
yard waste and SSCM may be composted privately on residential dwelling properties, disposed of at a properly licensed composting
facility, or through a licensed residential dwelling hauler and recycler or a licensed commercial/multiple-residential dwelling/industrial
hauler and recycler. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
4-2-20: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by a regulation of, or a fee charged by, the director of public works shall have the right of appeal to the city
council. The person shall provide the city clerk with a notice of appeal within twenty (20) days of the public director's imposition of the
regulation or fee. The city shall schedule a hearing before the city council within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of appeal. The
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 96/454
city council shall have the authority to confirm, modify or revoke any such regulation or fee after a hearing on the appeal. (Ord. 964,
7-6-2016)
4-2-21: PENALTIES:
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine or
imprisonment in the county jail, or both, as specified by state statute. With respect to licensed haulers, such penalty may be imposed
in addition to suspension or revocation of the license. (Ord. 964, 7-6-2016)
Chapter 3
PLANTS AND WEEDS
4-3-1: NOXIOUS WEEDS AND PLANTS; HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
A. Noxious, Poisonous Plants And Weeds Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant or occupant of land in the City to
permit or maintain noxious or poisonous weeds or plants on such land.
B. Plants And Weeds In Zoning Districts:
1. In Zoning Districts R-2.5 through R-6 and B-1 through B-3 and P-B where the land is platted or developed, and land within one
hundred feet (100') of said land, it shall also be unlawful to allow or permit any growth of weeds, grass, brush, or other rank
vegetation to a height greater than eight inches (8")1, or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush on such land.
"Developed" shall mean that the property has been improved with the construction of buildings, parking lots or other facilities
excluding underground utilities or sewer or water lines.
2. This subsection shall not apply to:
a. "Natural areas", which shall be defined as densely wooded areas, bogs, and marshes.
b. Northern States Power transmission easement.
c. Park land.
d. Stormwater pond areas.
e. Land used for agricultural purposes.
f. Compost areas which meet the following conditions:
(1) The compost is in a compost box which is of adequate construction to allow for the decomposition of the material.
(2) The compost is screened from view of adjacent property owners. (1971 Code § 13-1; amd. 2000 Code)
4-3-2: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
A. Notice To Abate: In the event of failure to comply with the provisions in section 4-3-1 of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer
or his/her designee may serve upon the owner, tenant or occupant of the land a notice ordering the owner, tenant or occupant to
cut, remove or eradicate the vegetation which is in violation of said section 4-3-1 of this chapter. The notice may be served upon
the owner, tenant or occupant personally, or sent by United States first class mail, postage prepaid. The notice shall order that the
conditions which violate section 4-3-1 of this chapter be abated within five (5) days after service or mailing of the notice. The
notice shall state that in the event of failure to comply with the order, the nuisance will be abated by the City or its designee at the
expense of the owner of the property.
B. Abatement By City: In the event that the conditions which violate section 4-3-1 of this chapter are not abated within five (5) days
after service or mailing of the notice, the Code Enforcement Officer or designee shall abate the condition and shall keep a record
of all time, material and equipment used in such abatement.
C. Costs To Owner; Administrative Fee: In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer or designee abates the violation of section 4-
3-1 of this chapter, a record showing the cost of such work attributable to each property shall be delivered to the Finance Director,
and the owner shall be charged for said cost. In addition to the cost of the work, the owner shall pay an administrative fee in such
amount as provided by ordinance of the City Council from time to time.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 97/454
D. Costs Assessed: If said cost and administrative fee are not paid within thirty (30) days, the City Council shall assess and levy and
cause to be collected the amount of said charges as a special assessment against the property, plus interest at such amount as
provided by ordinance of the City Council from time to time. (Ord. 981, 6-7-2017)
Chapter 4
DISEASED TREES
4-4-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to carry out and enforce the provisions of Minnesota statutes section 18G.13, as amended, as the
same relates to the control of Dutch elm disease, oak wilt, and emerald ash borer disease. (Ord. 877, 4-21-2010)
4-4-2: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
Where the provisions of this chapter conflict or are inconsistent with any other ordinances of the city, the provisions of this chapter
shall supersede, except in instances where one regulation is more restrictive than another, in which case the more restrictive section
shall apply and control. (Ord. 877, 4-21-2010)
4-4-3: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this chapter, "control area" shall be defined as any portions of the city served by city sewer and water. (Ord. 877,
4-21-2010)
4-4-4: STOCKPILING BARK BEARING WOOD:
The stockpiling of bark bearing elm wood and wood infected with emerald ash borer within the control limits of the city shall be
permitted during the period from October 15 through April 15 of any given year. Any such wood not utilized by April 15 of any year
must then be removed and disposed of as provided by this chapter and regulations incorporated hereby. (Ord. 877, 4-21-2010)
4-4-5: NUISANCE CONDITIONS1:
A. Nuisances Enumerated: The following things are public nuisances whenever they may be found within the city:
1. Any living or standing tree or part thereof infected to any degree with a plant pest as defined by Minnesota statutes 18G.02.
2. Any dead or diseased tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other elm material, from which the
bark has not been removed, chipped or burned.
3. Any dead or diseased ash tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood, or other material found to harbor the
emerald ash borer, from which the bark has not been removed, chipped or burned.
B. Nuisances Prohibited: No person shall permit any public nuisance as defined in this section to remain on any premises owned or
controlled by him/her within the city, except from October 15 to April 15.
C. Nuisance Declared: Any tree, or any part thereof, growing on private property, but overhanging or interfering with the use of any
street, that in the opinion of the public works director endangers the life, health, safety or property of the public shall be declared a
nuisance.
D. Abatement By City; Costs: If the owner of such property does not correct or remove such nuisance within fifteen (15) working days
after receipt of written notice thereof, the public works director shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed, and the cost
shall be assessed to such owner. (Ord. 877, 4-21-2010)
4-4-6: INTERFERENCE WITH FORESTER PROHIBITED:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 98/454
No person shall prevent the city forester or such designated person(s) from performing his/her duties or delay or interfere with
him/her while he/she is engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this chapter. The city forester or such designated person(s)
may enter upon private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned to him/her under
this chapter. (Ord. 877, 4-21-2010)
4-4-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor
and shall be subject to the penalty provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 877, 4-21-2010)
Footnote 1: See chapter 1 of this title for nuisance provisions.
Chapter 5
LAWN CARE AND TREE CARE SERVICES
4-5-1: PURPOSES:
This chapter is adopted for the purposes of:
A. Protecting the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city;
B. Regulating the application and use of chemical fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides and other toxic substances so as to prevent
pollution of the soil, air and surface and underground waters;
C. Preventing chemical spraying from creating a health hazard or a nuisance for the general public or for individuals; and
D. Licensing lawn care and tree care services doing business in the city. (Ord. 870, 1-20-2010)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
LAWN CARE SERVICE: Any person proposing to engage in the business of lawn and garden maintenance or providing chemical
treatment for fertilization or the control of weeds, insects or lawn diseases with a registered chemical.
REGISTERED CHEMICAL: Any substance used in a fertilizer, pesticide, herbicide or other chemical application that is registered by
the United States environmental protection agency and/or licensed for use by the appropriate state regulatory agency.
TREE CARE SERVICES: Any person proposing to engage in the business of tree care, tree trimming or removal of trees, limbs,
brush, or shrubs, or to treat trees, shrubs or vines. (Ord. 870, 1-20-2010)
4-5-3: LICENSING PROVISIONS:
A. License Required: Every person proposing to engage in the business as a lawn care service or tree care service shall first obtain
an annual license to carry on such work.
B. Application For License:
1. License applications shall be submitted to the city clerk and shall contain the following:
a. Name and address of the individual, firm or corporation seeking the license.
b. Name each person who will be applying a registered chemical along with proof of licensing by the Minnesota department of
agriculture.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 99/454
c. For tree care service applicants only, the applicant must be registered on the tree care company registry with the department
of agriculture as required by Minnesota statutes 18G.07. Applicant must provide the names of all persons who are certified
by the International Society of Arborists and name the certified arborist(s) who will be directly supervising all work performed
in the city.
d. Documentation indicating insurance coverage, which shall remain in effect during the license term. No license or renewal
shall be granted, nor shall the same be effective, until the applicant shall file with the city clerk proof of a public liability
insurance policy covering all operations of such applicant under this code for the sum of at least one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) liability for bodily injuries or death to more than one person from one accident and for at least one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) against liability for damage or destruction of property. Said policy shall provide that it may not be
canceled by the insurer except after ten (10) days' written notice to the city, and if such insurance is so canceled and the
licensee shall fail to replace the same with another policy conforming to the provisions of this section, said license shall be
automatically suspended until such insurance shall have been replaced.
2. No work shall be performed under a license unless and until required proofs of licensing and/or registrations and insurance are
filed with and approved by the city clerk.
C. License Fee: The annual license fee shall be in such amount as provided by ordinance of the city council from time to time.
D. Term Of License: Annual licenses shall be in effect January 1 to December 31 and shall be valid only during the year for which
issued.
E. Denial And Revocation Of License; Hearing:
1. The city clerk may revoke or refuse issuance or renewal of a license for cause, as follows:
a. For application of any registered chemical in violation of this chapter.
b. For falsification or misrepresentation of any documentation or other records required under this chapter.
2. After any license is refused or revoked, the applicant or licensee may within fourteen (14) days appeal the refusal or revocation
by requesting a hearing before the city council to show why such license should not be refused or revoked. (Ord. 870, 1-20-
2010)
4-5-4: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following minimum requirements shall apply to all licensed lawn care and tree care services:
A. Signs:
1. Time For Posting: In order to protect people and domestic pets from the possibly deleterious effects of toxic chemicals, lawns
and gardens treated with registered chemicals shall be posted for a period of not less than forty eight (48) hours following the
application.
2. Specifications: Signs shall be posted on properties treated with registered chemicals, and signs must meet the following
specifications:
a. All signs shall bear the name, address and telephone number of the applicator, as well as the date of the application.
b. All signs shall be in conformance with the city's sign ordinance1 in regard to size and location.
c. All signs shall include a warning substantially similar to the following:
This area has been chemically treated. Please keep children and pets off for 48 hours.
d. All signs must be of a rain resistant material and constructed and placed in such a manner as to be clearly legible and
provide sufficient warning to anyone who may enter the treated area.
3. Number Of Signs: The number of signs to be posted shall be determined on the basis of one sign placed at each access point
to a property, with a minimum of one sign per yard.
B. Applying Chemicals: The licensee shall apply all registered chemicals in such a manner as to minimize water, soil and air
pollution. Spraying chemical fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides or other toxic chemicals on any nonporous surface, such as a street
or driveway, shall be prohibited.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 100/454
C. Tree Care Notification Required: Prior to application of a registered chemical or treatment method to prevent or otherwise control
the spread of tree disease, the licensee shall provide the following information to the city forester: business name, type of tree,
location of tree, method of treatment, number of trees treated, size of each tree, date of proposed treatment, and name of
chemicals used.
D. Records: At the time of the application of any registered chemical, the licensee shall provide the property owner or tenant with a
written record of the following information: date of service, type of application, brand names of all registered chemicals used and
the amount of chemical applied (in pounds per square feet). A copy of this record of chemical application shall be provided free of
charge.
E. Supervision: All work involving registered chemicals shall be done or supervised by an individual licensed by the Minnesota
department of agriculture. (Ord. 870, 1-20-2010)
Chapter 6
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
4-6-1: OPEN BURNING:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this subsection:
BURNING PERMIT: A permit issued by the city fire chief authorizing fires exempted from the general provisions hereof and
setting conditions therefor.
COMBUSTIBLE: Capable of being ignited and burning, combustible materials include, but are not limited to, wood structures or
building materials, trees, brush, leaves, trash and woodpiles.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS: A multi-family dwelling is any single structure containing three (3) or more separate living
quarters, whether condominiums, townhouses or apartments.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE: Not capable of igniting and burning readily. Noncombustible materials include masonry, brick and metal.
OPEN BURNING: Burning any matter whereby the resultant combustion products are emitted directly to the open atmosphere
without passing through a stack, duct or chimney of a type meeting specifications from time to time established by the Minnesota
pollution control agency.
RECREATIONAL FIRES: Wood burning fireplaces and open fires used solely for outdoor recreational purposes.
B. Open Burning Prohibited: Except as herein otherwise provided, open burning is prohibited within the city.
C. Exemptions: Open burning of the types, and subject to the conditions, as hereinafter stated, shall be exempt from the prohibition
of subsection B of this section:
1. Open burning for outdoor food preparation.
a. Grilling is permitted at single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multi-family dwellings where all dwelling units have
ground level living areas.
b. Barbecues for the purpose of cooking food may be permitted at multi-family dwellings if they are electric or gas fired
barbecue grill, permanently mounted and wired or plumbed to the building's gas supply or electrical system. No multi-family
dwelling owner, resident, or other person shall set, kindle, maintain, or permit any fire or open flame on or under any balcony
or under any overhead wooden or combustible building projections of a multi-family dwelling except as permitted by this
subsection. No barbecue, torch, or similar heating, cooking, burning, or lighting equipment or device may be affixed to a deck
or railing within five feet (5') of a multi-family dwelling or apartment with wood or combustible siding, even though there is no
wooden deck or wooden projection above the open flame. The ignition device of the barbecue must be an electric starter.
The use of any igniting fluids, pastes, or bricks is prohibited. The provisions of this subsection C1b apply to multi-family
dwellings where one or more dwelling units do not have ground level living areas.
2. Recreational fires. Recreational fires are permitted on residential property as provided below:
a. All recreational fires must be operated in compliance with the requirements of this subsection. Recreational fires must be
located at least fifteen feet (15') away from any combustible structure and at least ten feet (10') from any property line, unless
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 101/454
a different location is approved by the fire chief. Fires must be contained in a fire pit or enclosure that is constructed from
brick, masonry, metal, or other noncombustible material. Fires must be no more than three feet (3') in diameter. Flame height
must not exceed three feet (3'). No trash, leaves, stumps, treated, painted, varnished, or otherwise coated lumber may be
burned. An adult must be in attendance and a charged water hose or fire extinguisher must be readily available at all times.
Recreational fires are not permitted when area winds exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour or when the fire chief has issued a
no fire order. Fires must be extinguished to the point of cold before being left unattended.
b. The fire chief may order any recreational fire to be immediately extinguished if the fire poses a nuisance to surrounding
residences. A nuisance is deemed to exist if the fire generates flying embers that pose a hazard to property or generates
smoke or odors that unreasonably interfere with the use or enjoyment of neighboring properties.
c. Fires under managed supervision, for which a burning permit has been obtained from the city fire chief and, where required
by state law, from the pollution control agency, but limited to, the following:
(1) Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of public and industrial firefighting personnel.
(2) Fires set for the elimination of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by any other practicable means.
(3) Fires purposely set for forest and game management purposes.
(4) The burning of trees, brush, grass and other vegetation in the clearing of land, the maintenance of street, road and
highway rights of way, and in accepted agricultural land management practices.
3. Exemption to conduct fires under this subsection C does not excuse a person from the consequences, damages or injuries
which may result therefrom, nor does it exempt any person from regulations promulgated by the Minnesota pollution control
agency or any other governmental unit exercising jurisdiction in matters of pollution or fire hazard regulation. (Ord. 714, 3-20-
2002)
4-6-2: CHRISTMAS TREES:
A. Definition: As used in this section, the term "Christmas tree" shall mean any natural tree which has been cut down and is set up,
used, installed or maintained within any building, structure or tent for decorative or commemorative purposes. (1971 Code § 12-
22)
B. Use Or Maintenance Requirements: Every hospital, rest home, institution, school, church, hotel, club room, store and every place
of public assembly or place of business to which the public is invited which shall use, keep, install or maintain Christmas trees,
electrical decorations or the like, shall observe and comply with the following regulations:
1. Every tree used for Christmas decoration, regardless of the type of tree, shall be so placed, kept and maintained so that the
butt, or bottom end of the trunk, is at all times immersed in not less than two inches (2") of water.
2. No cotton batting, straw, dry vines or leaves, celluloid or other flammable material, shall be used unless fireproofed in a manner
approved by the governing body of the city.
3. No trees used for Christmas decoration or display shall be placed in or immediately adjacent to exit areas, light wells or
stairwells in the building where the decoration has been set up.
4. No candles shall be used on Christmas trees. No electrical decorations shall be used on Christmas trees except in churches
when used in connection with religious or ceremonial services; provided, however, that this exception shall not apply to regular
Sunday school sessions. (1971 Code § 12-22)
C. Exemptions From Provisions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to artificial trees constructed of nonflammable
materials. (1971 Code § 12-24)
D. Violations; Tree Removal: The city council or its authorized agents are hereby authorized to disconnect or remove any tree or
other Christmas decoration in violation of this section. (1971 Code § 12-25; amd. 2000 Code)
4-6-3: SMOKING IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
A. State Statutes Adopted: The definitions and provisions of Minnesota statutes sections 144.391 through 144.417, as amended, are
adopted and made a part of this code by reference. (1971 Code § 12-26; amd. 2000 Code)
B. Receptacles: In every rest room in which smoking is permitted and in every room designated as a smoking room, there shall be
provided at least two (2) incombustible receptacles for the reception of discarded smoking materials. All rooms designated as
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 102/454
smoking rooms shall be subject to the approval of the fire marshal. (1971 Code § 12-27)
C. Signs: The owner or manager of any place where smoking is prohibited shall cause to be conspicuously displayed notices or
signs reading: "No smoking allowed by ordinance." (1971 Code § 12-28)
4-6-4: DUTY TO REPORT FIRES AND EVACUATE BUILDINGS:
A. Report Of Fires: It shall be the duty of any person in control of a church, school, multiple dwelling, place of business or any place
of public assembly, or any person under such person charged with responsibility for the same, or any other person who observes
the same, to immediately report smoke or other evidence of fire in such church, school multiple dwelling, place of business or any
place of public assembly to the fire division of the city. It shall be the duty of any occupant of any single-family residence to
immediately report to the fire division of the city any fire which endangers persons or property.
B. Building Evacuation Required: Whenever a fire alarm sounds in any church, school, multiple dwelling, place of business or place
of public assembly, every occupant of such building shall immediately vacate the premises. Failure or refusal to vacate such a
building when a fire alarm sounds will constitute a misdemeanor. (1971 Code § 12-1; amd. 2000 Code)
4-6-5: FIRE LANES:
A. Purpose: Fire lanes shall be established for the purpose of allowing unobstructed emergency access to a building for fire and
other emergencies.
B. Lanes Established; Specifications: Fire lanes shall be established either by order of the fire chief or by city council resolution. The
location and size of the fire lane shall be designated and approved by the fire chief.
C. Signage:
1. Signs Required: When a fire lane has been ordered to be established by the fire chief or council resolution, it shall be marked
by a permanently affixed sign bearing the words "No Parking _ Fire Lane" or a similar message.
2. Responsibility For Signs: When such fire lane is established on public property or public right of way, the necessary sign or
signs shall be provided by the city, and when on private property, they shall be erected and maintained by the owner at his/her
expense.
3. Time Limit For Installation; Compliance: Such sign shall be installed within thirty (30) days after notification of the order.
Thereafter, no person shall park a vehicle or otherwise occupy or obstruct a fire lane. (1971 Code § 12-2; amd. 2000 Code)
4-6-6: TAMPERING WITH FIRE HYDRANT:
No person, except an employee of the department of public works, the fire division or the police division of the city shall turn on or off
or tamper with in any manner any fire hydrant located within the corporate limits of the city, or draw or attempt to draw any water
therefrom. (1971 Code § 12-13; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 7
EMERGENCY SERVICES
4-7-1: CHARGES FOR AMBULANCE SERVICES AND COLLECTION:
A. Authority: This section is adopted pursuant to Minnesota statutes sections 415.01, 366.011 and 366.012.
B. Charges For Ambulance Services; Collection: The city may impose a reasonable service charge for ambulance services provided
by the city. If the service charge remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after a notice of delinquency is sent to the recipient of the
service or the recipient's representative or estate, the city may use any lawful means to collect the service charge that is allowed
to a private party for the collection of an unsecured delinquent debt. The city may also use the authority of Minnesota statutes,
section 366.012 to collect unpaid service charges of this kind from recipients of services who are owners of taxable real property
in the city, or areas served by the city for ambulance services.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 103/454
The powers conferred by this section are in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law for a city to
impose a service charge or assessment for a service provided by the city or contracted for by the city.
C. Collection Of Unpaid Service Charges: If the city is authorized to impose a service charge on the owner of a property for
ambulance services provided by the city, the city may certify to the county auditor on or before October 15 of each year, any
unpaid service charges which shall then be collected together with property taxes levied against the property. A charge may be
certified to the county auditor only, if on or before September 15, the city has given written notice to the property owner of its
intention to certify the charge to the county auditor. The service charges shall be subject to the same penalties, interest and other
conditions provided for the collection of property taxes. This section is in addition to other laws authorizing the collection of unpaid
costs and service charges. (Ord. 795, 6-21-2006)
Chapter 8
OUTDOOR WOOD BURNERS
4-8-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to ensure that outdoor wood burner systems are utilized in a manner that does not create a public nuisance
and is not detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. (Ord. 867, 10-7-2009)
4-8-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to all outdoor burning and open burning within the city, but does not apply to:
A. Grilling or cooking food using charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
B. Burning for the purpose of generating heat in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within a building used for human
or animal habitation.
C. The use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating construction or maintenance
activities.
D. Wood fires in fireplaces, stoves, heaters or furnaces, safely designed, constructed and installed for such purposes and complying
with all applicable laws and ordinances. (Ord. 867, 10-7-2009)
4-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this section, the following words shall have the definitions indicated unless the context clearly calls for or indicates a
different meaning:
CLEAN WOOD: Natural dry wood which has not been painted, varnished or coated with a similar material, has not been pressure
treated with preservatives and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products and other
environmental protection agency approved fuels.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE: Building waste materials, including, but not limited to, waste shingles, insulation,
lumber, treated wood, painted wood, wiring, plastics, packaging, and rubble that results from construction, remodeling, repair, and
demolition operations on a structure.
OUTDOOR WOOD BURNER SYSTEM: Any equipment, device, appliance, or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed,
affixed or situated outdoors for the primary purpose of combustion of fuel to produce heat or energy used as a component of heating
system providing heat for any interior space or water source. An outdoor wood burner may also be referred to as an outdoor wood
boiler or wood fired hydronic heater. An outdoor wood burner does not include a fire pit or wood fired barbecue.
PATIO WOOD BURNING UNIT: A patio warmer or other portable wood burning device used for outdoor recreation and/or heating.
(Ord. 867, 10-7-2009)
4-8-4: MATERIALS THAT MAY NOT BE BURNED:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 104/454
The following materials may not be burned:
A. Rubbish or garbage including, but not limited to, food wastes, food wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted
materials, furniture, newspaper and paper products, corrugated cardboard, container board, composite shingles, construction or
demolition debris or other household, hazardous or business wastes.
B. Waste oil or other oily wastes.
C. Asphalt and products containing asphalt.
D. Treated or painted wood including, but not limited to, plywood, composite wood products or other wood products that are painted,
varnished or treated with preservatives.
E. Any plastic material including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC, ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic
films and plastic containers.
F. Rubber including tires and synthetic rubberlike products. (Ord. 867, 10-7-2009)
4-8-5: AREA OF OPERATION:
An outdoor wood burner system may be installed and used only in accordance with the following provisions:
A. The outdoor wood burner must be installed and used on parcels of land that are a minimum of three (3) acres in size and zoned
AG-1, agricultural preservation; AG-2, agricultural; or R-1, rural residential.
B. The outdoor wood burner must be located at least one hundred feet (100') from any property line.
C. The outdoor wood burner must comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, ordinances that prohibit creating a
human health hazard or a public nuisance.
D. The outdoor wood burner must not be located in any required front yard.
E. The outdoor wood burner must be equipped with properly functioning spark arresters.
F. The outdoor wood burner must be located on the property in compliance with manufacturer's recommendations and listing
requirements for clearance to combustible materials.
G. The outdoor wood burner must be laboratory tested and listed to appropriate safety standards such as Underwriters Laboratories,
American National Standards Institute, or Canadian Standards Association.
H. The outdoor wood burner must be EPA outdoor wood qualified at the phase 2 emissions level or latest established phase for U.S.
environmental protection agency's voluntary program. (Ord. 867, 10-7-2009)
4-8-6: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
A building permit must be obtained to assure that the outdoor wood burner system meets all building and fire codes and
manufacturer's specifications for installation. (Ord. 867, 10-7-2009)
4-8-7: APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT:
An application for an outdoor wood burner permit must be made to the building inspections division upon forms furnished by the city
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 105/454
and must include the following data:
A. Name, address, and phone number of applicant and property owner;
B. Legal description of the property;
C. A sketch of the dimensions of the property, including location of buildings and the wood burner relative to the lot lines and
distances from residences on adjacent properties; and
D. Manufacturer's specifications for installation.
All permits applied for under this section shall include an application fee that is determined from time to time by the city. (Ord.
867, 10-7-2009)
4-8-8: EXISTING NONCONFORMING OUTDOOR WOOD BURNERS:
The lawful use of a nonconforming outdoor wood burner existing prior to the adoption hereof may continue to exist; however, the use
of a nonconforming outdoor wood burner must not be a public nuisance or cause a human health hazard. (Ord. 867, 10-7-2009)
Chapter 9
NOISE
4-9-1: INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare by restricting activities which emit
noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety or welfare of any person or
persons, or precludes their enjoyment of property. A person is guilty of violating this section if that person's actions:
A. Cause a reasonable person or reasonable persons to be annoyed, disturbed, or injured;
B. Endanger a reasonable person's or reasonable persons' comfort, repose, health, peace, safety or welfare; or
C. Preclude a reasonable person or reasonable persons from the enjoyment of their property. (Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
Words and phrases defined in this section have, when used in this chapter, the meaning given below. Any other word or phrase used
in this chapter, and defined in regulations of the Minnesota pollution control agency noise pollution control rules chapter 7030, has
the meaning given in those regulations.
AIR CIRCULATION DEVICE: A mechanism designed and used for the controlled flow of air used in ventilation, cooling, or
conditioning, but not limited to central and window air conditioning units.
LEGAL HOLIDAY: Includes New Year's Day (January 1), Memorial Day (the last Monday in May), Independence Day (July 4), Labor
Day (the first Monday in September), Thanksgiving Day (the fourth Thursday in November), and Christmas Day (December 25).
POWER EQUIPMENT: Includes, and is not limited to, saws, jackhammers, nail drivers, impact wrenches, air compressors, and
domestic power maintenance equipment including, but not limited to, lawn mowers, hedge clippers, grass/weed trimmers, garden
tillers, chain saws, leaf blowers, and wood chippers.
UNNECESSARY OR EXCESSIVE NOISE: Any sound which because of its volume level, duration, and character, annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities within the limits of the city.
(Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
4-9-3: EXCEPTIONS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 106/454
The following uses, activities and other similar events specified below, but not limited to, are exempted from this chapter:
A. Snow removal motorized vehicles, equipment and operations.
B. Equipment and vehicles used for maintenance of public or private golf courses, public and private driving ranges, ice skating rinks
on public property, ski trail grooming on public property.
C. Golf carts for use on public or private golf courses.
D. Emergency backup generators operated during power outages and during routine maintenance operations.
E. Repairs of utility structures, which are damaged, in disrepair, or out of service and such condition poses a clear and immediate
danger to life, health, or significant loss of property.
F. All public projects performed by a governmental agency or their agents.
G. Outdoor shooting ranges, aquatic and outdoor recreation facilities on public property.
H. Trains, airplanes, general road noises or barges.
I. Sirens, whistles, or bells lawfully used by emergency vehicles, or other alarm systems used in case of fire, collision, civil defense,
public safety activity, or imminent danger, and all sounds associated with city responses to emergency events.
J. Reasonable activities conducted on public playgrounds and public or private school/university grounds, which are conducted in
accordance with the manner in which such spaces are generally used, including, but not limited to, school/university athletic and
school/university entertainment events.
K. Chiming of bells or other similar sounds produced by a religious institution, school, or clock or bell tower.
L. Antitheft devices, burglar and fire alarms.
M. Government sponsored activities. Certain activities related to public entertainment, including, but not limited to, outdoor
gatherings, public dances, shows, Fourth Of July fireworks, city sponsored concerts in public parks, licensed carnivals and
parades, and other similar outdoor events, provided that a permit has been obtained from the appropriate permitting authority.
N. Refrigeration units on delivery vehicles.
O. Street sweeping.
P. Agricultural equipment and machinery.
Q. Construction, repair and demolition activities relating to the following:
1. Refueling machinery and equipment.
2. Labor work not requiring the use of power equipment or tools.
3. Construction equipment repair.
4. Surveying.
5. Construction staking.
6. Delivery of equipment and materials.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 107/454
7. Work preapproved by the city. (Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
4-9-4: NOISY GATHERINGS:
A. Hours: Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., no person shall congregate or participate in
any party or gathering of people from which noise emanates of sufficient volume to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet or
repose of other persons, except as allowed by the city.
B. Order To Disperse: A police officer may order all persons present at such party or gathering other than the owners, residents or
tenants to immediately disperse. Any person who refuses to leave after being ordered to do so is guilty of a violation of this
section.
C. Owner's Responsibility:
1. Any owner, tenant or resident of the building or place who has legal authority to control the activities at the building or place
and who knows or has reason to know of the disturbance and fails to immediately take reasonable steps to abate such
disturbances is guilty of violating this section.
2. Any owner, tenant or resident of the building or place who knows or has been notified by the city of a pattern of disturbances
and fails to immediately take reasonable steps to abate such disturbances is guilty of violating this section. (Ord. 923, 12-18-
2013)
4-9-5: AMPLIFIED SOUND:
No person shall use or operate, or permit the use or operation of any electronic sound system, audio equipment or any other device
designed for the production or reproduction of sound, in an unnecessary or excessive manner.
A. It shall be presumed that a violation of this section has occurred when any electronic sound system or audio equipment is
operated in an unnecessary or excessive manner, at a distance of fifty feet (50') or more, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. It shall be presumed that a violation of this section has occurred when any electronic sound
system or audio equipment is operated in an unnecessary or excessive manner, at a distance of one hundred feet (100') or more,
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
B. When noise violating this section is produced by an electronic sound system or audio equipment that is located in or on a vehicle,
the driver of the vehicle and the person who owns or is in control of the vehicle is guilty of the violation. (Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
4-9-6: MOTOR VEHICLES:
A. No person shall use, operate or permit operation of any car, truck, motorcycle, motorboat, all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile,
recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle in such a way that creates an unnecessary acceleration, screeching tires, revving
engines, or excessive noises.
B. No person shall engage in repair or service of any vehicle or other equipment where the noise from that activity is audible beyond
the property lines on which the repair or servicing is being conducted between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. (Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
4-9-7: LOADING AND UNLOADING:
Loading, unloading, opening, closing, or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, refuse, or similar objects
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. shall not create unnecessary or excessive noise. The
driver of the vehicle and the person who owns or is in control of the vehicle is guilty of the violation.
This section does not apply to refuse hauling and/or recycling collection operators licensed with the city. Licensed operators for
refuse hauling and recycling collection must comply with subsection 4-2-8L of this title. (Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
4-9-8: CONSTRUCTION, EXCAVATION, REPAIR AND DEMOLITION ACTIVITIES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 108/454
A. The use of any mechanical or power equipment or tool operated by fuel, battery or electric power in construction, repair or
demolition is allowed between the hours seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., Monday through Friday and
between the hours nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., Saturday.
B. The use of any mechanical or power equipment or tool operated by fuel or electric power between the hours of seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., Monday through Friday and between the hours seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M., Saturday is allowed only if the work is performed inside an enclosed building. Temporary enclosures
comprising of plastic sheeting, tarps or similar materials do not constitute an enclosed building.
C. Construction, repair and demolition activities are prohibited on Sunday and legal holidays.
D. All construction equipment powered by internal combustion engines shall be properly muffled and maintained.
E. Unnecessary idling of internal combustion engines is prohibited.
F. All stationary noise generating construction equipment such as tree grinders, power generators and air compressors are to be
located as far as is practical from existing residences.
G. Use of pile drivers, sources of impulsive sound and jackhammers shall be prohibited on Sundays and legal holidays, except for
emergencies or as approved in advance by the building official.
H. A residential property owner or tenants of residential property may conduct construction activities and power equipment on their
residentially used property on weekdays between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and weekends and legal
holidays from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. (Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
4-9-9: ANIMAL NOISE:
Animal noise is regulated by title 5, chapter 4, "Animal Control", of this code. (Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
Title 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
5-1-1: MINNESOTA CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; PENALTY:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as
provided, all of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and sections of the Minnesota criminal code
(Minnesota statutes chapter 609), as amended, are hereby adopted by the city. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered
violations of this chapter, and each such violation shall subject the violator thereof to penalty provisions under section 1-4-1 of this
code. (2000 Code)
5-1-2: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
A. Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to disturb the peace and quiet of any street, neighborhood,
family of persons, any meeting of persons for a lawful purpose or any public place or commercial establishment, by singing,
shouting, screaming, obscene or profane language or conversation, by swearing, quarreling, scolding, cursing, challenging,
assaulting or offensive or indecent language, or by any device or pretense whatever. (Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
5-1-3: INTERFERENCE WITH PERSONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to annoy or interfere with any person whether on the streets and public
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 109/454
ways, in a private residence or in a public place or commercial establishment by any offensive or disorderly act or language. (1971
Code § 16-18)
5-1-4: LOITERING:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, within the limits of the City, to loiter upon the streets and public ways or in any
public place or commercial establishment in such a manner as to cause annoyance or interference with the use of such streets
and public ways or the operation of any public place or commercial establishment.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, within the limits of the City, to loiter upon the streets and public ways or in any place
or commercial establishment with intent to cause annoyance or interference with the use of such streets and public ways or the
operation of any public place or commercial establishment. (1971 Code § 16-23)
5-1-5: FALSE REPORTS AND ALARMS:
A. Crime Reports: It shall be unlawful for any person to inform a law enforcement officer that a crime has been committed, knowing
that such report is false and intending that the officer shall act in reliance upon such report. (1971 Code § 16-10)
B. Fire Reports: It shall be unlawful for any person to inform a firefighter or law enforcement officer that a fire requiring the services of
a fire department exists knowing that such report is false and intending that the officer, firefighter or fire department shall act in
reliance upon such report. (1971 Code § 16-11; amd. 2000 Code)
5-1-6: SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER SKATES:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to protect the public health and safety arising out of the use of skateboards, roller skates,
rollerblades and roller skis within the City; to regulate the use thereof upon public streets and sidewalks; to prohibit the same from
parking lots and sidewalks on commercially zoned land; and to provide penalties for violations. Nothing in this Section shall be
construed to prohibit the use of a wheelchair or other wheeled devices designed to assist disabled persons on sidewalks or public
or private parking lots.
B. Definitions: For the purposes of this Section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this subsection:
ROLLER SKATES/ROLLERBLADES: A wheeled device which is attached to a shoe or designed to be attached to a shoe, which
is designed to transport a rider.
ROLLER SKIS: A wheeled, nonmotorized device, which may or may not be secured to the rider's feet or shoes, which is
designed to transport a rider.
SKATEBOARD: A wheeled, nonmotorized device, which is not secured to the rider's feet or shoes, which is designed to transport
a rider.
C. Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or propel himself/herself upon a skateboard, roller skates, rollerblades
or roller skis in any of the following circumstances:
1. On any street or roadway within an area zoned for commercial or industrial use.
2. On any sidewalk or public parking lot, or in any private parking lot which is in a commercially or industrially zoned area.
3. In any area within the City while being pushed, pulled or in any way propelled by any motorized vehicle or by a person on a
bicycle.
4. Contrary to the statutory provisions applicable to the operation of bicycles.
5. Upon any roadway where the posted speed limit is in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour.
D. Exemption: The provisions of subsection C2 of this Section shall not prohibit the owner of commercial property from using
commercial premises for skateboards, roller skis or roller skates/rollerblades for his/her own use, or for an organized event
conducted with the owner's permission.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 110/454
E. Violations; Penalty: Any person who violates this Section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1971 Code § 16-24.1; amd. 2000 Code)
5-1-7: WORTHLESS CHECKS:
A. Issuing Prohibited: Whoever issues, within the city, any check or other order for payment of money, which, at the time of issuance,
he/she intends shall not be paid, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to an administrative fee as established by ordinance of
the city council. In addition, restitution may be ordered by the court. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
B. Proof Of Intent:
1. Any of the following is evidence sufficient to sustain a finding that the person, at the time he/she issued the check or other
order for payment of money, intended it should not be paid:
a. Proof that, at the time of issuance, he/she did not have an account with the drawee.
b. Proof that, at the time of issuance, he/she did not have sufficient funds or credit with the drawee and that he/she failed,
within five (5) business days after mailing notice of nonpayment or dishonor, to pay the check or other order.
c. Proof that, when presentment was made within a reasonable time, the issuer did not have sufficient funds or credit with the
drawee, and that he/she failed, within five (5) business days after mailing of notice of nonpayment or dishonor, to pay the
check or other order.
2. Notice of nonpayment or dishonor shall be sent by the payee or holder of the check to the maker or drawer by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the address of record. Refusal by the maker or drawer of the check to accept certified mail notice
shall not constitute a defense that notice was not received. (1971 Code § 16-20; amd. 2000 Code)
C. Proof Of Lack Of Funds Or Credit: If the check or other order for the payment of money has been protested, the notice of protest
thereof is admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest and is evidence sufficient to sustain a finding that there
was a lack of funds or credit with the drawee. (1971 Code § 16-21)
D. Exemptions: This section does not apply to a postdated check or to a check given for a past consideration, except a payroll check.
(1971 Code § 16-22)
5-1-8: FRAUDULENT REFUNDS:
A. Fraudulent Refunds Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to obtain a refund for merchandise from a business establishment by:
1. Knowingly giving a false or fictitious name; or
2. Knowingly giving a false or fictitious address as his/her own; or
3. Knowingly giving the name or address of any other person without that person's knowledge and approval.
B. Notice Requirements: In order for a person to be convicted under this section, a conspicuous notice must have been posted in the
business establishment in the area where refunds are made, advising patrons of the provisions of this section and the penalties
provided. The following is the recommended, but not required notice:
Cottage Grove City Code Section 5-1-8:
Any person who obtains a refund for merchandise from a business establishment by:
1. Knowingly giving a false or fictitious name; or
2. Knowingly giving a false or fictitious address as his/her own; or
3. Knowingly giving the name or address of another person without that person's knowledge and approval;
is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section 1-4-1 of the Cottage Grove City Code.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 111/454
C. Violation; Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 629, 6-5-1996; amd. 2000 Code)
5-1-9: TRESPASSING TO CONSUME ALCOHOL OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES:
A. Prohibitions:
1. No person shall enter uninvited onto the land of another to consume alcohol or controlled substances.
2. No person shall bring a motor vehicle onto the land of another without invitation to facilitate the consumption of alcohol or
controlled substances on that land. (1971 Code § 16-25.1)
B. Determination Of Purpose: To determine whether a person entered onto the land of another to consume alcohol or controlled
substances or brought an automobile to facilitate consumption of alcohol or controlled substances, factors to be considered shall
include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Time of day;
2. Presence of containers intended to contain or containing alcohol;
3. Presence of equipment used to dispense alcoholic beverages;
4. Presence of paraphernalia containing identifiable residues of a controlled substance;
5. Noise level;
6. Lighting;
7. Identified physiological responses; and
8. Conduct of persons in the presence of a peace officer. (1971 Code § 16-25.2)
C. Violations: A person who violates subsection A of this Section is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1971 Code § 16-25.3)
D. Consent By Landowner As Defense; Presumptions From Consent:
1. Express consent, endorsement or ratification by a landowner of an entry onto land is an absolute defense to charges under
subsection A of this Section.
2. A landowner who expressly consents to, endorses or ratifies an entry onto land shall not be presumed to be in control of the
persons gathered on land, nor is the landowner presumed to have knowledge of an unlawful act merely because of the express
consent, endorsement or ratification. (1971 Code § 16-25.4)
5-1-10: RESISTING, OFFENDING, STRIKING OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful within the City for any person to do any of the following acts:
A. Use vulgar, obscene, disrespectful, offensive, insulting language or actions towards any peace officer while in the official
performance of his/her duty.
B. Assault, beat or strike any peace officer while in the official performance of his/her duty.
C. Resist, delay or obstruct any peace officer while discharging or attempting to discharge his/her official duty.
D. Refuse to identify himself/herself and display appropriate identification when requested to do so by any peace officer while in the
official performance of his/her duty.
E. Knowingly give a false name or any false information or conceal any material facts from a peace officer while in the official
performance of his/her duty. (1971 Code § 16-24; amd. 2000 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 112/454
5-1-11: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the possession, manufacture, advertisement and delivery of drug
paraphernalia and thereby deter the use of controlled substances in the City. This Section is not intended to allow what the
Minnesota Statutes prohibit or to prohibit what the Minnesota Statutes expressly allow. It is intended to prevent drug abuse. (1971
Code § 16-9.1)
B. Definition: For the purposes of this Section, "drug paraphernalia" shall mean all equipment, products and materials of any kind
which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
Minnesota Statutes or this Code. It includes, but is not limited to:
1. Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
2. Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;
3. Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance;
4. Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity
of controlled substances;
5. Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
6. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or
designed for use in cutting controlled substances;
7. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise
cleaning or refining marijuana;
8. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances;
9. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
10. Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
11. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
substances into the human body; and
12. Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish
or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
a. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls.
b. Water pipes.
c. Carburetion tubes and devices.
d. Smoking and carburetion masks.
e. Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material such as a marijuana cigarette which has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand.
f. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
g. Chamber pipes.
h. Carburetor pipes.
i. Electric pipes.
j. Air-pipes.
k. Chillums.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 113/454
l. Bongs.
m. Ice pipes or chillers. (1971 Code § 16-9.2)
C. Evidence: In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all
other logically relevant factors, the following:
1. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;
2. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or anyone in control of the object under State or Federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
3. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this Section;
4. The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
5. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
6. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or anyone in control of the object to deliver it to a person who he/she
knows, or should reasonably know, intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of this Code; the innocence of an owner or
anyone in control of the object as to a direct violation of this Code should not prevent a finding that the object is intended for
use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
7. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;
8. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;
9. National and local advertising concerning its use;
10. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
11. Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as
a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
12. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
13. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and
14. Expert testimony concerning its use. (1971 Code § 16-9.3; amd. 2000 Code)
D. Offenses:
1. Possession: It is unlawful for any person to use or to possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this
Section.
2. Manufacture Or Delivery: It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver or manufacture with intent to
deliver drug paraphernalia knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this
Section.
3. Offenses Involving Minors: Any person eighteen (18) years of age or over who violates subsection D1 of this Section by
delivering drug paraphernalia, and such delivery is to a person who is under eighteen (18) years of age and at least three (3)
years his/her junior, shall also be violating this subsection D3 as well as subsection D1 of this Section.
4. Advertisement: It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any
advertisement knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in
whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. (1971 Code § 16-9.4;
amd. 2000 Code)
E. Civil Forfeiture: All "drug paraphernalia" as defined by subsection B of this Section is subject to forfeiture, subject to the provisions
set forth in Minnesota Statutes section 609.5311 et seq., in the same manner as if such forfeiture were pursuant to said
Minnesota Statutes section 609.5311 et seq. (1971 Code § 16-9.5; amd. 2000 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 114/454
Chapter 2
MINORS
5-2-1: JUVENILE CURFEW:
A. Findings And Purpose:
1. In recent years, there has been a significant increase in juvenile victimization and crime. At the same time, the crimes
committed by and against juveniles have become more violent. A significant percentage of juvenile crime occurs during curfew
hours.
2. Because of their lack of maturity and experience, juveniles are particularly susceptible to becoming victims of older
perpetrators. The younger a person is, the more likely he or she is to be a victim of crime.
3. While parents have the primary responsibility to provide for the safety and welfare of juveniles, Cottage Grove also has a
substantial interest in the safety and welfare of juveniles. Moreover, Cottage Grove has an interest in preventing juvenile crime,
promoting parental supervision, and providing for the well-being of the general public.
4. A City-wide curfew will reduce juvenile victimization and crime and will advance public safety, health, and general welfare.
B. Definitions:
EMERGENCY: A circumstance or combination of circumstances requiring immediate action to prevent property damage,
serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment.
GUARDIAN: An adult appointed pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 525.6155 or 525.6165 who has the powers and
responsibilities of a parent as defined by Minnesota Statutes section 525.619.
JUVENILE: A person under the age of seventeen (17). The term does not include persons under seventeen (17) who are
married or have been legally emancipated.
PARENT: Birth parents, adoptive parents, and stepparents.
PROPRIETOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any
establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited
to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and
shops.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT: A person over the age of eighteen (18) specifically authorized by law or by a parent or guardian to
have custody and control of a juvenile.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent
disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any body part or organ.
C. Prohibited Acts:
1. It is unlawful for a juvenile under the age of twelve (12) to be present in any public place or establishment within Cottage
Grove:
a. Any time between nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and five o'clock
(5:00) A.M. of the following day.
b. Any time between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any Friday or Saturday and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on the following day.
2. It is unlawful for a juvenile, from ages twelve (12) through fourteen (14), to be present in any public place or establishment
within Cottage Grove:
a. Any time between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and five o'clock
(5:00) A.M. of the following day.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 115/454
b. Any time between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any Friday or Saturday and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on any Saturday or
Sunday of the following day.
3. It is unlawful for a juvenile, ages fifteen (15) and sixteen (16), to be present in any public place or establishment within Cottage
Grove:
a. Any time between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and five o'clock
(5:00) A.M. of the following day.
b. Any time between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on any Saturday or Sunday.
4. It is unlawful for a parent or guardian of a juvenile knowingly, or through negligent supervision, to permit the juvenile to be in
any public place or establishment within Cottage Grove during the hours prohibited in subsection C1, C2 or C3 of this Section.
5. It is unlawful for a proprietor of an establishment within Cottage Grove to knowingly permit a juvenile to remain in the
establishment or on the establishment's property during the hours prohibited in subsection C1, C2 or C3 of this Section.
If the proprietor is not present at the time of the curfew violation, the responding officer shall leave written notice of the violation
with an employee of the establishment. A copy of the written notice shall be served upon the establishment's proprietor
personally or by certified mail.
D. Defenses:
1. Juveniles: It is an affirmative defense for a juvenile to prove that:
a. The juvenile was accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other responsible adult.
b. The juvenile was engaged in a lawful employment activity or was going to or returning home from his or her place of
employment.
c. The juvenile was involved in an emergency situation.
d. The juvenile was going to, attending, or returning home from an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
sponsored and/or supervised by a public entity or a civic organization.
e. The juvenile was on an errand at the direction of a parent or guardian.
f. The juvenile was exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution or article 1 of the Constitution
of the State of Minnesota.
g. The juvenile was engaged in interstate travel.
h. The juvenile was on the public right of way, boulevard or sidewalk abutting the property containing the juvenile's residence or
abutting the neighboring property, structure, or residence.
2. It is an affirmative defense for a proprietor of an establishment to prove that:
a. The proprietor or employee reasonably and in good faith relied upon a juvenile's representations of proof of age. Proof of
age may be established pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 340A.503, subdivision 6, or other verifiable means,
including, but not limited to, school identification cards and birth certificates.
b. The proprietor or employee promptly notified the responsible police agency that a juvenile was present on the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours.
E. Violation; Penalty:
1. Violation of subsection C1, C2 or C3 of this Section will be prosecuted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 260B.235 and
will be subject to the penalties therein.
2. Violation of subsection C4 or C5 of this Section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 647, 5-21-1997; amd. 2000 Code)
F. Authority To Arrest: Any member of the police force is authorized to arrest, with or without warrant any person or persons observed
to be violating the provisions of this Section, and he/she shall notify, as soon as reasonably possible, the parents, guardian or
person having legal custody of any minor so arrested. (1971 Code § 16-8; amd. 2000 Code)
G. Application Of Other Laws: This Section shall not be construed as permitting the presence at any time of any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years in any place where his/her presence is now prohibited by an existing law or ordinance. (1971 Code
§ 16-7; amd. 2000 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 116/454
H. Annual Review: The City Council shall conduct annual reviews of this Section to assess the effectiveness of and continuing need
for a juvenile curfew. Prior to the annual review, the Director of Public Safety, in cooperation with the City Attorney, shall prepare
and submit a report to the City Council evaluating violations of this Section and juvenile crime and victimization during the
preceding year. (Ord. 647, 5-21-1997)
Chapter 3
WEAPONS
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
AMMUNITION: Any projectile, bullet or other mass prepared for insertion in and propulsion from any firearm.
ASSAULT WEAPON: Any weapon other than a firearm or military type weapon having the personal assault characteristics of any
sap, numchucks, blackjack, slungshot, slingshot, sand club, chain club, metal knuckles, shurikens or yawara stick.
BB GUN/AIR GUN: Any weapon from which is propelled any missile, projectile or other mass, measuring eighteen-hundredths inch
(0.18") or less in diameter, through a barrel by means of gas or air.
BOW AND ARROW: Any device which is made of a strip of flexible material (such as, but not limited to, wood) with a cord
connecting the two (2) ends and holding the strip bent and that is used to propel an arrow, which usually has a slender shaft, a
pointed head and feathers at the butt.
BOW AND ARROW TARGET RANGE: Any area so designated by the director of public safety.
CONCEALED MANNER: Having the object on the person in such a manner that it is not completely visible to any other person.
Having a knife in a sheath shall be considered as having the knife concealed, irrespective of position of the sheath on the person.
FIREARM: Any weapon from which is propelled any missile, projectile, bullet or other mass through a barrel by means of explosives
or gas or air, excluding devices used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges, explosive rivets or similar industrial apparatus and
instruments or equipment when used by licensed physicians or veterinarians in the course and scope of their professions; provided,
that a "handgun" or "firearm" does not include a device firing or ejecting a shot measuring eighteen-hundredths inch (0.18") or less in
diameter and commonly known as a BB gun, a scuba gun, a stud gun or nail gun used in the construction industry or children's pop
guns or toys, nor does either term include an "antique firearm," which means any firearm, including any pistol, with a matchlock,
flintlock, percussion cap or similar type of ignition system, manufactured before 1899, and any replica of any firearm or handgun
described herein if such replica is not designed or redesigned, made or remade or intended to fire conventional rimfire or
conventional centerfire ammunition which is not readily available in the ordinary channels of commercial trade.
HANDGUN: Any firearm having a barrel of less than twelve inches (12") in length and capable of being concealed on the person.
KNIFE: Any dirk, dagger, stiletto, switchblade knife, spring blade knife, push button knife, folding knife with a blade in excess of four
inches (4"), machete, bayonet or any fixed bladed knife carried in a concealed manner or within reach of any person in a motor
vehicle.
LANDOWNER: Any person, group, firm or corporation owning, leasing or legally controlling any lands within the city.
MILITARY TYPE WEAPON: Any destructive device, and the ammunition designed only for such device, having firepower, mass,
explosive or incendiary characteristics of weapons such as cannons having a bore diameter larger than one-half inch (1/2"),
bazookas, machine guns, fully automatic weapons, mortars, grenades or Molotov cocktails, but not including shotguns, rifles, pistols
or revolvers.
NUNCHUCKS: Any device constructed of two (2) solid cylindrical objects joined together on one end by a chain, rope, thong or other
such material.
OFFICIALLY RECOGNIZED TRAINING OR COMPETITION: All training or competitions held under the sponsorship of a bona fide
target shooting or sportsperson's club or bona fide educational program.
SECURED CONTAINER: A locked case legibly marked "weapon", having no mechanical features designed for immediate weapons
removal or use and containing no other nonrelated objects; except, that a "secured container" for a rifle, shotgun or bow and arrow
may mean a weapon case, such as leather, fiber, canvas or plastic, secured with a zipper, clasp, buckle or ties.
SHURIKEN: Any metal device which has the shape of a multiple pointed star, each point being sharpened, and primarily designed to
be thrown.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 117/454
SINGLE PROJECTILE: Any single projectile, whether contained in a metallic, paper, plastic or other cartridge, including any method
of loading muzzleloader which results in a single projectile being discharged.
WRITTEN PERMISSION: A writing that includes the following: the full name, address, date of birth and signature of the person
authorized to hunt or shoot; express authorization to hunt or shoot on identified lands; the full name, address and signature of the
landowner.
YAWARA STICK: Any cylindrically shaped object which has spheres on both ends and measures less than ten inches (10") in length.
(1971 Code § 27-2; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 777, 8-10-2005)
5-3-2: POSSESSION, CARRYING AND TRANSPORTING WEAPONS:
A. Possession Of Certain Weapons Prohibited: No person, except military personnel or peace officers engaged in the course of their
duties, shall keep, carry or have in his/her possession, on any public street or while trespassing upon the premises of another or
in a public place, any military type weapon, assault weapon, knife or stolen weapon, unless the person holds a permit to possess
the same as collector's items or for use in officially recognized training or competition. (1971 Code § 27-3; amd. 2000 Code)
B. Firearms: No person shall carry or possess any firearm within the city, except as provided for the purpose of taking wild game in
compliance with section 5-3-6 of this chapter or upon an authorized firing range. Except for a pistol or revolver carried in
compliance with Minnesota statutes sections 624.714 and 624.715, it is unlawful to transport in any manner whatever, whether by
person or by vehicle of any type, whether motorized or not, any firearm, including a muzzleloading firearm, unless: 1) the firearm
is unloaded in both barrels and magazine and contained in a gun case expressly made for that purpose which is fully enclosed by
being zipped, snapped, buckled, tied or otherwise fastened, with no portion of the firearm exposed, or 2) the firearm is unloaded
and in the trunk of a car with the trunk door closed. A muzzleloading firearm with a flintlock ignition is fully unloaded if it has no
priming powder in any pan, and a muzzleloading firearm with percussion ignition is fully unloaded if it has no percussion cap on a
nipple.
C. Bows And Arrows: No person shall transport a bow and arrow in any manner whatever, whether by person or by vehicle of any
type, whether motorized or not, unless: 1) unstrung, 2) completely contained in a case, or 3) contained in the trunk of the car with
the trunk door closed.
D. Other Dangerous Weapons: No person shall carry or possess any other dangerous weapon except as allowed by this chapter. No
person shall transport any dangerous weapon in any manner whatever, whether by person or by vehicle of any type, whether
motorized or not, unless completely contained in a secured container or confined in the trunk of the car with the trunk door closed.
(1971 Code § 27-12)
5-3-3: DISCHARGE RESTRICTED:
A. Firearm Or BB Gun/Air Gun: No person shall fire or discharge any firearm or BB gun/air gun within the city, except as provided for
the purpose of taking wild game as defined in section 5-3-6 of this chapter or upon an authorized firing range.
B. Bow And Arrow: No person shall discharge any bow and arrow within the city, except as provided for the purpose of taking wild
game as defined in section 5-3-6 of this chapter or upon an authorized bow and arrow target range. (1971 Code § 27-4)
5-3-4: FIREARMS:
A. Firing Ranges: The terms of this section shall not prohibit the possession or discharge of firearms upon a firing range, either
indoor or outdoor, provided such range is properly equipped and supervised to ensure reasonable safety as determined by the
certificate of the director of public safety or pursuant to licensing ordinances enacted for such ranges. No firing range shall be
constructed without prior investigation by the department of public safety and approval of the city council. (1971 Code § 27-5)
B. Use Within Home Or For Defense: Nothing in this section shall be construed to embrace the possession of a firearm within the
home or the discharge of the same when done in the lawful defense of person, property or family. (1971 Code § 27-6)
C. Reckless Use Prohibited: No person shall do any of the following:
1. Recklessly handle or use a firearm, other dangerous weapon or explosive so as to endanger the safety of another.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 118/454
2. Intentionally point a firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another. (1971 Code § 27-7)
D. Minors:
1. Possession: No minor under the age of twelve (12) years shall handle or have in his/her possession or under his/her control,
except while accompanied by or under the immediate supervision of his/her parent or guardian, any firearm or air gun of any
kind for any purpose. (1971 Code § 27-8; amd. 2000 Code)
2. Furnishing To Minors: No person shall:
a. Without the parent's or guardian's consent, furnish a child under fourteen (14) years of age or, as a parent or guardian,
permit such child to handle or use outside of the parent's or guardian's presence, a firearm or air gun of any kind, or any
ammunition or explosive.
b. Furnish a minor under eighteen (18) years of age with a firearm, air gun, ammunition or explosive without the written consent
of his/her parent or guardian or the department of public safety. (1971 Code § 27-9; amd. 2000 Code)
E. Silencers Prohibited: No person shall possess, transfer or sell any device designed to silence or muffle the discharge of a firearm.
(1971 Code § 27-10)
5-3-5: CONCEALED HANDGUNS; LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
The director of public safety, in compliance with Minnesota statutes section 624.714, may grant a license to carry a concealed
handgun, and he/she may revoke any such license with just cause. Application for such license shall be made to the department of
public safety in writing, and such license, when issued, shall be valid for a period of one year. (1971 Code § 27-11; amd. 2000 Code)
5-3-6: HUNTING:
A. Use Of Weapons For Hunting:
1. Firearms:
a. The landowner of land zoned AG-1 or AG-2, consisting of forty (40) contiguous acres or more, persons while accompanied
by the landowner, or persons in possession of written permission from the landowner of land zoned AG-1 or AG-2 of forty
(40) contiguous acres or more may discharge firearms in hunting wild game in accordance with Minnesota statutes chapter
97B upon the landowner's land.
b. Written permission from the landowner must be in the possession of the hunter at the time of hunting along with adequate
identification.
c. No person shall take any wild game with any firearms on any land zoned AG-1 or AG-2 of forty (40) contiguous acres or
more, or on any public right of way, under the following circumstances:
(1) In that portion of the city lying west of Keats Avenue, southerly of Military Road, and northerly of U.S. Highways 61 and
10.
(2) In that portion of the city lying south and west of U.S. Highways 61 and 10, except for the northwest and southwest halves
of section 28.
(3) Within five hundred feet (500') of any building occupied by any human or livestock, except with the written permission of
the landowner and occupant of such premises.
(4) Within five hundred feet (500') of any stockade or corral containing livestock.
(5) Within five hundred feet (500') of any highway or roadway.
d. All firearms used for the taking of wild game shall be limited to shotguns, .22 caliber rifles or long guns of less than .22
caliber.
e. Persons discharging firearms while hunting in accordance with Cottage Grove ordinances and state statute shall not let any
projectiles pass beyond the boundary of the land they are permitted to hunt.
f. Persons discharging single projectiles from firearms while hunting in accordance with Cottage Grove ordinances and state
statute must hunt from an elevated stand of at least six feet (6') or more.
2. Archery Hunting:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 119/454
a. The landowner of land zoned AG-1 or AG-2 or R-1 consisting of a minimum of five (5) contiguous acres, or persons with
written permission from the landowner of land zoned AG-1, AG-2 or R-1 consisting of a minimum of five (5) contiguous acres
may, upon the land of the landowner, discharge a bow and arrow in hunting wild game in accordance with Minnesota statutes
chapter 97B, and all subsequent amendments, and the ordinances of the city.
b. Written permission from the landowner must be in the possession of the hunter at the time of hunting along with adequate
identification.
c. No person shall take any wild game with any bow and arrow on any land zoned AG-1, AG-2 or R-1 under the following
circumstances:
(1) Within three hundred feet (300') of any property with a zoning classification other than AG-1, AG-2 or R-1.
(2) Within three hundred feet (300') of any public park land or public trail.
(3) Within three hundred feet (300') of any public right of way.
(4) Within three hundred feet (300') of any land or building not owned by the landowner.
(5) Any circumstance in which it is foreseeable that the safety of another person would be endangered.
d. Persons hunting in accordance with Cottage Grove ordinances and state statute shall not let any arrow pass beyond the
boundary of the land they are permitted to hunt.
e. Persons hunting in accordance with Cottage Grove ordinances and state statute must hunt from an elevated stand of at least
six feet (6') or more. (Ord. 777, 8-10-2005)
3. Rodent Control: The director of public safety or his/her designee, upon the showing of a need, may grant exceptions through a
permit to this chapter for the purposes of rodent control on land zoned AG-1, AG-2 or R-1 and R-2. All weapons used in the
control of rodents shall conform to regulations established in this chapter. (1971 Code § 27-15; amd. 2000 Code)
4. Responsibility Of Landowner: The landowner shall be responsible for the conduct of any hunter on land for which he/she has
granted permission to hunt. (1971 Code § 27-15; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 777, 8-10-2005)
5. Enforcement1:
a. Authority Of Peace Officers: A peace officer is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce all requirements of this
subsection A and related state statutes.
b. Seizure, Confiscation And Disposal Of Game And Property: A peace officer is hereby authorized and empowered to seize
and confiscate any wild game taken in violation of this subsection A and to seize, confiscate and dispose of all guns,
firearms, bows and arrows, boats or vehicles used by the owner or any other person with his/her knowledge in unlawfully
taking or transporting such wild game in violation of this subsection A. Articles which have no lawful use may be summarily
destroyed. Upon conclusion of the prosecution of any case, the guns, firearms, bows and arrows, boats or vehicles seized
pursuant to this subsection shall be returned to the lawful owner thereof upon payment to the city of all costs incurred by the
city in the seizure, to include towing fees and storage or impound fees. In the event the lawful owner cannot be determined or
located, the property shall be disposed of in compliance with court order. (1971 Code § 27-15; amd. 2000 Code)
B. Excess Population; Special Hunting Areas:
1. Excess Population And Special Hunting Areas Determined: The department of public safety shall determine, after consultation
with the department of natural resources, when there is an excess population of wild game or when herd control is required.
Upon such determination, the department of public safety shall designate additional area(s) for hunting of wild game, which
hunting shall be in accordance with Minnesota statutes chapter 97B. The resolution shall define the area(s) which may be
hunted. Such resolution shall be effective for one season. (1971 Code § 27-16)
C. Designated Hunting Areas:
1. This chapter along with the boundaries will be reviewed annually by the public services committee. (Ord. 968, 9-7-2016)
2. Annually before the hunting season commences, the city council will cause to be published a map designating the areas within
the city where hunting is allowed. (Ord. 777, 8-10-2005)
5-3-7: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
A. Nothing in this chapter prohibits the possession of the articles mentioned by museums or collectors of art or for other lawful
purpose of public exhibition.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 120/454
B. This chapter shall not apply to public law enforcement officers or members of the armed services of either the United States or the
state in the lawful performance of their duties. (1971 Code § 27-1)
5-3-8: ENFORCEMENT2:
A. Authority Of Peace Officers: A peace officer is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce all of the requirements of this chapter
and related state statutes. (1971 Code § 27-13)
B. Seizure, Confiscation And Disposal Of Weapons: A peace officer is hereby authorized and empowered to seize and confiscate
and dispose of any weapons, firearms, guns, bows and arrows possessed or used in violation of this chapter. Articles which have
no lawful use may be summarily destroyed. All other articles confiscated may be retained for use by the police division or sold at
public auction. (1971 Code § 27-14; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER OR ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY: A police officer, community service officer, or other person, or
their respective departments, that is responsible for animal control operations in the City.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and control of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord,
chain, or otherwise restrained or confined.
CARETAKER: Any person or persons, firm, association, or corporation possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in or
having care, custody or control of a domestic or wild animal on behalf of the domestic or wild animal's owner.
CAT: Any feline animal, male or female, whole, neutered or spayed.
COOP: The enclosed structure for keeping or housing fowl or poultry permitted by this chapter.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that has:
A. Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human being on public or private property;
B. Killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property; or
C. Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog
aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
DESTRUCTION COSTS: The costs attributed to the proper and humane destruction of a dog pursuant to Minnesota Statutes and
this chapter.
DISEASED ANIMAL: An animal shall be considered diseased if it has any communicable disease or is suspected by a qualified
person of having any communicable disease. A rabid animal shall be one having rabies or suspected by a qualified person as having
rabies. A rabid animal is a diseased animal.
DOG: Any canine animal, male or female, whole, neutered or spayed.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: Any animal commonly accepted as a domesticated household pet. Unless otherwise defined, such animals
shall include dogs, cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits, fish, nonpoisonous, nonvenomous, and
nonconstricting reptiles or amphibians, and other similar animals.
FOWL: A bird, such as a duck, goose, turkey, or pheasant that is used as food or hunted as game.
GREAT BODILY HARM: Bodily injury which creates a high probability of death, or which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or
which causes a permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ or other serious bodily
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 121/454
harm.
HEN: Female fowl or poultry.
MAINTENANCE COSTS: Any costs incurred as a result of seizing an animal for impoundment or observation, including, but not
limited to, the capturing, impounding, keeping, treating, examining, securing, confining, feeding, boarding or maintaining seized
animals, whether these services are provided by the City or a City contractor.
OWNER: Any person or persons, firm, association, or organization or department possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest
in or having care, custody or control of a domestic animal.
POLICE DOG: A dog that is trained specifically to assist police personnel with their work. Work includes, but is not limited to, tracking
and apprehending suspects, tracking of missing persons, and detecting controlled substances.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that: a) when unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal on public or
private property; b) when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person, including a person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks,
or any public or private property, other than the dog owner's property, in an apparent attitude of attack; or c) has a known propensity,
tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals.
POULTRY: Domestic fowls, such as chickens, turkeys, ducks, or geese, raised for meat or eggs.
PROPER ENCLOSURE: Securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the
animal from escaping and providing protection from the elements for the animal. A proper enclosure does not include a porch, patio,
or any part of a house, garage, or other structure that would allow the animal to exit of its own volition, or any house or structure in
which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the only obstacles that prevent the animal from exiting. The
enclosure must not allow the egress of the animal in any manner without human assistance. A "proper enclosure" must meet the
following minimum specifications:
A. The floor must have a minimum overall area of thirty two (32) square feet.
B. The side walls must have a minimum height of five feet (5') and be constructed of 11-gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the
wire may not exceed two inches (2"). Support posts must be one and one-fourth inch (11/4") diameter or larger steel pipe buried
into the ground eighteen inches (18") or more. When a concrete floor is not provided, the side walls must be buried a minimum
of eighteen inches (18") in the ground.
C. A cover over the entire pen or kennel must be provided. The cover must be constructed of the same gauge wire or heavier as
the side walls and must have no openings in the wire greater than two inches (2").
D. An entrance/exit gate must be provided and be constructed of the same material as the side walls and must have no openings
in the wire greater than two inches (2"). The gate must be equipped with a device capable of being locked and must be locked
at all times when the animal is in the enclosure.
PROVOCATION: An act that an adult could reasonably expect may cause a dog to attack or bite.
ROOSTER: Male fowl or poultry.
RUN: A fully enclosed and covered area attached to a coop where the fowl or poultry can roam.
RUNNING AT LARGE OR RUN AT LARGE: An animal is running at large if it:
A. Is not effectively contained within a fenced area; or
B. Is on any unfenced area or lot abutting a street, alley, public park, public place or upon any other private land without being
effectively restrained by chain, leash or an electronic pet containment device from moving beyond such unfenced area or lot; or
C. Is on any street, public park, school grounds or public place without being effectively restrained by chain or leash, except for a
dog within the boundaries of the public off leash dog park and the owner has verbal or physical command over the dog.
SERVICE ANIMAL: Consistent with the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), the definition of a service animal is any dog that is
individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including, but not limited to, guiding
individuals with impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders or sounds, providing minimal protection or
rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, alerting and protecting a person who is having a seizure, reminding a person with mental illness to
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 122/454
take prescribed medications, calming a person with post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) during an anxiety attack, or performing
other duties. The work or task a dog has been trained to provide must be directly related to the person's disability. Animals whose
function is to provide comfort or emotional support are not service animals under this chapter.
SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM: Bodily injury that involves a temporary but substantial disfigurement, or that causes a temporary but
substantial loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ or that causes a fracture of any bodily member.
UNPROVOKED: The condition in which the dog is not purposefully motivated or prompted.
VACCINATION AGAINST RABIES: The inoculation of a dog or cat with a rabies vaccine.
WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMAL: A mammal, bird, amphibian, reptile not native to the State, or may be native to the State but is not
usually domesticated or a species that, due to its size, wild nature or poisonous venom, is dangerous to humans. By way of example,
but not limited to, the term includes the following:
A. Large cats, such as jaguars, cougars, lions, tigers (excluding domestic house cats);
B. Skunks, raccoons or other types of nuisance animals;
C. Bears;
D. Members of the family Canidae, such as wolves, fox, coyote, dingoes and jackals, including cross-breeds (excluding domestic
dogs);
E. Primates, such as monkeys, gorillas, baboons;
F. Poisonous snakes, constrictors;
G. Carnivorous fish, such as piranhas, northern snakeheads;
H. Pot-bellied pigs;
I. Pigeons, and dove, whether or not they are trained; or
J. Any animal or species that is wild by nature or prohibited by Minnesota or Federal law. (Ord. 993, 3-21-2018)
5-4-2: RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to permit a domestic animal or illegal wild or exotic animal to run at large, whether or not the
owner is present, within the limits of the City. Dogs or cats must be continuously under restraint on a leash and accompanied by a
person reasonably able and effectively restraining the dog or cat. The City may charge the owner for all costs incurred in capturing,
impounding and maintaining of an animal running at large. (Ord. 993, 3-21-2018)
5-4-3: NUISANCES:
A. Noisy Animals: No person shall keep or harbor an animal which habitually barks, cries or creates a noise in a manner which
disturbs the peace and quiet of any street, neighborhood or public place at any time of day or night. "Habitual barking" shall be
defined as barking for repeated intervals of at least three (3) minutes with less than one minute of interruption and audible off the
owner's or caretaker's premises.
B. Damage To Property: No person having the custody or control of a domestic animal shall permit the animal to damage any lawn,
garden or other property, public or private, or to micturate or defecate on private property without the consent of the owner or
possessor of the property.
C. Removal Of Animal Waste Required: The owner or keeper of any animal shall be responsible for the immediate removal and
proper disposal of any feces deposited by such animal on any property, public or private, not owned or exclusively occupied by
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 123/454
the owner or keeper. The owner or keeper of any animal shall also be responsible for the periodic removal and proper disposal of
feces deposited by such animal on property owned or exclusively occupied by such owner or keeper so as to prevent the creation
of a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter.
D. Attacks Unlawful: Unless exempted by Minnesota Statutes or this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any owner's or caretaker's
domestic or wild animal to inflict great bodily harm or substantial bodily harm to any person or any animal regardless of whether
the owner or caretaker is present.
E. Animals Presenting Imminent Danger: If an animal control officer or police officer has reason to believe that an animal presents an
immediate danger to the health and safety of any person or the animal is in the process of attacking any person, the officer may
immediately destroy the animal in a proper and humane manner. In the alternative, the officer may seize the animal and confine
the animal as set forth in subsection 5-4-8F of this chapter and, as applicable, Minnesota Statutes section 35.541. The owner of
the animal presenting an imminent danger is responsible for all destruction and maintenance fees. (Ord. 993, 3-21-2018)
5-4-4: DOGS AND CATS:
A. Licensing Provisions:
1. Licenses Required: No person may own, harbor, keep or have custody of a dog or cat over six (6) months of age within the City
unless a current license for the dog or cat has been obtained from the City.
2. Issuance Of License; Fee:
a. Issuance Of License And Fee: The licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk for a fee established by Council from time to
time.
b. Payment Of Fee; Late Fee: It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog or cat to pay the license fee imposed in this
subsection when a dog or cat attains the age of six (6) months of age, upon acquiring ownership of a dog or cat, upon
establishing residence in the City, and before January 1 of each year. A late fee, as determined by Council, will be assessed
on all licenses obtained after January 1 of each year for dogs or cats owned prior to that date. License fees are
nonrefundable.
c. Exemptions From Fee: Service dogs shall be exempt from the license fee upon providing proof of certification of training as a
service dog. Dogs used in police or rescue activities by or with the permission of the City are exempt from the license fee.
3. Application For License: The owner of a dog or cat, at the time of application, shall provide his or her name and address, the
name, breed, color, sex of the dog or cat, proof of rabies vaccination, and statement of spaying or neutering. No license shall
be granted for a dog or cat that has not been vaccinated against rabies, as provided in this section.
4. Licenses Period: Licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis with an expiration date of December 31. The owner of a
dog or cat shall have the option to apply for a one year, two (2) year, or three (3) year license, depending on the expiration date
of the rabies vaccination.
5. Tags:
a. Issuance: The Police Department shall issue one appropriate tag to the owner upon payment of the fee.
b. Tag Fastened To Collar: The current license tag from the City shall be securely attached to the collar or harness of a dog or
cat whenever the dog or cat is outdoors, whether on or off the owner's property.
c. Duplicate Tags: In case any dog or cat tag is lost, a duplicate may be issued upon presentation of a receipt showing the
payment of the license fee for the current year. A fee in such amount as provided by Council is required for each such
duplicate tag.
d. Dangerous Dogs: A dangerous dog shall also have a standardized tag identifying the dog as dangerous and containing a
dangerous dog symbol.
e. Potentially Dangerous Dogs: A potentially dangerous dog shall also have a standardized tag identifying the dog as
potentially dangerous.
6. Certification Of Rabies Vaccination: Every application for a license shall be accompanied by a certificate from a licensed
veterinarian showing that the dog or cat to be licensed has been given a vaccination against rabies in compliance with
subsection B of this section.
7. Statement Of Neutering Or Spaying: An applicant for a license for a neutered male or for a spayed female dog or cat shall
present a statement from a licensed veterinarian indicating that the dog or cat has been neutered or spayed and giving the date
of the operation.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 124/454
8. Registration Fee For Dangerous Dogs: In addition to the fee set forth above, the owner of a dangerous dog shall pay a
registration fee. The fee, as established by Council, shall be paid on or before January 1 of each year.
9. Nontransferability Of License Or Tag: No license or license tag shall be transferable to another dog or cat.
10. License Prohibited To Minors: No license may be issued to an applicant under the age of eighteen (18) years.
11. Exemptions From Licensing Provisions: Cats may be used to control the rodent population on a farm and to facilitate the
efficient operation of farming. For these reasons only, the owners of properties in excess of ten (10) acres in either the AG-1 or
AG-2 Zoning District that have farming operations shall be exempt from the licensing requirements for cats under this
subsection A except that all farm cats must be vaccinated against rabies as described in subsection B of this section.
B. Rabies Control:
1. Vaccination Of Dogs And Cats:
a. Vaccinations Required:
(1) Every dog or cat shall be vaccinated against rabies, and no license, except as provided by this chapter, shall be granted
to a dog or cat which has not been so vaccinated. Dogs and cats shall be vaccinated within thirty (30) days after they
reach the age of six (6) months.
(2) Unvaccinated dogs or cats acquired or moved into the City must be vaccinated within thirty (30) days of purchase or
arrival, unless under six (6) months of age as specified.
b. Revaccination: Every dog or cat shall be vaccinated one year after initial vaccination, and thereafter at three (3) year periods,
with modified live virus vaccines or inactivated vaccines having a three (3) year duration, or annually if any other shorter
duration vaccine is used.
c. Vaccinator; Certificate And Tag:
(1) Vaccination is to be performed by a doctor qualified to practice veterinary medicine in the State or in the state in which the
dog or cat is vaccinated.
(2) The owner shall provide the City with a copy of the rabies certificate from the veterinarian as proof of vaccination at the
time of license application.
(3) The current vaccination tag from the veterinarian shall be securely attached to the collar or harness of a dog or cat
whenever the dog or cat is outdoors, whether on or off the owner's property.
d. Aged Or Ill Dogs Or Cats: When, by reason of age or other temporary physical disability, vaccination is impossible or harmful
to the dog or cat, the Police Department may, on presentation of a certificate of a veterinarian establishing such disability,
issue a license for such dog or cat, subject to the condition that the certificate of vaccination be obtained and presented to
the City after such period of disability ceases.
e. Responsibility And Liability Of Owner:
(1) The cost of rabies vaccination shall be borne by the owner of the dog or cat.
(2) An owner of a dog or cat not appropriately vaccinated against rabies which bites or exposes a person to rabies is guilty of
a petty misdemeanor.
(3) An owner or caretaker of a dog or cat who permits such animal to be uncontrolled off the owner's or caretaker's premises
without a proper rabies identification tag is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
2. Dogs And Cats Bitten By Rabid Animals:
a. Determination Of Exposure: Dogs or cats known to have been bitten or scratched by a bat or by a wild carnivorous mammal
not available for testing shall be regarded as having been exposed to a rabid animal.
b. Unvaccinated Dog Or Cat: If the exposed dog or cat is not vaccinated, the following shall apply:
(1) In the case of a dog or cat that has not been vaccinated in accordance with this subsection B and that has been exposed
to a rabid animal, such exposed dog or cat shall be immediately destroyed; or
(2) If the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed dog or cat, such animal shall be placed in strict isolation in a kennel under
veterinary supervision for six (6) months. Before release of the dog or cat to its owner, it shall be vaccinated for rabies one
month prior to its release. The owner of the dog or cat shall be responsible for the maintenance costs during the strict
isolation.
c. Vaccinated Dog Or Cat: If the exposed dog or cat is vaccinated, the following shall apply:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 125/454
(1) In the case of an exposed dog or cat vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this subsection B, the dog or cat
shall be handled as follows:
(A) It shall be immediately revaccinated and confined in a proper enclosure by the owner for a period of ninety (90) days
following vaccination; or
(B) If the dog or cat is not immediately revaccinated, it shall be confined in strict isolation in a kennel under veterinary
supervision for a minimum of six (6) months. Before release of the dog or cat to its owner, it shall be vaccinated for rabies
one month prior to its release. The registered owner of the dog or cat shall be responsible for the maintenance costs
during the strict isolation.
(2) Such dog or cat shall be destroyed if the owner does not comply with subsections B2c(1)(A) and B2c(1)(B) of this section.
3. Biting; Dogs And Cats:
a. Unvaccinated Biting Dogs Or Cats: Any dog or cat not vaccinated in accordance with this subsection B, which has bitten any
person and caused an abrasion or puncture of the skin of such person, shall be seized and impounded under the supervision
of a licensed veterinarian or a kennel approved by the animal control authority for a period of not less than ten (10) days. If,
after a complete examination by a veterinarian, the dog or cat has no clinical signs of rabies, it may be released to the owner,
or in the case of a stray, it shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable laws. The owner shall be responsible for
impoundment, maintenance costs, and veterinarian fees for such animal.
b. Vaccinated Biting Dogs Or Cats: Any dog or cat vaccinated in accordance with this subsection B, which has bitten any
person and caused an abrasion or puncture of the skin, shall be confined by the owner or other responsible person as
required by the animal control authority for a period of ten (10) days, at which time the dog or cat shall be examined by an
agent of the animal control authority. If no signs of rabies are observed by the agent of the authority, the dog or cat may be
released from confinement. The owner shall be responsible for impoundment, maintenance costs, and veterinarian fees for
such animal.
If the animal has been inoculated with a live modified rabies vaccine and the owner has proof of the vaccination by a
certificate from a licensed veterinarian the owner may confine the animal to a proper enclosure on the owner's property for
the required ten (10) day confinement period.
4. Biting; Other Animals: Any other animal that has bitten any person and caused an abrasion or puncture of the skin of such
person shall be seized and impounded under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian or kennel approved by the animal
control authority. If, after a complete examination by a licensed veterinarian, the animal has no clinical signs of rabies it may be
released to the owner, or, in the case of a stray, it shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable laws. If the licensed
veterinarian deems it necessary, the animal shall be euthanized and examined for rabies by the State Department of Health.
The owner, if known, shall be responsible for impoundment, maintenance, and destruction costs and veterinarian fees for such
animal. Unclaimed animals will be disposed of pursuant to subsection 5-4-8D of this chapter.
C. Maintaining Multiple Animals: No more than a total of three (3) dogs and cats may be maintained at one residence without first
obtaining a multiple animal license from the Police Department. In no event shall more than a total of five (5) dogs and cats be
maintained at one residence, including emergency rescued dogs that may be in transition to permanent homes. For more than
five (5) dogs, a kennel license is required.
1. License Procedure: Application for a multiple animal license must be made to the City and accompanied by the license fee
established by the Council.
2. Approval Of Contiguous Property Owners: The City shall grant a license for multiple animals after the applicant has sought the
written consent of one hundred percent (100%) of the owners or occupants of privately or publicly owned real estate that are
located adjacent (i.e., sharing property lines) on the outer boundaries of the premises for which the license is being requested.
3. Granting Or Denial Of License; Conditions: Whether or not all of the occupants of abutting property approve the application, the
Police Department may grant or deny the license. The multiple animal license will not be granted unless the Police Department
finds that the use of the applicant's premises with multiple animals will not have any adverse effect upon adjacent properties or
the occupancy thereof, and will not constitute a nuisance to the neighborhood as defined in section 5-4-3 of this chapter and
section 4-1-1 of this Code. A license will only be granted if the keeping of the dogs or cats is incidental to the occupancy of the
premises for residential purposes. The City may impose conditions on the granting of a license in order to minimize or mitigate
possible adverse impacts.
4. Reduction In Number: Each license will be conditioned upon a requirement that the total number of animals maintained be
reduced either by a certain time or through attrition to no more than three (3) within a time frame as designated by the Police
Department. Licenses are issued on an annual basis.
5. Maintenance Of Property: Properties holding a multiple animal license shall be maintained in a clean and healthy condition at
all times, and shall be open to inspection by the City at all reasonable times.
6. Rejection Of License; Appeal Process: If an application is rejected, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision of
the Police Department, the reason for the denial, and the applicant's right to appeal the denial to the City Council. Within seven
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 126/454
(7) days of receiving the notice, the applicant must appeal the decision in writing to the Police Chief. The City Council will hear
the appeal at a regularly scheduled meeting.
7. Revocation: The City Council may revoke a multiple animal license for any violation of this chapter or any other law relating to
the keeping of animals, after a hearing. The Police Department shall give the licensee at least five (5) days' written notice of the
meeting at which the revocation will be considered by mailing the notice to the licensee at the address in the application. The
City Council will give the licensee an opportunity to be heard at the meeting.
8. Multiple Animal License; Fee: Such license shall be renewable January 1 of each year thereafter. The multiple animal license
fee shall be in addition to the individual animal license fees required in this section, and is nonrefundable.
D. Dog Kennels: No person shall maintain more than five (5) dogs without securing a kennel license therefor from the City and
appropriate zoning approvals from the City Council. The license fee shall be in such amount as provided by the Council. This fee
shall be in lieu of the license fee prescribed in subsection A of this section for each dog kept in such kennels. Such license shall
be renewable January 1 of each year thereafter.
E. Basic Care: All animal owners, caretakers, and dog kennel operators shall provide kind treatment, sufficient shelter, and sufficient
food and water for the animals' comfort. All structures, enclosures, pens, and yards where animals are permitted or kept must be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and animal waste must be removed on a regular basis to keep the area free from
objectionable and unsanitary feces and odors. (Ord. 993, 3-21-2018)
5-4-5: DISEASED ANIMALS:
A. Removal Of Diseased Animals From City: It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to remove a diseased animal from the City
without prior consent of the animal control officer, except for treatment by a licensed veterinarian.
B. Impoundment Or Destruction: The animal control officer of the City shall take up and impound any diseased animals found
running at large in the City. If such officer finds it unfeasible to impound such animal, he/she may forthwith take all reasonable
measures to immediately destroy such animal. (Ord. 993, 3-21-2018)
5-4-6: WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS:
A. Wild Or Exotic Animals Prohibited: The owning, keeping, maintaining or selling of wild or exotic animals is prohibited. The animal
control officer or any licensed peace officer shall be empowered to immediately impound any wild or exotic animal found within
the City, and to seek whatever legal process is necessary to enter private property to carry out this directive. It is not a defense to
allege that the animal has been tamed or born and/or raised in captivity.
B. Exceptions: This section does not apply to:
1. Animals that are temporarily brought into the City for the purpose of participating in an educational program, circus or show, if
protective measures are provided to adequately prevent such animals from escaping or injuring the public;
2. Unconfined wild native animals presently indigenous to the County that roam free; or
3. Wild native animals kept in confinement by zoos, circuses or nature centers, if protective measures are provided to adequately
prevent such animals from injuring the public are provided. (Ord. 993, 3-21-2018)
5-4-7: DANGEROUS DOGS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS:
A. Adoption Of State Law: Minnesota Statutes sections 347.50 through 347.565, are hereby adopted. Every provision contained in
the foregoing sections is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference as if fully set forth herein.
B. Determination Of Potentially Dangerous Or Dangerous Dog: A City animal control officer or other law enforcement official shall be
responsible for determining whether a dog is a potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog.
1. Notice Of Determination: Upon a determination by the animal control officer or other law enforcement official that a dog is
potentially dangerous or dangerous, the City shall provide the owner with notice of the determination by delivering or mailing
the notice to the owner of the dog, or by posting a copy of the notice at the place where the dog is kept, or by delivering it to a
person residing on the property, and telephoning, if possible. The notice shall include:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 127/454
a. A description of the seized dog; the authority for and purpose of the dangerous dog declaration and seizure; the time, place,
and circumstances under which the dog was declared dangerous; and the telephone number and contact person where the
dog is kept;
b. A statement that the owner of the dog may request a hearing concerning the dangerous dog declaration and, if applicable,
prior potentially dangerous dog declarations for the dog, and that failure to do so within fourteen (14) days of the date of the
notice will terminate the owner's right to a hearing under this section;
c. A statement that if an appeal request is made within fourteen (14) days of the notice, the owner must immediately comply
with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes section 347.52, paragraphs (a) and (c), and until such time as the Hearing
Officer issues an opinion;
d. A statement that if the Hearing Officer affirms the dangerous dog declaration, the owner will have fourteen (14) days from
receipt of that decision to comply with all other requirements of Minnesota Statutes sections 347.51, 347.515, and 347.52;
e. A form to request a hearing under this subsection;
f. A statement that all actual costs of the care, keeping, and disposition of the dog are the responsibility of the person claiming
an interest in the dog, except to the extent that a court or Hearing Officer finds that the seizure or impoundment was not
substantially justified by law.
2. Right To An Administrative Appeal: An owner may appeal a determination that its dog is potentially dangerous or dangerous by
filing a written request for a hearing to the Police Chief stating that the owner contests the designation accompanied by a one
hundred dollar ($100.00) non-refundable filing fee, within fourteen (14) days of the service of the potentially dangerous or
dangerous dog determination.
a. Untimely Appeals: If a timely appeal is not filed, the owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog must comply with the
applicable requirements set forth in this section and Minnesota Statutes sections 347.50 through 347.565.
b. Timely Appeals: If a timely appeal is filed from a determination that a dog is potentially dangerous, the owner must
immediately comply with the requirements of subsection E of this section, until such time as an opinion is rendered. If a
timely appeal is filed from a determination that a dog is dangerous, the owner must immediately comply with the
requirements of Minnesota Statutes section 347.52, paragraphs (a) and (c), and until such time as an opinion is rendered.
c. Hearing Process: If a timely appeal is filed, a hearing shall be held within fourteen (14) days after the City's receipt of the
appeal and the following procedures shall be followed:
(1) The City shall appoint an impartial Hearing Officer to conduct the appeal.
(2) Both parties may be represented by Counsel, shall have the opportunity to present testimony, be able to call and question
witnesses and introduce any exhibits; however, strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The Hearing Officer shall receive
and give weight to the evidence, including hearsay evidence.
(3) The hearing shall be recorded and a full record of the proceedings shall be maintained by the City according to its data
retention schedule.
(4) The Hearing Officer has the authority to do any of the following, or a combination thereof:
(A) Uphold the declaration and require the owner to comply with all provisions of this subsection within fourteen (14) days;
or
(B) Overturn the declaration and make findings that no violation has occurred.
(5) If the declaration is upheld, the owner shall pay for the actual costs of the hearing, not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
(6) Failure to appear at the hearing shall result in a default judgment against the party who fails to appear. If the owner fails to
appear, the declaration shall be upheld and the fee for the cost of the hearing shall be imposed. If the City fails to appear,
the declaration shall be dismissed and the filing fee shall be refunded to the owner.
(7) The Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision within ten (10) days of the hearing. The decision shall be personally
delivered to the owner or sent by registered mail. The decision of the Hearing Officer is final.
3. Exemption: Dogs may not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person:
a. Who was committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog;
b. Who was provoking, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or who can be known to have repeatedly in the past,
provoked, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog; or
c. Who was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 128/454
C. Dangerous Dog Review: Beginning six (6) months after a dog is declared a dangerous dog, the owner may request annually that
the animal control officer review the designation. The owner must provide evidence that the dog's behavior has changed due to
the dog's age, neutering, environment, completion of obedience training that includes modification of aggressive behavior, or
other factors. If the animal control officer finds sufficient evidence that the dog's behavior has changed, then the officer may
rescind the dangerous dog designation.
D. Dangerous Dog Registration: No person may own a dangerous dog unless the dog is annually registered with the City. Such
registration will be issued to the owner of a dangerous dog after the owner presents sufficient evidence to the animal control
officer that:
1. A proper enclosure exists for the dangerous dog and the premises are posted with a clearly visible sign that includes a warning
symbol of a dangerous dog on the property, including a warning symbol to inform children. The warning symbol must be the
uniform symbol issued by the City that was provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
2. The owner has obtained a surety bond or policy of liability insurance in the sum of at least three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog.
3. The owner has paid the annual dangerous dog registration fee in addition to the regular licensing fee described in this chapter.
4. The owner has had microchip identification implanted in the dangerous dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer and
identification number of the microchip must be provided to the animal control authority.
5. The owner provides proof that the dog has been sterilized. If the owner does not sterilize the dog within thirty (30) days of
being notified of this requirement, the City may seize the dog and have it sterilized at the owner's expense.
E. Potentially Dangerous Dog Regulation: No person may own a potentially dangerous dog unless the dog is annually registered with
the City. Such registration will be issued to the owner of a potentially dangerous dog after the owner presents sufficient evidence
to the animal control officer that:
1. Within fourteen (14) days of receiving a determination that the dog is potentially dangerous, that the dog has a microchip
implanted for identification, and the name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number of the microchip must be
provided to the animal control authority.
2. When the potentially dangerous dog is outside, the potentially dangerous dog must be muzzled and under the physical control
and restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from biting any person or
animal but that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration.
F. Pre-License Inspections: Prior to the issuance of any tags for a new registration of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog,
a pre-license inspection of the premises to ensure compliance with this Code may be required. The City shall be allowed at any
time to inspect the dog, the proper enclosure and all places where the dog is kept.
G. Notification Requirements Upon Death Or Relocation:
1. Relocation Or Death: The owner of a dog that has been declared dangerous or potentially dangerous must notify the Police
Department in writing if the dog is to be relocated from its current address or if the dog has died. The notification must be given
in writing within thirty (30) days of the relocation or death. The notification must include the current owner's name and address,
and the new owner's name and the relocation address. If the relocation address is outside of the City, the City may notify the
local law enforcement agency of the transfer of the dog into its jurisdiction.
2. Renter's Obligations: A person who owns or possesses a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog and who will rent property
from another where the dog will reside must disclose to the property owner prior to entering the lease agreement and at the
time of any lease renewal periods that the person owns or possesses a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog that will reside
at the property. A dog owner who is currently renting property must notify the property owner within fourteen (14) days of City
notification if the owned dog is newly declared as dangerous or potentially dangerous and the owner keeps the dog on the
property.
3. Transfer Of Ownership Into The City: No dog that has been previously determined to be dangerous or potentially dangerous by
another jurisdiction shall be kept, owned or harbored in the City, unless the dog's owner complies with the requirements of this
section prior to bringing the dog into the City. Dogs in violation of this section are subject to impoundment and destruction.
H. List Posted: For the purposes of public notification and public safety, the City may post a list of potentially dangerous dogs and
dangerous dogs on the official City internet site. (Ord. 993, 3-21-2018)
5-4-8: IMPOUNDMENT, SEIZURE, AND REDEMPTION PROCEDURES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 129/454
A. Authority To Impound: The animal control officer has the authority to seize and impound in the following circumstances:
1. On and after January 1 of each year, any dog or cat found in the City without the tag provided for in subsection 5-4-4A5 of this
chapter.
2. Any domestic animals found running at large in the City.
3. Any domestic animals found to be habitually barking or crying as described in subsection 5-4-3A of this chapter provided there
has been at least one other documented incident for the same owner or the same animal during the six (6) months prior.
4. Any animal that is not being provided with basic care as described in subsection 5-4-4E of this chapter.
5. Any animal that attacks another animal as described in subsection 5-4-3D of this chapter.
6. Any animal that is presenting an imminent danger as described in subsection 5-4-3E of this chapter.
7. After fourteen (14) days, any designated potentially dangerous or dangerous dog that has not been properly registered, cared
for, possessed, and licensed pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and Minnesota Statutes.
B. Redemption Of Impounded Animals: Any animal may be redeemed from impound by the owner after payment to the Police
Department of the license fee for the current year, if applicable, as well as impounding fees and maintenance costs for each day
the animal is confined by the animal control authority and the satisfaction of any additional requirements of this section.
C. Release Of Impounded Animals: Upon the presentation of a current license tag and receipt for a dog or cat license for the current
year as well as the payment of the fees and costs provided in subsection B of this section, the animal control authority shall
release or cause to be released to any owner the dog, cat or other animal claimed.
1. A dangerous and potentially dangerous dog shall not be released until the dog owner satisfies the requirements of this chapter
and Minnesota Statutes.
2. Where an animal has been seized due to a lack of basic care or due to disease, the animal shall not be released to the owner
until such release is approved by a licensed veterinarian and the animal control authority.
D. Disposition Of Unclaimed Animals: Any unclaimed animal will be disposed of within ten (10) calendar days after impounding in
accordance with the contract in place with the designated pound facility.
E. Procedure For Seizure Of Animals When Owner Is Not Present: For any of the circumstances described in this section, any police
officer or animal control officer may enter upon private property to seize and impound an animal if:
1. The officer has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of the property and those attempts have either failed or have
been ignored; and
2. The seizure will not involve the forced entry into a private residence. Use of a passkey obtained from a property manager,
landlord, innkeeper, or other authorized person to have such key shall not be considered unauthorized or forced entry; and
3. Written notice of the seizure and impoundment is left in a conspicuous place where the dog is kept, and if possible, the owner
is contacted by telephone.
F. Special Provisions For Seizure And Confinement Of Attacking Animals: Any animal that attacks a person and such attack results
in an abrasion or puncture of the victim's skin or where the victim requires the services of a doctor, the attacking animal shall be
confined pursuant to the following procedure and Minnesota Statutes:
1. Confinement In City Pound: Any animal that has not been inoculated by a live modified rabies vaccine shall be confined in the
City pound for a period of not less than ten (10) days, at the expense of the owner. The animal may be released at the end of
such time if healthy and free from symptoms of rabies and upon the payment of all maintenance costs by the owner; or
2. Alternative Hospital Confinement: The owner of the animal may elect to voluntarily and immediately confine the animal for the
required period of time in a veterinary hospital within Washington County, and provide immediate proof of such confinement; or
3. Home Confinement: If the animal has been inoculated with a live modified rabies vaccine and the owner has proof of the
vaccination by a certificate from a licensed veterinarian, the owner may confine the animal to the owner's property within a
proper enclosure. (Ord. 993, 3-21-2018)
5-4-9: DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN ANIMALS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 130/454
After the animal control officer has provided the owner with notice, the animal control officer, Police Chief, Hearing Officer, or City
Council is authorized to order the proper and humane destruction of any animal upon a finding that:
A. The animal has habitually destroyed property or habitually trespassed in a damaging manner on property of persons other than
the owner; or
B. The dog has been designated as dangerous, the owner's right to a hearing and appeal has been exhausted or expired, and the
owner has failed to comply with the provisions of this section or Minnesota Statutes; or the owner has voluntarily waived his right
to administrative or judicial review and requests that the dog be destroyed, a court orders that the dog be destroyed; or
C. The dog inflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human being without provocation and the owner of the dog has had the
opportunity for a hearing before an impartial Hearing Officer; or
D. The owner of the animal has habitually demonstrated an inability or unwillingness to control the animal and that lack of control
results in injury to persons or other animals; or
E. The animal is so severely injured or sick that it is suffering and it will not likely survive and the owner cannot be immediately
located; or
F. It is determined that the animal is infected with rabies; or
G. The animal presents an imminent danger to the health and safety of any person or the animal is in the process of attacking any
person; or
H. The dog acted under any of the circumstances set forth in Minnesota Statutes section 347.56. (Ord. 993, 3-21-2018)
5-4-10: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS:
No person shall in any manner hinder or interfere with any person authorized by the City Council to discharge his or her duties under
this section. (Ord. 993, 3-21-2018)
5-4-11: CONCEALING ANIMALS:
No person may harbor, hide, conceal or refuse to produce to an animal control officer or police officer an animal that has been
ordered into custody. (Ord. 993, 3-21-2018)
5-4-12: RESERVED:
(Ord. 993, 3-21-2018)
5-4-13: KEEPING OF FOWL OR POULTRY:
Any person keeping fowl or poultry in any zoning district on land with three (3) to less than five (5) acres of land within the City of
Cottage Grove shall comply with the following:
A. License Required: Any person who keeps fowl or poultry in the City of Cottage Grove must obtain an annual license prior to
acquiring the fowl or poultry. The annual license is valid on the date the fowl or poultry arrive on the site and ending on December
31. Subsequent licenses are valid from January 1 to December 31. Applications for licenses must be made to the City Clerk.
1. Annual License Fee: Fees charged for the issuance of an annual license for keeping fowl or poultry will be set by the City
Council in the annual fees resolution. An inspection of the coop and outdoor run will be performed annually.
2. Denial; Revocation: The City may refuse to grant or may revoke an annual license if the fowl or poultry become a nuisance, as
evidenced by a second substantiated violation (within 12 months of the first substantiated violation).
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 131/454
3. Cruelty To Animals: The City may refuse to grant an annual license to, or may revoke a license from, a person convicted of
cruelty to animals.
4. Nontransferable: An annual license is nontransferable and does not run with the land.
5. License Limited: An annual license constitutes a limited license granted to the landowner by the City and in no way creates a
vested zoning right.
6. Publications To Be Read: Prior to issuance of a license, the prospective annual license holder must acknowledge they have
read the Chicken Run Rescue publication entitled "Recommendations for Municipal Regulations of Urban Chickens (2010)" or
similar publications approved by the City.
7. Maintaining Adequate Temperature: Prior to issuance of an annual license, the prospective annual license holder must provide
a plan for maintaining an adequate temperature in the coop for safety of the fowl or poultry. The plan must address both
extreme winter and summer temperature conditions.
8. Exceptions: Birds or fowl that are temporarily brought into the City for the purpose of participating in an educational program,
circus or show, if protective measures are provided to adequately prevent such animals from escaping or injuring the public; or
birds or fowl kept in confinement by zoos, circuses or nature centers, if protective measures are provided to adequately prevent
such animals from injuring the public are provided.
B. License Application: Any person desiring a license required under the provision of this section shall make written application upon
a form prescribed by and containing such information as required by the City. Among other things, the application shall contain
the following information:
1. A description of the real property upon which it is desired to keep fowl or poultry.
2. The breed and number of fowl or poultry to be maintained on the premises.
3. A site plan of the property showing the location and size of the proposed coop and run, setbacks from the coop and run to
property lines and surrounding buildings (including houses and buildings on adjacent lots), and the location, style, and height of
fencing proposed to contain the fowl or poultry in a run or exercise area. Portable coops and cages are allowed, but portable
locations must be included with the site plan.
4. Statements that the applicant will at all times keep the fowl or poultry in accordance with all the conditions prescribed by City
ordinance and/or the City, or modification thereof, and that failure to obey such conditions will constitute a violation of the
provisions of this section and grounds for cancellation of the license and removal of the fowl or poultry from the property.
5. Such other and further information as may be required by the City.
6. A building permit is required for the coop. If electricity is proposed for the coop, an electrical permit is also required.
C. License Conditions:
1. If granted, the license shall be issued by the City Clerk and shall state the conditions, if any, imposed upon the licensee for the
keeping of fowl or poultry under this license. The license shall specify the restrictions, limitations, conditions, and prohibitions
which the City deems reasonably necessary to protect any person or neighboring use from unsanitary conditions, unreasonable
noise or odors, or annoyance, or to protect the public health and safety. Such license may be modified from time to time or
revoked by the City for failure to conform to such restrictions, limitations, or prohibitions. Such modification or revocation shall
be effective after ten (10) days following the mailing of written notice thereof by certified mail to the person or persons licensed
to keep such fowl or poultry.
2. The City shall grant a license for fowl or poultry after the applicant has sought the written consent of one hundred percent
(100%) of the owners or occupants of privately or publicly owned real estate that are located adjacent (i.e., sharing property
lines) on the outer boundaries of the premises for which the license is being requested.
Where an adjacent property consists of a multiple dwelling or multi-tenant property, the applicant must obtain the written
consent of the owner or manager, or other person in charge of the building and tenants within the building. Such written
consent shall be required on the initial application and as often thereafter as the City deems necessary.
3. Each person holding a license to keep fowl or poultry on property with three (3) to less than five (5) acres of land within the City
of Cottage Grove shall comply with the following:
a. Only one annual license for keeping fowl or poultry will be granted per parcel.
b. The principal use of the specified property must only be single-family residential. An annual license will not be issued for any
property which is used principally for something other than single-family.
c. No person may keep more than a cumulative total of four (4) fowls or poultries.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 132/454
d. Keeping a rooster is prohibited.
e. No fowl or poultry shall be allowed to roam freely without being within a completely enclosed pen.
f. Keeping live fowl or poultry inside a house or attached garage is prohibited.
g. Butchering a fowl or poultry must not be in public view.
4. Fowl or poultry must be provided a secure and well ventilated roofed structure ("coop").
a. Location: The coop may only be located in a rear yard.
b. Separation From Dwellings: The coop must maintain a minimum one hundred foot (100') separation from all dwellings on
adjacent properties and a minimum fifty foot (50') separation from any property line that adjoins public right-of-way or land.
c. Roof: The roof structure must be fully enclosed, waterproof and windproof.
d. Sanitation: The floors and walls of the coop shall be kept in a clean, sanitary and healthy condition with all droppings
collected on a daily basis and placed in a fireproof covered container until transported off the premises to a proper disposal
site. Droppings applied as fertilizer or mixed in with compost is prohibited.
e. Unattended Fowl Or Poultry: Fowl or poultry must be kept in the coop, run or a detached mobile pen whenever they are
unattended by the keeper.
f. Floor Height: The coop's floor must be a minimum of twenty four inches (24") above the ground.
g. Floor Area: The floor area of the roofed coop must be equal to at least four (4) square feet of area per fowl or poultry and not
greater than fifty (50) square feet.
h. Windows: The coop must have a minimum of one square foot window per ten (10) square feet floor space. Windows must be
able to open for ventilation.
i. Climate Control: Adequate ventilation and/or insulation to maintain the coop temperature between thirty two degrees
Fahrenheit (32°F) and eighty five degrees Fahrenheit (85°F).
j. Construction: Coops and pen enclosures must be constructed and maintained in a workmanlike manner. Exterior finishes
must be constructed of quality weather resistant materials consisting of wood, metal, or engineered composite materials that
are similar to the color palette of the principal structure. The coop and outdoor run must be maintained in a condition of
reasonable repair and must not remain in a condition of disrepair or constitute a nuisance. Fiberglass or steel corrugated
materials, metal hoops or PVC materials, cotton, nylon or plastic fabrics are prohibited. The coop roof shall be covered with
fiberglass shingle roof materials.
k. Number Allowed: Only one coop and outdoor run per parcel.
5. All grain and food stored for the use of the fowl or poultry must be kept in a rodent proof manner.
6. An outdoor run or exercise yard is required and must be constructed and maintained to meet the following standards:
a. Location: The outdoor run may only be located in a rear yard and must maintain a minimum one hundred foot (100')
separation from all dwellings on adjacent properties and a minimum fifty foot (50') separation from any property line that
adjoins public right-of-way or land.
b. Size: A minimum of ten (10) square feet per fowl or poultry and not greater than one hundred (100) square feet of gross
area.
c. Height: Six feet (6') in height to allow access for cleaning and maintenance.
d. Gate: One gate to allow human access to the run.
e. Attached Pen; Construction: The coop's attached pen must be securely constructed with at least a mesh type material and
shall have protective overhead netting to keep the fowl or poultry separated from other animals.
f. Attached Pen; Drainage: The coop's attached pen must be well drained so there is no accumulation of moisture or become
an erosion issue.
g. Mulch Materials: If the ground surface within the outdoor run area becomes barren soil and without grass covering the area,
then mulch materials must be placed on the exposed ground surface.
7. Fowl and/or poultry shall not be kept in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance to occupants of adjacent property.
8. Eggs, chicks, adult fowl or poultry shall not be sold.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 133/454
9. No person shall keep, maintain or harbor within the City of Cottage Grove any animal or species that is prohibited by Federal or
Minnesota law. (Ord. 993, 3-21-2018)
Chapter 5
SPECIAL EVENTS
5-5-1: FINDINGS OF FACT; PURPOSE:
This chapter governs the time, place and manner of special events on public and private property when an event's impact upon the
health, fire, law enforcement, transportation or other services exceeds those regularly provided to that property. This chapter is
enacted in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of all residents and visitors of the city by ensuring that special events do
not create disturbances, become nuisances, menace or threaten life, health and property, disrupt traffic or threaten or damage
private or public property. It is not the intent of the city council by enacting this chapter to regulate in any manner the content of
speech or infringe upon the right to assemble, except for regulating the time, place and manner of speech and assembly and this
chapter should not be interpreted or construed otherwise. (Ord. 928, 3-19-2014)
5-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the meanings given to them by this section:
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The Cottage Grove city administrator or designee.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any large indoor or outdoor concert, fair, show, festival, carnival, rally, party, tournament, street dance, run, race,
walk, parade, or other entertainment or celebration of limited duration that is held on public or private property or any event that will
require the use of special services as determined by the city, due to the intensification of the land use, parking concerns, traffic
generation, or an increase in demand of the city's infrastructure. The special event may not be the primary use of the property.
SPECIAL SERVICES: The exclusive allocation of city resources, including, but not limited to, city personnel, equipment, rights of
way, property or facilities for use in conjunction with a specific event or activity that are deemed necessary by city staff in order to
maintain or protect the public health, safety or welfare. Special services shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following: street
closures; requiring police officers to stop or reroute traffic; special police protection, security or monitoring; stationing emergency
vehicles at or in the immediate vicinity of the event; exclusive use of city streets as a staging area or for event parking; additional
street cleaning and garbage removal services; special signage, such as temporary no parking signs; the use of any city building,
equipment or other property for any purpose other than the normal daily operations of the city; or the city otherwise providing
exclusive services. (Ord. 928, 3-19-2014)
5-5-3: PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: Any person or organization desiring to hold a special event within any zoning district in the city must first obtain a
special event permit from the city in addition to any other permits required for the event by state law or city ordinance.
B. Exceptions: A permit is not required for:
1. Weddings, wedding receptions, anniversaries, birthdays, family reunions, funeral processions, and graduation parties.
2. Any event attended by fewer than three hundred (300) persons that does not require any special services.
3. Any event that is held on publicly owned property, public or railroad right of way and involves the review or approval of the
government entity or agency controlling that property through a permit, agreement or other approval process.
4. Golf tournaments.
5. The use of traditional public forums as alternative channels of communication by the public, provided that such use is for the
free exercise of constitutionally protected activities and does not disrupt or interfere with traffic on public streets or the use of
public places by other members of the public. (Ord. 928, 3-19-2014)
5-5-4: PERMIT APPLICATION:
A. Form: An application for a permit to hold a special event must be made in writing and must contain a statement made upon oath
or affirmation that the statements contained therein are true and correct to the best knowledge of the applicant. A permit
application may be submitted for more than one event within a calendar year, as long as each event is of the same type, at the
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 134/454
same location and of the same scope. A separate permit application must be submitted for events that are different in type, at a
different location or of a different scope, as determined by city staff. Separate application fees will be required for each
application. The application must be signed and sworn to or affirmed by an authorized individual and the property owner, if
different from the applicant. The application must contain and disclose the following:
1. Type and description of the special event and a list of all activities to take place at the special event.
2. Name of the sponsoring entity, contact person, address, and phone number.
3. Name of property owner, if different from applicant.
4. Proposed date(s) of the special event, together with the beginning and ending times for each date.
5. Proposed location of the special event, including a site plan or diagram of the proposed area to be used showing the location
of any barricades, perimeter/security fencing, fire extinguishers, safety or first aid stations, entertainment, stages, restrooms or
portable toilets, parking areas, ingress and egress routes, signs, special lighting, trash containers, and any other items related
to the special event.
6. A sign package including size, quantity, and location, and any large inflatable balloons, statues, or structures.
7. Maximum estimated number of persons expected to attend at any one time and the estimated time and date at which that will
occur.
8. Number of event staff that will be provided for the event. Applicant must provide the contact information, including cellphone
number and e-mail address for the on site event staff coordinator, manager or supervisor.
9. Public health plans, including supplying water to the site, solid waste collection and the number of toilet facilities that will be
available.
10. Fire prevention, emergency medical service plans, and severe weather plans.
11. Any security plans.
12. The admission fee, donation, or other consideration to be charged or requested for admission to the special event.
13. Whether food or alcohol will be served or sold at the event.
14. Whether camping or temporary overnight lodging will be included.
15. Whether any sound amplification or public address system will be used or if there will be any live performances of any music
or musical instruments.
16. The name, address and contact information of any entity providing entertainment.
17. A detailed description of all public rights of way and private streets for which the applicant requests the city to restrict or alter
normal parking, vehicular traffic or pedestrian traffic patterns, the nature of such restrictions or alterations, and the basis.
18. A detailed description of any shuttle service, including off site parking locations, shuttle routes, types of vehicles that will be
used for shuttling passengers, hours of operation and frequency of shuttle service.
19. The names and addresses of all residential properties within an area of impact for which the special event is proposed to be
held. (Ord. 928, 3-19-2014)
20. For runs, walks, races or parades, an addendum will be included with special event applications. (Ord. 947, 4-1-2015)
21. A statement signed by the applicant agreeing to pay all fees and meet all other requirements of this section and a statement
representing to the city that the applicant is duly authorized to make such agreement on behalf of the person or organization
holding or sponsoring the special event.
22. Any other information requested by the city that it deems reasonably necessary in order to determine the nature of the special
event and the extent of any special services required.
B. Time For Filing: A special event permit application must be filed with the city at least sixty (60) days in advance of the date on
which the special event is to occur.
C. Permit Fee: An applicant for a special event permit must pay a nonrefundable permit fee in the amount established by the city
council pursuant to the annual fee schedule. (Ord. 928, 3-19-2014)
5-5-5: PERMIT REVIEW:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 135/454
A. The special event permit application shall be distributed by the city administrator to the public safety department and to any other
departments that may require special services or other conditions for the event. Each such department will review the application
and determine the amount of special services that are necessary, if any, and shall forward a cost estimate for the special services
associated with his or her department to the city administrator.
B. After receiving the information from the departments, the city administrator shall review the special event permit application.
1. If property is located within five hundred feet (500') of residential property, then the city council shall hold a hearing on the
application. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the city shall mail notice to each residential property owner within five
hundred feet (500') of the subject property. The city council shall consider the application and must either approve the permit
with or without conditions, or deny the permit. The applicant shall be notified of the decision in writing.
2. If the property is not located within five hundred feet (500') of residential property, then the city administrator must either
approve and issue the permit with or without conditions, or deny the permit. The city administrator shall notify the applicant of
his or her decision in writing.
3. For runs, races, walks or parades, the city council shall hold a hearing on the application. At least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing, the city shall publish notice of the parade in the newspaper. The city council shall consider the application and must
either approve the permit with or without conditions, or deny the permit. The applicant shall be notified of the decision in writing.
(Ord. 928, 3-19-2014)
5-5-6: PERMIT DENIAL:
A. Denial Of Application: The city may deny an application for a special event permit if it determines from a consideration of the
application or other pertinent information, that:
1. The information contained in the application or supplemental information requested from the applicant is false or nonexistent in
any material detail.
2. The applicant fails to supplement the application after having been notified by the city of additional information or documents
needed.
3. The applicant fails to agree to abide or comply with all of the conditions and terms of the special event permit, including
payment of all costs and expenses.
4. The applicant has outstanding fees due to the city, any outstanding or unresolved code enforcement or noncompliant building
permit issues, has violated the terms and conditions of a previously issued special event permit or has had a previously issued
special event permit revoked by the city.
5. The time, hours, location or size of the special event will unnecessarily disrupt or interfere with the movement of traffic, would
interfere with access to the fire station or fire hydrants, or would interfere with access to businesses or residences in the
immediate vicinity of the event and there are not sufficient city resources available to mitigate the disruption at the time of the
event.
6. The special event is of the size or nature that it is unduly burdensome to the public safety department or other city resources or
city infrastructure.
7. The proposed date and time of the special event conflicts with a previously scheduled event and there are not available at the
time of the proposed special event sufficient city resources to provide services for both events without substantially or
unnecessarily interfering with police, fire, ambulance, water, public works, or other services to the city as a whole.
8. The location of the special event will substantially interfere with any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place
upon or along public property or right of way.
9. The special event would substantially or unnecessarily interfere with police, fire, ambulance, water, public works or other
services to the city as a whole and there are not available at the time of the proposed event sufficient city resources to mitigate
the disruption.
10. The special event would likely endanger the public safety or health.
11. The special event would likely create or constitute a public nuisance.
12. The special event would be likely to cause significant damage to public property or facilities.
13. The special event would engage in or encourage participants to engage in disorderly conduct activity, disturbances, or illegal
acts.
14. The applicant fails to comply with the liability insurance requirements or the applicant's insurance lapses or is canceled.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 136/454
15. The applicant, responsible party, or the person on whose behalf the application is submitted has on prior occasions made
material misrepresentations regarding the nature of a special event in the city, or has violated the terms of a prior special event
permit.
16. The applicant cannot comply with the performance standards required in subsection 5-5-7B of this chapter.
B. Appeal:
1. If the city administrator denies an application for a special event permit, the applicant may appeal the city administrator's
decision to the city council. An appeal must be filed with the city administrator in writing no later than ten (10) days from the
date of the city administrator's decision.
2. If the city council denies an application for a special event permit, the applicant has all remedies permitted at law, including
appealing to the district court. (Ord. 928, 3-19-2014)
5-5-7: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
A. Permitted Areas: Because of the predominantly residential character of the city and the relatively small size of the commercially
zoned areas resulting in the potential for conflicting uses, special events will be permitted within the city only after a finding by the
city that the character of the proposed special event is compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood considering
the possible creation of problems including noise, lighting, traffic, sanitation, congestion and other factors affecting the public
health, safety and welfare of such areas in addition to compliance with all ordinances of this city and applicable statutes and
regulations.
B. Performance Standards: All special event permits must comply with the following performance standards:
1. Parking: All off street parking must be sized to accommodate the needs generated by the use and must be approved by the
community development director.
2. Access To Collector Or Arterial Street: The property must be located with direct access to a collector or arterial street as
identified in the comprehensive plan.
3. Access For Emergency Vehicles: Access for ingress and egress for emergency vehicles must be approved by the fire marshal.
4. Setbacks: Setbacks must be approved by the community development director.
5. Americans With Disabilities Act: The applicant must comply with the Americans with disabilities act.
6. Liquor Licenses: The applicant must obtain all relevant liquor licenses and have a minimum of one security personnel on site
during the event if liquor is sold.
7. Requirements Of Building Official And Fire Marshal: The applicant must comply with all requirements imposed by the city
building official and fire marshal, including occupancy requirements and the number and location of sanitary restroom facilities.
8. Off Site Signage: Off site signage is prohibited, except for directional signs that are approved by the city.
9. Trash Collection: The applicant must provide adequate trash and recycling collection during and after the event.
10. Hours Of Operation:
a. Hours of operation shall be allowed between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. Sunday through
Thursday and between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and twelve thirty o'clock (12:30) A.M. on Friday and Saturday.
b. For events with music or amplified sound, such music or amplified sound shall terminate no later than ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. Sunday through Thursday and no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Friday and Saturday.
11. Signs: The sign package must be approved by the community development director.
12. Exterior Lighting: Any special exterior lighting must be designed and installed so that the light source is recessed and
enclosed on all sides except the bottom so that light is cast downward.
13. Food Sales: All on site food sales shall be licensed by the Washington County health department.
14. Temporary Buildings, Fences Or Structures: All temporary buildings, fences or structures must be removed within twelve (12)
hours after the event.
C. Permit Conditions: The city may condition the issuance of a special event permit by imposing reasonable conditions concerning
the time, place and manner of the special event, and such conditions as are necessary to protect the safety of persons and
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 137/454
property, and the control of traffic; provided that such conditions shall not unreasonably restrict the right of free speech. The city
may inspect the property upon which the special event is to be held prior to the event in order to make certain there is compliance
with all permit conditions. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to:
1. Alteration of the date(s), time(s) or location of the special event proposed.
2. Elimination or alteration of an activity at the special event which cannot be mitigated to a point as to ensure public safety and
welfare, or which causes liability to the city.
3. Modification to the traffic control or safety plan.
4. Restrictions on the use of amplified sound, public address systems and the playing of music and musical instruments and
compliance with noise ordinances, regulations and laws.
5. Limitations on the maximum attendance.
6. Restrictions on the sale or consumption of food or alcohol.
7. Other reasonable conditions in order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
D. Permit Issuance: The city clerk or deputy city clerk shall issue the special event permit after the application has been approved by
the city administrator or city council and the applicant has signed the permit and agreed to comply with the terms, conditions and
special service fees of the permit as well as the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 928, 3-19-2014)
5-5-8: SPECIAL SERVICES FEES:
A. Special Services Fee: If any special services are required for the special event, the applicant will be required to pay for the special
services. The special services fee shall be determined by the city administrator and will be based upon the actual cost of the
special services. The special services fee must be paid by the applicant at least five (5) days before the special event. If
additional special services are required during the event that exceeds the fees collected, the applicant will be invoiced for the
additional fees. No new special event permit will be issued until all previous fees have been paid, with interest, if applicable.
B. Special Services Rates: The rates charged for the use of city personnel, equipment, facilities and rights of way shall be set by the
city council pursuant to the annual fee schedule. (Ord. 928, 3-19-2014)
5-5-9: INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT:
If the special event requires special services, prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the applicant and authorizing officer of
the sponsoring organization, if any, must sign an agreement to indemnify, defend and hold the city, its officials, employees, and
agents harmless from any claim that arises in whole or in part out of the special event, except any claims arising solely out of the
negligent acts or omissions of the city, its officials, employees and agents. (Ord. 928, 3-19-2014)
5-5-10: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Liability Insurance Required: The applicant or sponsor of a special event must possess or obtain liability insurance to protect
against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury or property damage arising from the special
event. A certificate of insurance must be filed with the city prior to issuance of the special event permit. The certificate of
insurance must name the city, its officials, employees and agents as additional insureds. Insurance coverage must be maintained
for the duration of the special event in the types and amounts as follows:
1. Commercial general liability insurance covering claims for bodily injury, death, personal injury or property damage (including
loss of use) occurring or arising in connection with this agreement, including contractual liability coverage. The limits of
insurance will not be less than: one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence; two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) general
aggregate.
2. Workers' compensation insurance with statutory limits and providing coverage for any employee working the event, even if not
required by statute. Employer's liability or "stop gap" insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
each accident.
3. Business automobile liability insurance covering the ownership, operation and maintenance of all owned, nonowned and hired
motor vehicles used in connection with the event, with limits of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for
bodily injury and property damage.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 138/454
B. Waiver Or Reduction Of Required Limits: The city may waive or reduce insurance requirements of this section under the following
circumstances:
1. The applicant or authorized individual of the sponsoring organization signs a verified statement that it believes that the special
event's purpose is first amendment expression and that the cost of obtaining the insurance is so financially burdensome that it
would constitute an unreasonable burden on the right of first amendment expression.
2. The city determines that the insurance requirements are in excess of the reasonable risk presented by the proposed special
event. (Ord. 928, 3-19-2014)
5-5-11: VIOLATIONS:
A. Unlawful To Sponsor A Special Event Without A Permit: It is unlawful for any person to sponsor or conduct a special event
requiring a permit pursuant to this section unless a valid special event permit has been issued for the event.
B. Unlawful To Exceed The Scope Of The Permit: The special event permit authorizes the special event permittee or sponsor to
conduct only such a special event as is described in the permit, and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit. It
is unlawful for the permittee or sponsor to wilfully violate the terms and conditions of the permit. (Ord. 928, 3-19-2014)
5-5-12: REVOCATION:
Any special event permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be summarily revoked by a city law enforcement officer at any time
when, by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the law enforcement officer determines that the safety of the
public or property requires such revocation. The city administrator, or his/her designee, may also summarily revoke any special event
permit issued pursuant to this chapter if he or she finds that the permit has been issued based on false information or when the
permittee exceeds the scope of the permit or violates any term or condition of the permit or this chapter. Notice of such action
revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing to the applicant by personal service or certified mail at the address specified by the
applicant in the application. (Ord. 928, 3-19-2014)
5-5-13: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Injunction: The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction.
B. Public Nuisance: The holding of a special event in violation of any provision or condition contained in this chapter will be deemed
a public nuisance and may be abated as such.
C. Towing Authorized: If a special event is held on private property and members of a special event have parked automobiles in
violation of any provision or condition contained in this chapter, violators' automobiles may be tagged and towed at violators'
expense.
D. Noise: The special event must be in compliance with the city's noise ordinance at all times.
E. Misdemeanor: Violation of any provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor. Violators shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment as
specified by state statute. Each day in which a violation continues to occur shall constitute a separate offense.
F. Permit Revocation: Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be grounds for revocation of the special event permit. (Ord. 928,
3-19-2014)
5-5-14: MODIFICATIONS:
The city may modify or waive any of the requirements of this chapter after a finding that the waiver or modification of the
requirements will not endanger the public health, safety and welfare of the community, that no special services are required and that
enforcement of the requirements would impose a unique hardship upon the applicant. (Ord. 928, 3-19-2014)
Chapter 6
PARADES
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 139/454
(Rep. by Ord. 928, 3-19-2014)
Chapter 7
GRAFFITI PREVENTION
5-7-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. Purpose: The City Council is enacting this Chapter to help prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for
the removal of graffiti from public and private property. The Council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and destructive of the
rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community. Unless the City acts to remove graffiti from public and
private property, the graffiti tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti, and entire neighborhoods are
affected and become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the City.
B. Intent: The City Council intends, through the adoption of this Chapter, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and
private property from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement. The Council does not intend for this Chapter to conflict with any
existing anti-graffiti State laws. (Ord. 628, 6-5-1996)
5-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER: Any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray paint or other
substances capable of defacing property.
BROAD-TIPPED MARKER: Any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest
width is greater than one-fourth inch (1/4"), containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is not water soluble.
ETCHING EQUIPMENT: Any tool, device, or substance that can be used to make permanent marks on any natural or human-made
surface.
GRAFFITI: Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched,
sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to
the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property or, despite advanced authorization,
is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the City Council.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT: An aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment,
brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or human-made surface.
PAINT STICK OR GRAFFITI STICK: Any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance
capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least one-eighth inch (1/8") in width.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee,
assignee, or any other legal entity. (Ord. 628, 6-5-1996; amd. 2000 Code)
5-7-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Defacement: It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or human-made surface on any City-owned property
or, without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any non-City-owned property.
B. Possession Of Graffiti Implements:
1. Minors At Or Near School Facilities: It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any graffiti
implement while on any school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures, or in areas immediately adjacent to those
specific locations upon public property, or upon private property without the prior written consent of the owner or occupant of
such private property. The provision of this subsection does not apply to the possession of broad-tipped markers by a minor
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 140/454
attending or traveling to or from a school at which the minor is enrolled if the minor is participating in a class at the school that
formally requires the possession of broad-tipped markers. The burden of proof in any prosecution for violation of this
subsection is upon the minor student to establish the need to possess a broad-tipped marker.
2. Designated Public Places: It is unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility,
park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public building or structure owned or operated by the City or
while in or within fifty feet (50') of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, or similar types of infrastructure unless
otherwise authorized by the City. (Ord. 628, 6-5-1996; amd. 2000 Code)
5-7-4: ACCESSIBILITY TO GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS:
A. Furnishing To Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give,
loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any aerosol paint container,
broad-tipped marker, or paint stick to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years without the written consent of the parents
or guardian of the person. (Markers containing water soluble ink or pigmented liquid are exempt from this subsection.)
B. Display And Storage:
1. Every person who owns, conducts, operates, or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol paint containers,
paint sticks, or broad-tipped markers must store the containers, sticks, or markers in an area primarily observable, through
direct visual observation or surveillance equipment, by employees of the retail establishment during the regular course of
business.
2. In the event that a commercial retail establishment is unable to store the aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, or broad-tipped
markers in an area as provided above, the establishment must store the containers, sticks, and markers in an area not
accessible to the public in the regular course of business without employee assistance.
C. Signs Required: Every person who operates a retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements must:
1. Place a sign in clear public view at or near the display of such products stating: "Graffiti is against the law. Any person who
defaces real or personal property with paint or any other liquid or device is guilty of a crime, punishable by imprisonment of up
to 90 days and/or a fine up to $700.00".
2. Place a sign in the direct view of such persons responsible for accepting customer payment for graffiti implements stating:
"Selling spray paint, paint sticks, or broad-tipped markers to persons under 18 years of age is against the law and punishable
by imprisonment of up to 90 days and/or a fine up to $700.00". (Ord. 628, 6-5-1996)
5-7-5: NUISANCE DECLARED:
The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of this Chapter is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and,
therefore, is subject to the removal and abatement provisions specified in this Chapter. (Ord. 628, 6-5-1996)
5-7-6: REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI; COSTS:
A. Responsibility For Removal: It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the graffiti has been applied and any person
who may be in possession or who has the right to possess such property to at all times keep the property clear of graffiti.
B. Removal By Perpetrator: Any person applying graffiti on public or private property has the duty to remove the graffiti within twenty
four (24) hours after notice by the City or private owner of the property involved. Such removal must be done in a manner
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety, the Director of the Department of Public Works, or any additional City department
head, as authorized by the City Council. Any person applying graffiti is responsible for the removal or for the payment of the
removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional violation of this Chapter.
Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents or legal guardian is also responsible for such removal or for the
payment for the removal.
C. Removal By Property Owner Or City: If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator according to subsection B of this Section, graffiti
shall be removed pursuant to the following provisions:
1. Property Owner Responsibility:
a. It is unlawful for any person who is the owner or who has primary responsibility for control of property or for repair or
maintenance of property in the City to permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of ten (10)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 141/454
days after service by first class mail of notice of the defacement. The notice shall contain the following information:
(1) The street address and legal description of the property sufficient for identification of the property.
(2) A statement that the property is a potential graffiti nuisance property with a concise description of the conditions leading
to the finding.
(3) A statement that the graffiti must be removed within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice and that if the graffiti is not
abated within that time, the City will declare the property to be a public nuisance, subject to the abatement procedures in
this Code.
b. The removal requirements of subsection C1a of this Section do not apply if the property owner or responsible party can
demonstrate that:
(1) The property owner or responsible party lacks the financial ability to remove the defacing graffiti; or
(2) The property owner or responsible party has an active program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal
of the graffiti as part of that program, in which case, it is unlawful to permit such property to remain defaced with graffiti for
a period of fifteen (15) days after service by first class mail of notice of the defacement.
2. Right Of City To Remove:
a. Use Of Public Funds: Whenever the City becomes aware or is notified and determines that graffiti is located on publicly or
privately owned property viewable from a public or quasi-public place, the City is authorized to use public funds for the
removal of the graffiti, or for the painting or repairing of the graffiti, but will not authorize or undertake to provide for the
painting or repair of any more extensive an area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the City Administrator or the
designee of the City Administrator determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in
order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the property owner or responsible
party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area.
b. Right Of Entry On Private Property: Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public entity other than
the City for the purpose of graffiti removal, the City must attempt to secure the consent of the property owner or responsible
party and a release of the City from liability for property damage or personal injury. If the responsible party fails to remove the
offending graffiti within the time specified by this Chapter, or if the City has requested consent to remove or paint over the
offending graffiti and the property owner or responsible party has refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the City
and consistent with the terms of this subsection C, the City will commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the
graffiti removal according to the provisions specified below.
3. Abatement And Cost Recovery Proceedings:
a. Notice Of Due Process Hearing: The City Administrator or the designee of the City Administrator, serving as the hearing
officer, must provide the property owner of record and the party responsible for the maintenance of the property, if a person
different than the owner, not less than forty eight (48) hours' notice of the City's intent to hold a due process hearing at which
the property owner or responsible party is entitled to present evidence and argue that the property does not constitute a
public nuisance. Notice must be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action according to State law. If the
owner of record cannot be found after a diligent search, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous
place upon the property for a period of ten (10) days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published
in the area in which the property is located.
b. Determination Of Hearing Officer: The determination of the hearing officer after the due process hearing is final and not
appealable. If, after the due process hearing, regardless of the attendance of the owner or the responsible party or his/her
respective agent, the hearing officer determines that the property contains graffiti viewable from a public or quasi-public
place, the hearing officer must give written notice in an eradication order that, unless the graffiti is removed within ten (10)
days, the City may enter upon the property, cause the removal, painting over (in such color as meets with the approval of the
hearing officer), or such other eradication thereof as the hearing officer determines appropriate, and provide the owner and
the responsible party thereafter with an accounting of the cost of the eradication effort on a full cost recovery basis.
c. Eradication Effort: Not sooner than the time specified in the order of the hearing officer, the City Administrator or the
designee of the City Administrator is to implement the eradication order and provide an accounting to the owner and the
responsible party of the costs thereof.
d. Cost Hearing: The owner or responsible party may request a cost hearing before the hearing officer on the eradication
accounting, and appropriate due process must be extended to the owner or responsible party. If, following the cost hearing
or, if no hearing is requested, after the implementation of the eradication order, the hearing officer determines that all or a
portion of the cost is appropriately chargeable to the eradication effort, the total amount set forth in the eradication
accounting, or an amount thereof determined as appropriate by the hearing officer, is due and payable by the owner or
responsible party within thirty (30) days. Any amount of eradication charges assessed by the hearing officer that is less than
the total amount set forth in the eradication accounting must be explained by written letter from the hearing officer to the City
Council.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 142/454
e. Lien: As to such property where the responsible party is the property owner, if all or any portion of the assessed eradication
charges remain unpaid after thirty (30) days, the portion thereof that remains unpaid constitutes a lien on the property that
was the subject of the eradication effort. (Ord. 628, 6-5-1996; amd. 2000 Code)
5-7-7: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
A. Fines And Imprisonment: Any person violating this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
1. In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian is jointly and severely liable with the minor for payment of all fines.
2. Failure of the parents or legal guardian to make payment will result in the filing of a lien on the parents' or legal guardian's
property that includes the fine and administrative costs.
B. Restitution: In addition to any punishment specified in this Section, the court will order any violator to make restitution to the victim
for damages or loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator's offense in the amount or manner determined by the court. In the
case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be ordered jointly and severely liable with the minor to make the restitution.
C. Civil Responsibility For Damages For Wrongful Sale, Display Or Storage: Any person who sells, displays or stores, or permits the
sale, display or storage, of any graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of this Chapter is personally liable for all costs,
including attorney fees and court costs, incurred by any party in connection with the removal of graffiti, the repair of any property
containing graffiti, or such party's prosection of a civil claim for reimbursement or damages resulting from such graffiti removal or
property repair, arising from the use by any person of such wrongfully sold, displayed or stored graffiti implement in violation of
the provisions of this Chapter; provided, that such liability shall not exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). (Ord.
628, 6-5-1996)
Chapter 8
SOCIAL HOSTS
5-8-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
The city council intends to discourage underage consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private residence, and
intends to hold persons criminally responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under twenty one (21) years of age
consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering supplied the alcohol. The city council finds that:
A. Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol is consumed by persons under the age of twenty one (21)
are harmful to those persons and constitute a potential threat to public health requiring prevention or abatement.
B. Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol is consumed by persons under the age of twenty one (21)
disturb neighbors, damage property and jeopardize their own or others' safety.
C. Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol is consumed by persons under the age of twenty one (21)
are responsible for a disproportionate expenditure of public safety resources which can delay or reduce the ability of the police,
fire, or EMS to respond to other emergencies.
D. Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons, as well as the general public, from injuries related to alcohol
consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol related traffic collisions.
E. Often, events or gatherings involving underage consumption occur outside the presence of parents or other responsible adults.
However, there are times when the parent or other adult is present and condones the activity, and, in some circumstances,
provides the alcohol.
F. Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a crime, it is difficult to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to
help further combat underage consumption.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 143/454
G. A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person criminally responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage
consumption occurs. (Ord. 876, 4-7-2010)
5-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including
dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, or beer,
and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when
diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.
EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or
other activity.
HOST OR ALLOW: To aid, conduct, sponsor, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or permit a gathering or event.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
A. As a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent;
B. As a legal guardian; or
C. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, corporation, or any association of one or more individuals. A person does not
include any city, county, or state agency.
RESIDENCE OR PREMISES: Any location, including a home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room,
or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a
temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned,
leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual under twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord. 876, 4-7-2010)
5-8-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. It is unlawful for any person to host or allow an event or gathering at any residence or premises where alcohol or alcoholic
beverages are present and underage persons may also be present if the person hosting the event or gathering knows or
reasonably should know that the underage person will or does consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage.
B. A person is criminally responsible for violating subsection A of this section if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels,
or conspires with or otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.
C. A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering to be criminally responsible. (Ord.
876, 4-7-2010)
5-8-4: EXCEPTIONS:
A. This chapter does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and his or her parents while present in the parent's
household.
B. This chapter does not apply to legally protected religious observances.
C. This chapter does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club
permit holders who are regulated by Minnesota statutes section 340A.503, subdivision 1(a)(1), but it does apply to a person who
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 144/454
hosts a gathering or event at such liquor establishment.
D. This chapter does not apply to situations where underage persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages
during the course and scope of employment. (Ord. 876, 4-7-2010)
Title 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
6-1-1: STATE HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATION ACT ADOPTED; EXCEPTIONS:
Except for Minnesota statutes sections 169.04, 169.10, 169.11, 169.66, 169.78, 169.965, 169.966, and 169.98, chapter 169, known
as the highway traffic regulation act is hereby adopted as a traffic regulations ordinance for the city. Every provision contained in
such chapter is hereby adopted and made a part of this title by reference, as if fully set forth herein. (1971 Code § 14-1; amd. 2000
Code)
6-1-2: UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
No person shall leave a motor vehicle, except a commercial motor vehicle in a business or industrial district, unattended on any
street, alley, used car lot or unattended parking lot in the city without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key
and taking it with him/her; provided, that any violation of these provisions shall not mitigate the offense of stealing such motor vehicle
nor shall such violation be used to effect a recovery in any civil action for the theft of such motor vehicle or the insurance thereon or
have any other bearing on any civil action. (1971 Code § 14-3; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
6-1-3: TRAFFIC ON CERTAIN STREETS:
6-1-3-1: HADLEY AVENUE, BETWEEN 80TH AND 90TH STREETS:
A. Definition: "Gross weight" means the unloaded weight of a vehicle or the unloaded weight of a truck-tractor and semitrailer
combination, plus the weight of the load.
B. Weight Restrictions: No person shall operate a motor vehicle of over fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds' gross weight on or over
the portion of Hadley Avenue lying between 80th and 95th Streets in the city.
C. Temporary Permit: The city clerk shall have authority to issue temporary permits for motor vehicles of over fifteen thousand
(15,000) pounds' gross weight to operate on that portion of Hadley Avenue described in subsection B of this section.
D. Exempt Vehicles: The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles owned by or performing work for: 1) a sanitation
company; 2) a utility company; 3) the city; 4) the county; 5) the state; 6) the United States; 7) the school district transportation
offices; or 8) the metropolitan transit commission. (Ord. 605, 11-2-1994; amd. Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
6-1-4: REMOVAL AND RECOVERY OF VEHICLES:
A. Removal By Police:
1. Any vehicle, wherever found, whether on public or private property, in violation of this code or other ordinances of the city or
the laws of the state is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the same may be summarily abated by removing it, under the
direction or at the request of a police officer, to a place of storage by means of a towing truck or otherwise, or such police
officer may require the driver or owner to remove such vehicle off the paved or traveled portion of a street.
2. Any vehicle found upon the streets of the city in such a damaged condition or state of disrepair that it cannot be driven and
which, in the opinion of a police officer, constitutes an obstruction of the street, may be removed and impounded by the police
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 145/454
division to a place of storage; provided, that if the owner or operator has requested, such vehicle may be towed to the owner's
own garage or any other garage. (1971 Code § 14-4; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
B. Recovery Of Stored Vehicles: Before the owner or his/her agent shall be permitted to remove a vehicle from the place of storage
set forth in subsection A of this section, he/she shall:
1. Furnish satisfactory evidence to the director of public safety and the person in charge of such storage area of his/her identity
and ownership of such vehicle. (1971 Code § 14-5; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
2. Pay to the person in charge of such storage area for the towing of such vehicle the sum in such amount as provided by
ordinance of the city council from time to time as a storage charge. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006; amd. Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
3. Sign a written receipt for such vehicle. (1971 Code § 14-5; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
C. Effect Of Removal On Prosecution: The removal of a vehicle which is parked in violation of this code or other ordinance of the city
or the laws of the state shall not prevent the prosecution for violation of such laws. (1971 Code § 14-6; amd. Ord. 923, 12-18-
2013)
6-1-5: VIOLATIONS:
A. Unless otherwise declared by Minnesota statutes chapters 65B, 168, 169 and 171 with respect to particular offenses, it is a petty
misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by sections 6-1-1, 6-1-2, and 6-1-4 of this
chapter and sections 6-2-1 and 6-2-3 of this title; provided, that any violation of section 6-2-2 of this title and any violation which is
committed in a manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property is a
misdemeanor offense.
B. No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with the
authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. (1971 Code § 14-2; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
Chapter 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
6-2-1: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
A. On Street Parking Restrictions:
1. Snow And Ice Removal Between November 1 And March 31 Following: Between November 1 and March 31 following no
vehicle shall be left standing or parked on the streets of the city between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. on any day. At all other hours during such period, on street parking shall be permitted only when the same does not
interfere with the removal of snow and ice from the city streets, and vehicles so parked shall be removed from the street by
their owners. If a motor vehicle is found in violation of this subsection a police officer is authorized to issue a citation and/or
have the motor vehicle removed at the owner's expense.
2. Snow And Ice Removal Before November 1 And After March 31: Before November 1 and after March 31, on street parking
shall be permitted only when the same does not interfere with the removal of snow and ice from the city streets, and vehicles
so parked shall be removed from the street by their owners. It shall be unlawful to park on such streets until the snow removal
operation is completed in the area involved. If a motor vehicle is found in violation of this subsection a police officer is
authorized to ticket and/or have the motor vehicle removed at the owner's expense. (Ord. 919, 10-2-2013)
3. Number Of Days Limited: No vehicle shall be parked continuously on a public street for a period of seventy two (72) hours or
more. This prohibition is in addition to subsection A1 of this section.
4. Exemptions: All emergency and official vehicles responding to an emergency call, including doctors' automobiles, shall be
excluded from the provisions of this subsection A. (1971 Code § 14-7; amd. Ord. 919, 10-2-2013)
B. No Parking Zones: No vehicle shall be left standing or parked on the streets of the city:
1. Where any section of street has been designated as a no parking zone by resolution of the city council or by order of the fire
chief or designee.
2. Within fifteen feet (15') of any mailbox between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on Monday
through Saturday. (1971 Code § 14-7.1; amd. 2000 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 146/454
C. Liability Of Owner: Whenever any motor vehicle shall be parked or left standing within the city by any person other than the owner,
with the consent of the owner, express or implied, the operator thereof shall be deemed to be the agent of the owner of such
motor vehicle for the purposes of subsections A and B of this section. (1971 Code § 14-7)
6-2-2: PARKING FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS:
A. Parking Restrictions: No person shall park a motor vehicle in a parking space designated and reserved for the physically
handicapped, on either private or public property, unless:
1. That person is physically handicapped in a manner rendering it difficult and burdensome for such person to walk or such
person is operating the vehicle under the direction of such a physically handicapped person; and
2. The vehicle visibly bears or contains the certificate or insignia issued to physically handicapped persons by the Minnesota
department of public safety pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 169.345, subdivision 2.
B. Signs Posted: Notice of such designation of handicapped parking spaces shall be given by the posting of appropriate signs.
C. Prima Facie Proof: In any prosecution charging a violation of the provisions of this section, proof of the identity of the registered
owner of the particular vehicle described in the citation or complaint at the time of the violation shall create a prima facie
presumption that the individual was the person who parked such vehicle at the point where the violation occurred.
D. Violation; Vehicle Impoundment: A violation of this section shall constitute a petty misdemeanor. Vehicles in violation may be
removed, impounded and kept in custody under the direction of the director of public safety. (1971 Code § 14-17.2; amd. 2000
Code)
6-2-3: PRIVATE PARKING LOTS:
A. Purposes: The purposes of this section are to promote the safe operation of motor vehicles on public roads and highways and in
private parking lots and to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of persons using private parking lots.
B. Definitions:
OPERATING: Controlling or parking a motor vehicle. For the purposes of this section, a motor vehicle located in a private parking
lot shall constitute prima facie evidence that the vehicle was operated in such private parking lot.
PRIVATE PARKING LOT: A parking lot ordinarily used by or accessible to the public, and any driveways connecting such parking
lot to a public street or highway, except driveways in zoning districts R1 through R4, inclusive. (1971 Code § 14-7.3)
C. Prohibited Acts: The following acts are prohibited:
1. Operating a motor vehicle in a private parking lot without proper motor vehicle equipment as required by Minnesota statutes
chapter 169, the highway traffic regulation act.
2. Operating a motor vehicle in a private parking lot without proper insurance as required by Minnesota statutes chapter 65B, the
no fault automobile insurance act.
3. Operating a motor vehicle in a private parking lot without proper vehicle registration as required by Minnesota statutes chapter
168.
4. Operating a motor vehicle in a private parking lot without a proper driver's license as required by Minnesota statutes chapter
171. (1971 Code § 14-7.4)
6-2-4: PARKING OR STORAGE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES DEEMED PUBLIC NUISANCE:
A. Findings: The presence and accumulation of an excessive number of motor vehicles, or improper parking and storage of such
vehicles on real property is hereby found to create an unsightly condition tending to reduce the value of real property, to create
fire and safety hazards, and to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the public health and safety. The
accumulation or improper parking of such vehicles is further found to promote blight and deterioration in the community; and to
violate the zoning regulations of the city in many instances, particularly where such vehicles are maintained in required setback
areas of residential property. It is further found that inoperable motor vehicles are often in the nature of rubbish, litter, and
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 147/454
unsightly debris in violation of health and sanitation laws. Therefore, the accumulation and improper parking of such vehicles on
real property is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such, which remedy shall be in addition
to any other remedy provided in this section or other ordinances of this city or by state law.
B. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the words and phrases used herein are defined as follows:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE, CLASS I: Vehicles exceeding an axle weight of five (5) tons or more, or any of the following types of
vehicles, regardless of axle weight: semitrailers, the tractor portion of semitrucks, garbage trucks, tank trucks, dump trucks,
flatbed trucks, tow trucks, cattle trucks, trucks carrying or designed to carry explosive or flammable materials, well drilling
equipment, earth moving equipment, or school buses.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE, CLASS II: All commercial vehicles other than class I commercial vehicles including pickup trucks,
vans, trailers and recreational vehicles which are used for commercial purposes.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE: Any vehicle which cannot be driven or propelled under its own power in its existing condition, or which
cannot be driven or propelled under its own power in a safe manner because of its wrecked, junked, or partially dismantled
condition, or which cannot be driven because necessary licenses or authorizations have not been obtained and displayed on the
vehicle.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise, or in obedience to traffic
regulations, signs or signals or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of the operator of
the vehicle.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle used primarily for recreation including, but not limited to, a camper, snowmobile, trail
bike, all-terrain vehicle, motor vehicle licensed for highway operation which is being used for off road recreational purposes, boat
or other recreational watercraft, and any trailer for transportation of such recreational vehicle.
TRAILER: Any device designed for carrying persons or property which is drawn by a vehicle and is not self-propelled. For
purposes of this section, a trailer shall be deemed a vehicle whether standing alone or hitched to another vehicle.
VEHICLE: Any self-propelled device in, or upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported. A vehicle properly
loaded on a trailer shall constitute a single vehicle. (Ord. 709, 3-20-2002)
C. General Parking Requirements: Vehicles must be parked in accordance with the following provisions:
1. A vehicle must not be parked upon the private property of any person without the consent of such property owner.
2. In residential districts, no more than a total of four (4) vehicles may be parked on a single lot outside of a building or accessory
structure.
3. In residential districts, the parking surface must extend a minimum of one foot (1') around the perimeter of the vehicle.
4. No vehicle may be parked in any alley except for purposes of loading and unloading unless ten feet (10') or more of the alley is
left available for the free movement of traffic.
5. A parked vehicle on public or private property must not be parked in a location or manner which limits or impairs sightlines for
motorists traveling in the public right of way.
6. An uncoupled boat, camper, or trailer may not be parked on any public right of way. (Ord. 807, 10-18-2006)
D. Class I Commercial Vehicle Parking Restricted In Residential Areas:
1. No class I commercial vehicle may be parked in a residential district except as follows:
a. Class I commercial vehicles while loading, unloading, or rendering a service.
b. Moving vans may be parked for up to a forty eight (48) hour period adjacent to the dwelling.
c. Semitruck tractors that display a valid permit issued under subsection D2 of this section.
2. Permanent residents that lawfully and regularly parked an operable semitruck tractor in a residential district as of April 10,
2002, may apply to the city clerk's office for a permit to continue to park the semitruck tractor vehicle in such residential district.
Applications must be received no later than October 10, 2002, (6 months after effective date hereof) in order to qualify for a
permit under this section. (Ord. 709, 3-20-2002)
3. A permit applicant shall be required to identify the semitruck tractor, indicate when the applicant began parking the vehicle in
the residential district, identify the address or street location where the vehicle has regularly been parked, and provide such
other information as may be required by the clerk. An application fee shall be charged as provided by ordinance of the city
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 148/454
council from time to time. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
A permit issued under the provisions of this section shall be personal, nonassignable, and nontransferable, except that a new
permit may be issued for a semitruck tractor that replaces a previously permitted semitruck tractor. Each permit shall be valid
only for a specifically prescribed semitruck tractor and identified parking location. No more than one commercial vehicle permit
is allowed for a residential property.
E. Class II Commercial Vehicle Parking In Residential Districts Restricted: No more than one class II commercial vehicle may be
parked or stored on a property located in a residential district, except for those properties with a conditional use permit issued
under subsection 11-3-9D5b of this code.
F. Open Storage Of Inoperable Vehicles Prohibited: No inoperable vehicle shall be parked upon any real property within the city for a
period of more than seven (7) days, unless such vehicle is completely enclosed in a building or accessory structure such as a
detached garage.
G. Blocking Entries Prohibited: No person shall park a vehicle upon a highway in front of or within ten feet (10') on either side of the
entrance to any building designated by official no parking signs. (Ord. 709, 3-20-2002)
Chapter 3
TOWING SERVICES
6-3-1: PURPOSE:
The Public Safety Department requests that motor vehicles be towed in order to remove them from the public right of way. (Ord. 613,
4-19-1995)
6-3-2: BIDS AND CONTRACTS:
The City shall let bids for a towing company to provide the towing and impound service needs of the City. The contract shall be
awarded for up to three (3) years to the lowest responsible bidder. (Ord. 613, 4-19-1995)
6-3-3: COMPLIANCE WITH TOWING AND IMPOUNDING SPECIFICATIONS:
Detailed specifications for the towing and impounding of vehicles shall be complied with by the provider. A tow provider shall meet
the minimum standards provided in the specifications in order to provide the service required by the Public Safety Department. The
requirements of this Chapter must be met in order to be eligible to provide the City's towing services on a contract. (Ord. 613, 4-19-
1995)
Chapter 4
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: A. A motor vehicle, as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 169.01, that:
1. Has remained illegally for a period of more than forty eight (48) hours on any public property, or controlled by a unit of
government for more than four (4) hours on that property when it is properly posted; or on private property for a period of
time, as determined under Minnesota Statutes section 168B.04, subdivision 2, without the consent of the person in control of
the property.
2. Lacks vital component parts or is in an inoperable condition such that it has no substantial potential for further use consistent
with its usual functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building.
B. A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 168.10, is not considered an "abandoned vehicle".
C. Vehicles on the premises of junk yards and automobile graveyards that are defined, maintained, and licensed in accordance
with Minnesota Statutes section 161.242 or that are licensed and maintained in accordance with local laws and zoning
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 149/454
regulations are not considered abandoned.
D. A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being held under police authority or pursuant to a writ or court order is not
considered abandoned, nor may it be processed as abandoned while the police hold, writ, or court order is in effect.
JUNK VEHICLE: A vehicle that is three (3) years old or older; is extensively damaged, with the damage including such things as
broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train, or transmission; is apparently inoperable; does not have a valid, current registration
plate; and has an approximate fair market value equal to the approximate value of the scrap in it.
VITAL COMPONENT PARTS: Those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including
such things as the motor, drive train, and wheels. (1971 Code § 2-77; amd. 2000 Code)
6-4-2: SCOPE:
Notwithstanding Section 1-11-1 of this Code, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply to abandoned motor vehicles. (1971 Code
§ 2-77; amd. 2000 Code)
6-4-3: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND:
The City Police Division shall take into custody and impound any abandoned motor vehicles. (1971 Code § 2-77; amd. 2000 Code)
6-4-4: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Initial Notice:
1. When an abandoned motor vehicle is taken into custody, the Police Division or impound lot operator taking it into custody shall
give notice of the taking within ten (10) days. The notice shall: a) set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make,
model, and serial number of the impounded vehicle if such information can be reasonably obtained and the place where the
vehicle is being held, b) inform the owner and any lien holders of their right to reclaim the vehicle under Section 6-4-5 of this
Chapter, and c) state that failure of the owner or lien holders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents within the
appropriate time allowed under Minnesota Statutes section 168B.051, subdivision 1 or 2, shall be deemed a waiver by them of
all right, title and interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent to the transfer of title to and disposal or sale of the vehicle
and contents at a public auction pursuant to Section 6-4-6 of this Chapter.
2. The notice shall be sent by United States mail to the registered owner, if any, of the abandoned motor vehicle and to all readily
identifiable lien holders of record.
3. The Police Division shall make this information available to the impound lot operator for notification purposes. If it is impossible
to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lien holders, the notice shall be
published once in the newspaper of general circulation in the area from where the motor vehicle was towed or abandoned.
Published notices may be grouped together for convenience and economy.
B. Second Notice: If an unauthorized vehicle remains unclaimed after thirty (30) days from the date the notice was sent under this
Section, a second notice shall be sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered owner, if any, of the unauthorized
vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien holders of record. (1971 Code § 2-77; amd. 2000 Code)
6-4-5: RECLAMATION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE:
A. The owner or any lien holder of an abandoned motor vehicle shall have a right to reclaim such vehicle from the City or impound lot
operator taking it into custody, upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody
within fifteen (15) or forty five (45) days, as applicable under Minnesota Statutes section 168B.051, subdivision 1 or 2, after the
date of the notice required by Section 6-4-4 of this Chapter.
B. Nothing in Section 6-4-3 or 6-4-4 of this Chapter shall be construed to impair any lien of a garage keeper under the laws of the
State, or the right of a lien holder to foreclose. For the purposes of this Section, "garage keeper" is an operator of a parking place
or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles. (1971 Code § 2-77; amd. 2000 Code)
6-4-6: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES; PROCEEDS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 150/454
A. Disposition:
1. An abandoned motor vehicle and contents taken into custody and not reclaimed under Section 6-4-5 of this Chapter may be
disposed of or sold at public auction two (2) weeks following published notice. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form
prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also
entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership.
Before such a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety check.
2. Abandoned or junk vehicles not sold pursuant to subsection A1 of this Section shall be disposed of in accordance with
Minnesota Statutes section 168B.09, subdivision 1.
B. Proceeds Of Sales: From the proceeds of a sale of an abandoned vehicle, the City shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing,
preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative notice and publication costs incurred in handling the vehicle pursuant to
this Chapter. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lien holder for ninety
(90) days and then shall be deposited in the City Treasury. (1971 Code § 2-77; amd. 2000 Code)
6-4-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who abandons a motor vehicle on any public or private property, without the consent of the person in control of such
property, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(1971 Code § 2-78; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 5
BICYCLES
6-5-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this Chapter, "bicycle" means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having
two (2) tandem wheels either of which is over fourteen inches (14") in diameter and including any device generally recognized as a
bicycle though equipped with two (2) front or rear wheels. (1971 Code § 5-1)
6-5-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The parent of any child or minor and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any child, minor or ward to
violate any provisions of this Chapter. These provisions shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or highway within
the City or upon any path or trail therein set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated in this Chapter.
(1971 Code § 5-17)
6-5-3: OPERATION OF BICYCLES:
A. Generally: Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles shall be
granted all of the rights of and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by Minnesota Statutes
chapter 169, except as to special regulations therein and except as to those provisions thereof which by their nature can have no
application.
B. Manner Of Riding: A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached
thereto.
C. Number Of Riders: No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped, except on a baby seat attached to the bicycle; provided, that such seat is equipped with a harness to hold the child
securely in the seat and that protection is provided against the child's feet hitting the spokes of the wheel; or in a seat attached to
the bicycle operator.
D. Hitching To Other Vehicles: No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, toboggan, sled, skateboard or toy vehicle
shall attach the same or himself/herself to any streetcar or vehicle upon a roadway.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 151/454
E. Where To Ride:
1. Roadways:
a. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable,
exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
b. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
2. Bicycle Paths: Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such
path and shall not use the roadway.
3. Sidewalks:
a. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.
b. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall
give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
F. Carrying Articles: No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the driver from keeping
at least one hand upon the handlebars. (1971 Code § 5-9; amd. 2000 Code)
6-5-4: PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. Parking To Obstruct Prohibited: No person shall park a bicycle against any window or parking meter or on the main traveled
portion of the sidewalk nor in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to pedestrians, traffic or property.
B. Spaces Provided; Parking Required: Notwithstanding subsection A of this Section, when bicycle parking spaces have been
established and designated, no person shall park a bicycle in the vicinity thereof except in such bicycle parking spaces. (1971
Code § 5-14)
C. Bicycles To Be Locked: No owner or operator of a bicycle shall leave or park such bicycle unattended on the streets, sidewalks,
alleys, designated parking areas and other public grounds without first affixing a lock thereon so as to prevent the theft of such
bicycle. (1971 Code § 5-15)
6-5-5: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
A. Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic signals, signs and markings unless otherwise directed
by a police officer.
B. On any street or intersection where U-turns or other turns are prohibited and signs are erected and in place so indicating, no
person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to
make any such turn, in which case, such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. (1971 Code § 5-12)
6-5-6: BICYCLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION:
A. Compliance With Mechanical Standards: It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle within the City unless the bicycle
is equipped as provided in this Chapter and unless the bicycle is in safe mechanical condition. (1971 Code § 5-10)
B. Lights And Reflectors:
1. Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with or its operator shall carry a lamp on the front which shall emit a
white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type
approved by the Department of Public Safety which is visible from all distances from one hundred feet (100') to six hundred feet
(600') to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light
visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
2. No person may, at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the
highway at a distance of five hundred feet (500') ahead, operate a bicycle unless the bicycle or its operator is equipped with
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 152/454
reflective surfaces that shall be visible during the hours of darkness from six hundred feet (600') when viewed in front of the
lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. The reflective surfaces shall include reflective materials on each side of
each pedal to indicate their presence from the front or the rear and with a minimum of twenty (20) square inches on each side
of the bicycle or its operator, of white reflective material. All reflective materials used in compliance with this subsection shall
meet the requirements as prescribed by the State Commissioner of Public Safety.
C. Brake: Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level,
clean pavement. (1971 Code § 5-9; amd. 2000 Code)
6-5-7: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Juvenile Offenders: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) who violates any of the sections of this Chapter shall be declared a
juvenile bicycle law offender, and the proceedings against such individual will take place in the Family Court Division of
Washington County Court under the rules and regulations of such Court. (1971 Code § 5-16; amd. 2000 Code)
B. Violation; Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to the penalty provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code and impoundment of the bicycle for not to exceed
three (3) months. (1971 Code § 5-18; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 6
SNOWMOBILES
6-6-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Minnesota statutes sections 84.81 through 84.88 are hereby adopted as snowmobile regulations of the city and made part of this title
by reference as if fully set forth herein. (1971 Code § 14-8; amd. 2000 Code)
6-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
BOULEVARD: The portions of the street right of way between the curb and/or street line and the property line.
DESIGNATED TRAIL: That series of snowmobile trails designated on a map dated October 1 of each year and labeled snowmobile
designated trail system, which map is on file with the city clerk, reviewed by the public safety, health and welfare commission and
approved by the city council.
EASEMENT: A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons other than the owner.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street right of way improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice steered by skis or runners.
WRITTEN PERMISSION: The expressed written permission of the owner of the land authorizing snowmobile use. The written
permission must be on file with the police division, or in the alternative, the operator must have the written permission on his/her
person and in his/her possession while operating the snowmobile; the written permission shall specify the specific area where
operation is permitted. (1971 Code § 14-8; amd. 2000 Code)
6-6-3: VEHICLE REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a snowmobile within the city unless it is registered as provided by state law. (1971 Code § 14-14)
6-6-4: OPERATORS OF SNOWMOBILES:
A. Ages Of Operators; Application Of Certificate:
1. Children under the age of twelve (12) are not allowed to operate a snowmobile on designated public lands or waters and are
prohibited to cross streets or highways.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 153/454
2. Children ages twelve (12) and thirteen (13) can operate a snowmobile upon designated lands and/or waters with a snowmobile
safety certificate. They are prohibited to cross any street or highway.
3. Children ages fourteen (14) through seventeen (17) can operate a snowmobile upon designated public lands or waters with a
snowmobile safety certificate. They can cross legally designated streets and highways.
4. Persons ages eighteen (18) and over can operate snowmobiles upon designated public lands or waters without a certificate.
(1971 Code § 14-11)
6-6-5: OPERATION IN CERTAIN AREAS RESTRICTED:
A. The operation of snowmobiles within the city is prohibited except:
1. Upon a designated snowmobile trail system.
2. Upon a mayoral declaration of a snow emergency.
3. When used by law enforcement in the officers' performance of their duties.
4. Upon private land with the expressed written permission of the owner.
5. Upon the highway right of way of U.S. Highway 61 and Highway 95, which is in conformance with Minnesota state statutes.
B. Snowmobile operation is prohibited on Jamaica Avenue between 70th Street and East Point Douglas Road; snowmobiles may
otherwise be operated upon a public roadway when a snowmobile is being operated on the most direct route from the operator's
residence to access or return from a designated snowmobile trail system when:
1. The snowmobile is operated in single file.
2. The snowmobile is operated on the extreme right hand curb line.
3. The snowmobile is operated at a speed not greater than thirty (30) miles per hour.
4. The snowmobile is being operated on the most direct route to access or return from a designated snowmobile trail system.
C. As part of the designated trail system, a snowmobile may enter upon and cross street rights of way under the following conditions:
1. The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the public street or public highway
and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing; and
2. The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main traveled way of the public street or public
highway; and
3. The driver yields the right of way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard; and
4. Crossing a divided public street or public highway, the crossing is made only at an intersection of such public street or public
highway with another public street or public highway. (1971 Code § 14-9)
6-6-6: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Except when being operated on a designated trail system, snowmobiles may be operated within the city only during the following
hours:
A. Between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., Sunday through Thursday.
B. On Friday from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Saturday morning.
C. On Saturday from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. until one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Sunday morning. (1971 Code § 14-10)
6-6-7: SPEED LIMIT; RECKLESS OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any snowmobile in the following ways:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 154/454
A. At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all the surrounding circumstances; and
B. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury or damage to
person or property. (1971 Code § 14-14.2; amd. Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
6-6-8: EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Vehicle Equipment: It shall be unlawful to operate or ride upon a snowmobile in the city without the following equipment:
1. Muffler: A standard engine muffler and exhaust system in good operating condition to prevent excessive noise. No person shall
use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device to defeat such muffling.
2. Throttle: A safety or deadman throttle which automatically cuts the fuel supply to the engine whenever the operator releases
pressure on the throttle.
3. Lights: A headlight and taillight displayed when operating.
B. Helmets: No person shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile while it is being operated on the roadways or highway
within the city without wearing a protective helmet that complies with standards established by the Minnesota commissioner of
public safety. (1971 Code § 14-13; amd. Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
6-6-9: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Enforcement Official: A peace officer is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce all requirements of this chapter and related
state statutes.
B. Impoundment; Redemption; Disposal: A peace officer is hereby authorized and empowered to seize and confiscate any
snowmobile, trailer or vehicle used by the owner or any other person with his/her knowledge in violating this chapter. Upon
conclusion of the prosecution of any case, the snowmobile, trailer or vehicle seized pursuant to this section shall be returned to
the lawful owner thereof upon payment to the city of all costs incurred by the city in seizure, to include towing fees and storage or
impound fees. In the event the lawful owner cannot be determined or located, the property shall be disposed of in compliance
with state statute or court order. (1971 Code § 14-14.3; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
C. Violation: All violations of this chapter and/or state statutes, unless otherwise designated, relating to the operation of snowmobiles,
shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. (1971 Code § 14-14.4; amd. Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
D. Liability Of Registered Owner:
1. The person registered as owner of a snowmobile may be charged with a misdemeanor if a snowmobile bearing his/her
registration number is operated contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The registered owner may not be so charged if:
a. The snowmobile was reported as stolen to a law enforcement agency at the time of the alleged unlawful act.
b. The registered owner demonstrates that the snowmobile was stolen.
c. The registered owner furnished to law enforcement officers, upon request, the identity of the person in actual physical control
of the snowmobile at the time of such violation.
2. The provisions of this subsection D do not apply to any person who rents or leases a snowmobile if such person keeps a
record of the name and address of the person or persons renting or leasing such snowmobile, the registration number thereof,
the departure date and time and expected time of return thereof. Such record shall be preserved for at least six (6) months and
shall be prima facie evidence that the person named therein was the operator thereof at the time it was operated contrary to
this chapter. The provisions of this subsection D do not prohibit or limit the prosecution of a snowmobile operator for violating
any provisions of this chapter. (1971 Code § 14-14.1; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
Chapter 7
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 155/454
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are applicable:
PRIVATE PROPERTY: All lands other than public property.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Lands owned by the United States, the state or any political subdivision thereof.
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle designed for, used or capable of use for sport, amusement or recreation,
whether or not eligible to be licensed for use upon streets and highways, including, but not limited to, motorbikes, motor scooters,
trail bikes, minibikes, motorcycles, go-carts, hovercraft, snowmobiles converted to use with wheels, all-terrain vehicles or dune
buggies, but excluding motor vehicles designed for commercial, industrial or agricultural use, motorized foot scooters as defined by
Minnesota state statute section 169.225, and snowmobiles propelled by tracks. (1971 Code § 14-15; amd. Ord. 779, 10-19-2005)
6-7-2: OPERATION RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to operate a recreational motor vehicle within the city:
A. Upon private property without the written permission of the owner or person entitled to possession thereof. This restriction shall
not apply to motor vehicles registered under Minnesota statutes chapter 168 when operated by a driver licensed under Minnesota
statutes chapter 171 upon private driveways, roadways, lanes, ways or parking lots where the operation of licensed motor
vehicles is not expressly prohibited by posted notice.
B. Upon any school grounds, public park, playground, recreational area, golf course or other public property, except at such times
and places as the proper authorities may authorize or designate and subject to conditions imposed by such authorities. No
operation whatsoever shall be allowed on the foregoing areas or places described in this subsection when the recreational motor
vehicle does not bear a license plate evidencing registration pursuant to Minnesota statutes chapter 168.
C. Upon any public sidewalk, walkway or boulevard.
D. Upon the right of way of any public street or highway unless:
1. The recreational motor vehicle is licensed under Minnesota statutes chapter 168; and
2. The operator is licensed under Minnesota statutes chapter 171; and
3. The vehicle is operated upon the improved portion of the right of way.
E. Unless the vehicle is registered pursuant to Minnesota statutes chapter 168 or is operated solely on the vehicle owner's private
property. (1971 Code § 14-16; amd. 2000 Code)
F. Except when operated by a law enforcement officer in the performance of official duties. (Ord. 779, 10-19-2005)
6-7-3: MOVEMENT OF UNLICENSED RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
No unlicensed recreational motor vehicle may be moved along or across a street or highway with a person seated thereon, whether
or not the engine be operating. Such vehicle may be moved along or across a street or highway by pushing, and only when doing so
creates no hazard to moving vehicular traffic on the street or highway. (1971 Code § 14-18)
6-7-4: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Except for licensed vehicles operated upon streets or highways by licensed operators, no recreational motor vehicle shall be
operated between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. upon any public property, or within one-fourth
(1/4) mile of any platted area. (1971 Code § 14-17)
6-7-5: NOISE LIMITS:
Recreational motor vehicles shall meet the noise limits established for motorcycles by Minnesota statutes chapter 169. (1971 Code
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 156/454
§ 14-20)
6-7-6: HELMETS:
Persons operating a recreational motor vehicle within the city or riding upon such recreational motor vehicle shall wear a helmet that
complies with standards established by the Minnesota commissioner of public safety. (1971 Code § 14-21; amd. 2000 Code)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
7-1-1: STREET NAMES AND BUILDING NUMBERS:
A. System Adopted: A uniform system of naming streets and numbering properties and principal buildings, as shown in the manual of
procedures identified by the title uniform street and property numbering system, which is filed in the city office and the county
courthouse, is hereby adopted for use in the city. This map and all explanatory matter thereon is hereby adopted and made a part
of this section. (1971 Code § 22-6; amd. 2000 Code)
B. Compliance With System1:
1. Building Numbers: All properties or parcels of land within the city shall hereafter be identified by reference to the uniform
numbering system adopted by this section; provided, that all existing numbers of property and buildings not now in conformity
with provisions of this section shall be changed to conform to the system adopted by this section within six (6) months from the
date of passage of this section2.
2. Street Names: The names of all streets in the city shall be as designated by the uniform street naming system. (1971 Code
§ 22-7)
C. Location Of Numbers On Buildings: Each principal building shall bear the number assigned to the frontage on which the front
entrance is located. In case a principal building is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front
entrance of such building shall bear a separate number. (1971 Code § 22-8)
D. Specifications Of Numerals: Numerals indicating the official numbers for each principal building or each front entrance to such
building shall be at least four inches (4") in height and be reflectorized and shall be posted in a manner so as to be visible from
the street on which the property is located. In zoning districts AG-1, AG-2, R-1, R-2 and UR, the official numbers, two inches (2")
in height, shall be displayed on the mailbox. (1971 Code § 22-9; amd. 2000 Code)
E. Administration Of System:
1. Building Numbers:
a. Maintenance: The department of administration shall be responsible for maintaining the numbering system. In the
performance of this responsibility, the department shall be guided by the provisions of subsections B, C and D of this section.
b. Records Kept: The department of administration shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under this section.
c. Assignment Of Numbers: The department of administration shall assign to any property owner in the city, upon request, a
number for each principal building or separate front entrance to such building. In doing so, it shall assign only the numbers
assigned to such building under the provisions of this section; provided, that the recorder may assign additional numerals in
accordance with the official numbering system whenever a property has been subdivided, a new front entrance opened or
undue hardship has been worked on any property owner.
2. Existing Street Names: Street names in existence prior to the passage of this section3 may be retained subject to approval by
the city council. (1971 Code § 22-10)
7-1-2: EXCAVATIONS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 157/454
(Rep. by Ord. 700, 6-20-2001)
7-1-3: PROHIBITED SNOW AND ICE DEPOSITS:
A. Unless approved by the director of public works of the city, it shall be unlawful to deposit snow removed from private property on
public property, including boulevard areas; except, that snow removed from boulevard areas of driveways and sidewalks may be
placed on adjacent boulevard areas.
B. Snow removed from private property may not be deposited upon other private property without the consent of the owner thereof.
(1971 Code § 22-4; amd. 2000 Code)
C. Removal operations shall in no manner interfere with the use of public streets, nor shall snow be accumulated or deposited by
motor-driven equipment in such a manner as to interfere with visibility at intersections or curves of public streets of the city. (1971
Code § 22-5)
7-1-4: STREET LIGHTING RATES:
A. Rates Established:
1. Residential: There shall be imposed upon each residential lot benefited by the municipal street lighting system a special
quarterly charge, as and for a special charge for the operation of the municipal street lighting system, to cover the city cost of
electrical energy for and the maintenance of such system. The amount of said charge shall be established by council
resolution. (1971 Code § 22-21; amd. 2000 Code)
2. Commercial: There shall be imposed upon each commercial lot benefited by the city street lighting system a special annual
charge, as and for a special charge for the operation of the city street lighting system, to cover the city cost of electrical energy
for and the maintenance of such system. The amount of said charge shall be established by council resolution. (1971 Code
§ 22-22; amd. 2000 Code)
3. Amendment Of Rates: The city council hereby reserves and retains the right and power to amend the rates established in this
section in the event the established rates are not sufficient to cover the costs of construction, electrical energy and
maintenance. (1971 Code § 22-23)
B. Bills For Service; Liability For Rates: The charges imposed by subsections A1 and A2 of this section shall be billed quarterly to the
owners of the affected properties, and thereupon, the amount due shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the city
clerk. The owners of such properties shall be personally liable for the amounts imposed in this section. (1971 Code § 22-24)
C. Unpaid Charges Assessed: On or before September 1 of each year, the clerk shall list any unpaid charges against each separate
lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this section. The council shall then spread the charges against property benefited
as a special assessment under Minnesota Statutes section 429.101 and other pertinent statutes for certification to the county
auditor and collection the following year along with the current taxes. (1971 Code § 22-26)
D. Disposition Of Proceeds: The proceeds of the special charges and special assessments shall be credited to the city streetlight
enterprise fund. (1971 Code § 22-27; amd. 2000 Code)
7-1-5: SIDEWALKS:
A. Classification: Sidewalks shall be classified according to pedestrian use and location in the following categories:
1. Safety sidewalk.
2. Low use. (1971 Code § 22-11)
B. Snow Removal By City:
1. Safety Sidewalks: Safety sidewalks shall be cleared by the city within forty eight (48) hours after the snow has ceased to fall.
2. Low Use Sidewalks: Low use sidewalks shall be posted closed from November 15 through April 15 of each year. (1971 Code
§ 22-12)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 158/454
Chapter 2
STREET, DRIVEWAY AND PARKING LOT CONSTRUCTION
7-2-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit And Compliance Required: No person shall make any curb cut or install any driveway or parking lot without first obtaining a
permit from the city. The applicant shall provide the required information and shall, in addition, conform with the regulations of this
chapter. (Ord. 700, 6-20-2001)
B. Application For Permit: Any person desiring a permit shall present a written application to the public works director, describing the
improvements to be made and, if specified by the public works director, plans which indicate that the requirements of this chapter
will be met. The public works director shall request assistance from the city engineer in cases where a grade to establish the
driveway or other technical information is requested. (1971 Code § 22-31; amd. 2000 Code)
C. Revocation Of Permit: Any permit issued may be revoked by the public works director, upon request by the city engineer, at any
time after its issuance for failure to comply with the conditions of the permit. (1971 Code § 22-37; amd. 2000 Code)
D. Appeals: Appeals from the decision of the public works director in relation to the granting or revoking of a permit shall be referred
to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken within twenty (20) days from and after the date of such decision by the public works
director. Upon a motion from the city council, the appeal may be referred to the planning commission. The recommendation of the
planning commission shall be forwarded to the council for final action. The prosecution for violation of any of the provisions herein
shall be held in abeyance pending the determination of an appeal to the city council. (1971 Code § 22-38; amd. 2000 Code)
7-2-2: CURB CUTS:
A. There shall only be one curb cut for each residential lot having curb and gutter. Approval of a new or second curb cut shall require
that the original curb cut be closed and the driveway removed and the curb cut repaired at the applicant's expense.
B. No curb cuts shall be made which will impair proper street drainage or cause ingress and egress from properties to constitute a
hazard to traffic if so determined by the public works director.
C. The performance of the work and quality of materials shall be in accordance with the latest revision of the state department of
highways standard specifications for highway construction.
D. The existing curb shall be removed in complete whole sections. No cutting, sawing or breaking of the existing curb shall be
allowed, except for blacktop curbs. Joints between the existing curb and the new entrance shall be made at the existing joints in
the in-place curb.
E. Any portion of the existing pavement structure disturbed during the curb cut work shall be repaired with similar materials of equal
or greater structural capacity. Repair limits shall be defined by right angle saw cuts so oriented to provide the least noticeable
surface patch.
F. On existing streets, improved with curb and gutter, the period between removing the in-place curb and constructing the new
entrance shall not exceed seventy two (72) hours. (1971 Code § 22-32; amd. 2000 Code)
G. The permit fee for a curb cut shall be in such amount as provided by ordinance of the city council from time to time. The fee shall
be waived if application is made in connection with the issuance of a building permit for new construction. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
7-2-3: DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING LOTS; PROCEDURES AND SPECIFICATIONS:
The following procedures and specifications shall be required for all driveway construction from streets to private garages, and for all
parking lot construction in areas served by streets with curb and gutter. Developments in rural areas where storm sewer is not
installed may utilize rural cross section roads, and driveways may be of crushed rock, gravel or other durable materials:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 159/454
A. Procedures:
1. The driveway or parking lot shall be excavated to remove all organic or other unstable soils from the area to be surfaced.
2. The area to be surfaced shall be graded and compacted to the elevation that will permit the placement of the full pavement
section.
3. The performance of the work and the quality of materials shall be in accordance with the latest revision of the state department
of highways standard specifications for highway construction.
4. The public works director shall be granted access to the improvement area during all phases of construction. The contractor or
owner shall arrange for inspections of the grading work, the aggregate base placement, and the bituminous course placement
by the public works director prior to proceeding with the subsequent work phase. Any and all stability, compaction, gradation or
other material or placement tests that the public works director may request shall be provided by the contractor or owner
through a testing company acceptable to the city.
B. Specifications:
1. Driveways and parking lots shall be constructed so as to provide drainage from the garage to the street or storm sewer system
unless an alternative method is approved by the public works director.
2. Minimum pavement sections for asphalt driveways and parking lots shall be:
a. Driveways for residential buildings with four (4) units or less per building: 2331 bituminous wearing course - 2 inches
compacted class 5 aggregate base - not less than 4 inches compacted.
b. Parking lots and driveways for residential buildings with more than four (4) units per building, and commercial, industrial and
institutional areas:
(1) 2341 bituminous wearing course - 2 inches compacted.
(2) 2331 bituminous binder course - 4 inches compacted class 5 aggregate base - 6 inches compacted unless alternates are
approved in writing by the city. In all cases, alternate pavement sections shall be considered only if sufficient data to justify
another pavement design, based on the current Minnesota transportation department design procedure for flexible
pavement, is submitted as part of a formal alternate request. If, based on the plan that is presented, the public works
director determines that the proposed driveway or parking lot construction is not deemed adequate due to traffic volumes
or types of traffic, additional construction materials may be required by the city based on Minnesota transportation
department design criteria.
3. Minimum pavement requirements for concrete driveways shall be:
a. Gravel base - 3 inches compacted.
b. Slab - 4 inches.
c. Reinforcement - 6 x 6 no. 10 mesh.
4. Minimum requirements for gravel driveways shall be at least six inches (6") (compacted) of class 5 gravel meeting state
transportation department specification 2118. (1971 Code § 22-34; amd. 2000 Code)
C. Permit Fee: The permit fee for driveways and parking lots shall be in such amount as provided by ordinance of the city council
from time to time. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
7-2-4: TABLE OF DRIVEWAY DIMENSIONS:
All driveways constructed in the city shall conform to the dimensions set forth in the following table:
DRIVEWAY DIMENSIONS
Driveway Dimensions
Residential
Urban
Rural
Commercial - Industrial
Urban Rural
Driveway angle (Y) 60 - 90 60 - 90 60 90 60 90
Minimum driveway width (W) 12' 12' 26' 32' 26' 32'
Recommended driveway width (W) 16' 16' 26' 32' 26' 32'
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 160/454
Maximum driveway width (W) 28' 28' * * * *
Radius of curvature (R1) 15' max 5' min
15' max
5' min
30'
max
5' min
30'
max
10' min
40'
max
10' min
40'
max
Radius of curvature (R2) 15' max 5' min
15' max
5' min
15'
max
5' min
15'
max
5' min
15'
max
10' min
40'
max
Minimum edge clearance (E) 5' 5' 10' 10'
Minimum distance between doubledriveways
(D)
20' 30' 20' 20' 30' 30'
Minimum corner clearance from major
street (C)
30' 60' 75' 75' 75' 75'
Minimum corner clearance from minor
street (C)
20' 60' 50' 50' 60' 60'
(1971 Code § 22-35)
7-2-5: ADDITIONAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN DRIVEWAYS:
Where a proposed driveway is to be constructed so that it opens onto any street designated as a State, County or Federal trunk
highway, all additional specifications of the appropriate highway departments will apply, and the required permits shall be obtained
from the appropriate department. (1971 Code § 22-33)
>7-2-6: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Enforcement Officer: The Public Works Director is hereby designated as the enforcing officer for this Chapter and shall have the
power to issue, deny or revoke any permit. The Public Works Director may institute, in the name of the City, any appropriate
actions and procedures against a violator, as provided by law.
B. Violation; Penalty: Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this
Code. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. It shall be no defense that the defendant in any
such proceeding has a right to appeal from any order or decision of the Public Works Director if such person has not instituted
appeal proceedings with the City Council within twenty (20) days from the date of the violation or order, as the case may be.
(1971 Code § 22-36; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 3
PARKS
7-3-1: PURPOSES:
This chapter is adopted for the purposes of:
A. Protecting the safety, convenience, comfort and general welfare of those using the city parks;
B. Promoting the use of the parks for the benefit of the general public; and
C. Preserving and maintaining park facilities and regulating use of parks to minimize unnecessary maintenance to parks caused by
uses which damage park facilities. (1971 Code § 17A-1)
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 161/454
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol by volume.
AMUSEMENT CONTRAPTION: Any contrivance, device, gadget, machine or structure designed to test the skill or strength of the
user or to provide the user with any sort of ride, lift, swing or fall experience, including, but not limited to, any ball throwing contest
device, pinball type device, electronic video, animal ride device, dunk tank, ball and hammer device, trampoline device and the like.
AREA: A specified place within a park.
COUNCIL: The elected members of the city council.
DIRECTOR: The person selected by the council to serve as the chief administrative officer of the department of public works.
MOTORIZED RECREATION VEHICLE: Any self-propelled, off the road or all-terrain vehicle, including, but not limited to, any
snowmobile, minibike, amphibious vehicle, motorcycle, go-cart, trail bike, dune buggy or all-terrain cycle.
NATURAL RESOURCES: All flora and fauna within parks and physical factors upon which they depend, including air, water, soil and
minerals.
PARK: Any land or water area, and all facilities thereon, under the jurisdiction, control or ownership of the city, including, but not
limited to, parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, open space or golf courses.
PARK RANGER: Any parks maintenance division employee vested with the authority and whose primary duties are to enforce laws
and ordinances.
PARKS MAINTENANCE DIVISION: An operating unit of the department of public works responsible for the maintenance of city
parks.
PERMIT: The written permission obtained from the director to issue permits to carry out a given activity.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation or society or any group or gathering whatsoever.
PET: Any animal that is tamed and domesticated and kept as a companion.
PROPERTY: Any land, waters, facilities or possessions of the city.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except
devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
WATERCRAFT: Any contrivance used or designated for navigation on water, other than: a) a duck boat during the duck hunting
season, or b) a seaplane.
WILDLIFE: Any living creature, not human, wild by nature, endowed with sensation and the power of voluntary motion, including, but
not limited to, mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, reptiles, crustaceans and mollusks. (Ord. 612, 4-19-1994; amd. 2000 Code)
7-3-3: ACTIVITIES REQUIRING PERMIT:
No person shall engage in the following activities, except pursuant to a permit for the activity:
A. Be present in a city park or open space area between the hours of ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord.
897, 12-7-2011)
B. Cut or remove firewood on park property.
C. Possess, use or display fireworks or other pyrotechnics.
D. Solicit, sell or otherwise peddle goods, wares, merchandise, services, liquids or edibles.
E. Operate a still, motion picture, video or other camera for commercial purposes.
F. Erect any sign, advertisement, notice, poster or display.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 162/454
G. Use park property for starting or landing of aircraft, hot air balloons, parachutes or hang gliders.
H. Conduct public meetings, assemblies, worship services, entertainment, parades or demonstrations.
I. Occupy designated camping sites on park property for purposes of overnight use.
J. Launch or land watercraft upon waters within a park; except, that launching shall be permitted at Grey Cloud Park.
K. Ride, lead or allow a horse within a park.
L. Conduct races or meets on cross country ski trails.
M. Operate motorized vehicles and equipment on park and open space property.
N. Bring in, set up, construct, manage or operate any amusement or entertainment contraption, device or gadget.
O. Dig trenches, holes or other excavations.
P. Introduce natural resources, such as trees and shrubs, within park property. (Ord. 662, 1-20-1999)
7-3-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
The following acts are prohibited:
A. City Employees: Impersonate any employee of the department of public works or interfere with, harass or hinder any employee in
the discharge of his or her duties.
B. Harassment: Intentionally disturb, harass or interfere with a park visitor or their personal property.
C. Garbage And Refuse: Deposit, scatter, drop or abandon in a park, bottles, cans, broken glass, grass clippings, tree branches, hot
coals, ashes, sewage, pet waste or other material, except in receptacles provided for such purposes.
D. Fires:
1. Start a fire in a park, except in designated areas, other than in fire rings, portable stoves or grills.
2. Leave a fire unattended or fail to fully extinguish a fire.
3. Scatter or leave unattended lighted matches, burning tobacco, paper or other combustible material.
E. Vehicles:
1. Operate a bicycle or other motorized recreation vehicle, except as posted.
2. Operate a snowmobile except on designated trails.
3. Operate any vehicle in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour or other posted speed limits.
4. Park off of paved surfaces or in nondesignated parking areas.
5. Grease, change oil or perform other maintenance on any vehicle. (Ord. 677, 4-19-1999; amd. 2000 Code)
F. Pets And Animals:
1. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to permit a domestic animal to run at large, whether or not the owner is present, in city
parks. Dogs or cats must be continuously under restraint on a leash and accompanied by a person reasonably able and
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 163/454
effectively restraining the dog or cat. Unleashing of dogs is allowed within the boundaries of the public off leash dog park and is
subject to the posted rules of the park which includes the owner having verbal or physical command over the dog.
2. Permit a pet under one's control to disturb, harass or interfere with any park visitor or park visitor's personal property.
3. Remove, release or abandon any animal within a park without a permit. (Ord. 883, 10-6-2010, eff. 6-1-2011)
G. Liquor:
1. Possess or consume any alcoholic beverages in any city park or open space area during any adult sports tournament held on
a Friday, Saturday and Sunday, or any combination of these days except pursuant to a licensed sale occurring at a city park
during the Strawberry Festival celebration or at the River Oaks Golf Course.
2. Possess or consume any type of alcoholic beverage in parking lot areas in all city park and open spaces.
3. Possess or consume any type of alcoholic beverage at the outdoor municipal pool and at the Cottage Grove Ice Arena. (Ord.
859, 5-20-2009)
H. Use For Storage; Construction Of Sheds, Fences, Etc.: Park/store firewood, construction materials, boats, campers, snowmobiles,
trailers, and vehicles on park property; construct compost bins, storage sheds, play structures, fences, underground electrically
controlled cable, retaining walls, or other personal property on park property. Such property shall be removed by the city, or by
others under contract with the city, on ten (10) days' written notice to the owner, if ascertainable. All costs incurred for removal
and storage shall be at the property owner's expense.
I. Gardens: Create and maintain gardens.
J. Tampering With, Damage To Property: Intentionally remove, alter, injure or destroy natural resources on park property.
K. Trespassing: Enter any building, installation or area under construction or locked or closed to public use; or enter or be upon any
building, installation or area during times when the park property is not open to the public.
L. Golfing: Putt, drive or in any other manner play or practice golf except at established facilities. (Ord. 677, 4-19-1999; amd. 2000
Code)
7-3-5: ENFORCEMENT:
Park personnel or other law enforcement officers of the city shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the
city and state statutes applicable to acts and conduct on park property. (1971 Code § 17A-5)
7-3-6: VETERANS' MEMORIAL:
There shall be established at a location selected by the city council a veterans' memorial to memorialize all who have served in the
United States military, including prisoners of war and those missing in action, from the air force, army, coast guard, marines, and
navy to be located at the city of Cottage Grove Public Safety/City Hall site at 12800 Ravine Parkway. (Ord. 889, 7-6-2011)
Chapter 4
PLANTINGS AND LANDSCAPING ON BOULEVARDS
7-4-1: PURPOSE:
The City recognizes the intrinsic, aesthetic, and material value that trees bring to our community. Some of these benefits include:
A. Combating climate change.
B. Cleaning the air.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 164/454
C. Providing oxygen.
D. Energy conservation and cooling.
E. The prevention of water pollution and soil conservation.
F. Muffling sound and creation of visual barriers.
G. Providing a canopy and habitat for wildlife.
H. Increased property values.
I. Improvement of business viability and economic growth.
As an ongoing process, the City maintains our forest catalog through various care and upkeep initiatives including regular trimming,
abatement of diseased, damaged, and/or perished trees and installation and replacement of those trees deemed necessary at no
cost to the associated property owner. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and promote the public health, safety and general
welfare by allowing property owners to plant and maintain the boulevard areas adjoining their property in a manner that enhances
and improves the aesthetic appearance of City streets, avenues and alleys, as well as prevent and abate hazardous and nuisance
conditions within the City, while preventing the unauthorized removal or damage to the City's trees. (Ord. 988, 12-6-2017)
7-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the terms defined have the following meanings.
BOULEVARD: The public right-of-way lying between the property line and sidewalk, and between the sidewalk and the roadway, or
where no sidewalk exists, between the property line and the roadway.
LANDSCAPED AREA: The area within which plantings and landscaping materials are placed.
LANDSCAPING MATERIALS: Dirt, rock, pavers, stepping stones, wood or similar materials.
NOXIOUS WEEDS: The annual, biennial and perennial plants that are deemed by the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture to be
injurious to public health, environment, public roads, crops, livestock and other property.
PLANTINGS: Trees, flowers, grass and other plants.
PUBLIC PLACES: Areas including, but not limited to public parks, trail systems, City-owned property, wetlands, drainage beds, and
all public rights-of-way or easements along any boulevard or street. (Ord. 988, 12-6-2017)
7-4-3: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The Public Works Director or his/her designee shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 988, 12-6-2017)
7-4-4: PERMITTED TREES:
A. Master Tree List: A list of approved trees that may be planted on the boulevard portion of a public right-of-way is on file in the
Office of the Public Works Director.
B. Revisions To List: Revisions or changes in such master tree list may be made from time to time by the Public Works Director.
C. Compliance With List; Exceptions: All trees hereinafter planted in, or which may overhang the public streets of the City must be on
the master tree list unless a written permit from the Public Works Director is obtained in advance. (Ord. 988, 12-6-2017)
7-4-5: SIZE AND LOCATION OF PERMITTED TREES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 165/454
All trees planted must be at least one inch (1") in diameter at six inches (6") above the ground. Trees must be cultivated nursery
stock with straight trunks not less than six feet (6') high. No trees shall be placed so as to cause a traffic hazard. Specific
measurement regulations are as follows.
A. Spacing: Required spacing guidelines will be provided by the Public Works Director on the approved list of trees.
B. Curb Returns And Intersections: Trees must not be planted closer than thirty feet (30') from future or existing curb returns at
intersections.
C. Driveways: Trees must be planted at least five feet (5') from driveways.
D. Boulevards: Except where special permit is obtained from the Public Works Director, no tree may be planted on any boulevard
where the distance between the nearest edge of the sidewalk and curb is less than three feet (3').
E. Sidewalks And Curbs: Trees must be a maximum of one and a half feet (11/2') from the nearest public street pavement, curb,
sidewalk or trail. All trees must be planted equally distant from the nearest edge of the proposed or existing sidewalk and curb,
except when the Public Works Director may direct otherwise.
F. Assistance: The Public Works Director or his/her designee will assist in staking out the location of the tree planting. (Ord. 988, 12-
6-2017)
7-4-6: TREE PLANTING AND CARE; PERMIT PROVISIONS:
A. Permit Required: No person, other than the Public Works Director or his/her designee or deputy, shall cut, trim, prune, spray,
brace, plant, move, remove or replace any tree on any public street or which overhangs any public street, nor cause the same to
be done unless or until a written permit to do so shall have first been obtained from the Public Works Director. Any such permit
may be declared void by the Public Works Director if its terms are violated.
B. Public Utilities: Any person doing business as a public utility shall be given a permit from the Public Works Director, valid for one
year from the date of issuance, allowing tree trimming, bracing, removal or such other acts with respect to trees growing adjacent
to the public streets, or which grow upon private property to the extent that they encroach upon such public streets, as may be
necessary to comply with the safety regulations and as may be necessary to maintain the safe operation of its business. (Ord.
988, 12-6-2017)
7-4-7: REMOVAL OR DAMAGE OF TREES BY PROPERTY OWNER:
A. It is unlawful for any person to willfully cut down, deface, break, injure, chemically damage, or pierce with nails or other objects,
any tree located, standing or growing upon any public place within the corporate limits of the City, without first having obtained the
written permission from the Public Works Director.
B. It is unlawful for any person to place or construct any material impervious to air and water around any street/boulevard tree so as
to impede the free access of air and water to the roots.
C. It is unlawful to place any excess soil, building materials, debris, equipment, or pour any deleterious material, around any
street/boulevard tree, without first having obtained the written permission from the Public Works Director.
D. The owner of property abutting a boulevard may request the removal of a boulevard tree from in front of the owner's property. If
deemed necessary by the Public Works Director, the tree will be removed by the City at no cost to the property owner with no
replacement tree added to the boulevard. (Ord. 988, 12-6-2017)
7-4-8: INSPECTIONS; NUISANCE PROVISIONS:
A. Inspections: The Public Works Director may inspect any tree adjacent to or overhanging any public street in the City to determine
whether the same or any portion thereof is in such a condition as to constitute a hazard or impediment to the progress or vision of
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 166/454
anyone traveling upon such public street.
B. Nuisance Declared: Any tree, or any part thereof, growing on private property, but overhanging or interfering with the use of any
street, that in the opinion of the Public Works Director endangers the life, health, safety or property of the public shall be declared
a public nuisance.
C. Abatement By City; Costs: If the owner of such property does not correct or remove such nuisance within fifteen (15) working days
after receipt of written notice thereof, the Public Works Director shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed, and the cost
shall be assessed to such owner.
D. Liabilities And Responsibilities: Nothing in this section shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the City, its officers or
employees, nor shall the owner of any private property be relieved from the duty to keep any tree upon his/her property under
his/her control in such a condition as to prevent it from constituting a public nuisance as defined by this section. (Ord. 988, 12-6-
2017)
7-4-9: APPEALS:
Any person who is aggrieved by an act or determination of the Public Works Director and the exercise of the authority granted by
section 7-4-3 of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the City Administrator or his/her designee. (Ord. 988, 12-6-2017)
7-4-10: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
A. Upon confirmation of a violation of a provision of this chapter, a civil penalty may be issued.
B. The civil penalty shall be served by certified mail, regular mail or by personal service and shall contain the following information:
1. A description or address of the property on which the violation has occurred;
2. Reference to this Code that is alleged to be violated;
3. The amount of the civil penalty for the specific Code violation, which shall be due and payable to the City within thirty (30) days
of the date the notice is mailed or personally served;
4. A statement that failure to pay the civil penalty may result in it being assessed against the property as provided in Minnesota
Statutes chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time.
C. If the offender pays the civil penalty no further action will be taken for that same violation.
D. If the offender fails to pay the civil penalty, the City may do any of the following, or any combination thereof:
1. Assess the administrative civil penalty against the property pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapter 429, as it may be amended
from time to time;
2. Initiate criminal proceedings; and/or
3. Initiate other enforcement action authorized by law. (Ord. 988, 12-6-2017)
Chapter 5
BOATING AND WATER USE
7-5-1: PURPOSE, INTENT AND APPLICATION:
As authorized by Minnesota Statutes sections 86B.201, 86B.205, and 459.20, as now in effect and hereafter amended, this Chapter
is enacted for the purpose and with the intent to control and regulate the use of waters of Moore Lake and Grey Cloud Slough within
the City, said bodies of water being located partially within the boundaries of Grey Cloud Island Township and partially within the City
of Cottage Grove, to promote its fullest use and enjoyment by the public in general and the citizens of Grey Cloud Island Township
and the City of Cottage Grove in particular; to ensure safety for the persons and property in connection with the use of said waters; to
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 167/454
harmonize and integrate the varying uses of said waters; and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
Grey Cloud Island Township and the City of Cottage Grove. (Ord. 630, 8-21-1996)
7-5-2: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED; VIOLATIONS:
A. Adoption Of State Regulations: The Minnesota Waters and Watercraft Safety Laws, Minnesota Statutes section 86B.001 et seq.,
as they now exist and are hereafter amended by the State Department of Natural Resources, and Minnesota Rules Parts
6110.0100 through 6110.2300, as the same now exist and are hereafter amended, are hereby adopted, incorporated by
reference, and made part hereof as if fully set forth in their entirety. At least three (3) copies of said Minnesota Waters and
Watercraft Safety Laws and Boat and Water Safety Rules and Regulations so adopted shall be marked as official copies and filed
in the office of the City Clerk, City of Cottage Grove and Grey Cloud Island Township along with this Chapter.
B. Violations: Any person violating the Minnesota Waters and Watercraft Safety Laws and the Boat and Water Safety Rules and
Regulations promulgated by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, adopted and incorporated herein by reference,
shall be subject to the penalties and punishment as herein provided. (Ord. 630, 8-21-1996)
7-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall be defined and construed as follows:
GREY CLOUD SLOUGH: That body of water as is delineated and set forth on the official map of Grey Cloud Island Township as
Grey Cloud Slough, copies of which are available from the Cottage Grove City Clerk and at least three (3) copies of which are
marked as official copies and are filed of record in the office of the Cottage Grove City Clerk along with this Chapter.
MOORE LAKE: That body of water as is delineated and set forth on the official map of Grey Cloud Island Township as Moore Lake or
Mooer Lake, copies of which are available from the Cottage Grove City Clerk and at least three (3) copies of which are marked as
official copies and are filed of record in the office of the Cottage Grove City Clerk along with this Chapter.
MOTORBOAT: Any watercraft propelled in any manner by machinery including watercraft temporarily equipped with detachable
motors.
SLOW-NO-WAKE SPEED: The slowest possible speed necessary to maintain steerage but not greater than five (5) miles per hour.
(Ord. 630, 8-21-1996)
7-5-4: USE REGULATIONS AND LIMITATIONS:
A. Slow-No-Wake Zones: On the surface of Moore Lake no motorboat shall be operated at greater than a slow-no-wake zone speed
within fifty feet (50') of the shoreline. No watercraft towing a person on water skis, aqua plane or similar device shall be operated
at any time in a slow-no-wake zone; provided, however, that any watercraft launching or landing a person on water skis, aqua
plane or similar device by the most direct route to open water or shore shall be exempt from this Section.
B. Anchoring On Private Property: No person shall anchor or beach any watercraft on or enter upon any property not owned by that
individual unless the individual has written permission from the owner or legal occupant of such property in his/her possession or
unless such person is in the immediate presence of and has the permission and consent of the owner or legal occupant of such
property.
C. Docks: Except in established marinas, or as may be authorized by permit from the Town Board for waterways within Grey Cloud
Island Township or the Cottage Grove City Council for waterways within the City of Cottage Grove, no person shall construct or
maintain any dock or structure which protrudes more than thirty five feet (35') from the shoreline or more that twenty five percent
(25%) of the width of the channel (whichever is less), at the point such dock exists, or is constructed. (Ord. 630, 8-21-1996; amd.
2000 Code)
7-5-5: EXEMPTIONS:
All authorized resource management, police, fire and ambulance emergency and enforcement personnel, while acting in the
performance of their assigned duties, are exempt from the restrictions of this Chapter. (Ord. 630, 8-21-1996)
7-5-6: ENFORCEMENT:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 168/454
A. Enforcement Officials: The enforcement of this Chapter shall be the primary responsibility of the Washington County Sheriff's
Department. Other licensed peace officers, including the Cottage Grove Police Division and the conservation officers of the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources are also authorized to enforce this Chapter.
B. Violation; Penalty: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 630, 8-21-1996; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 6
MANAGEMENT OF UTILITIES
7-6-1: FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT:
A. To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the
rights-of-way, the City strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances.
B. Accordingly, the City enacts this chapter relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This chapter imposes reasonable
regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within the City's rights-of-way or to be placed
therein at some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of State and Federal agencies. Under this chapter,
persons excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work through the recovery of out-ofpocket
and projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way.
C. This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws, chapter 123, substantially codified in Minnesota Statutes
sections 237.16, 237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the "Act") and the other laws governing applicable rights of the
City and users of the right-of-way. This chapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minnesota Rules 7819.0050 - 7819.9950
where possible. To the extent that any provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, the
interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory and case law is intended. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-2: ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
Pursuant to the authority granted to the City under State and Federal statutory, administrative and common law, the City elects
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 237.163 subdivision 2(b), to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-
2019)
7-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply in this chapter:
ABANDONED FACILITY: A facility no longer in service or physically disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any
other facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
APPLICANT: Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way.
CITY: The City of Cottage Grove, Minnesota. For purposes of this chapter, "City" means its elected officials, officers, employees, and
agents.
COLLOCATE: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an
existing wireless support structure that is owned privately or by the City.
COMMISSION: The Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.
CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY: A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public right-of-way that occurs when the maximum
lateral spacing between existing underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground facilities without using
hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities in conformance with Minnesota Statutes, section 216D.04, subdivision 3, over a
continuous length in excess of five hundred feet (500').
CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND: Any of the following forms of security provided at permittee's option: individual project
bond; cash deposit; security of a form listed or approved under Minnesota Statutes, section 15.73, subdivision 3; or letter of credit, in
a form acceptable to the City; self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the City; a blanket bond for projects within the City, or other
form of construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the City.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 169/454
DEGRADATION: A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting
in the need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation or disturbance did not occur.
DEGRADATION COST: Subject to Minnesota Rules 7819.1100 means the cost to achieve a level of restoration as determined by the
City at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in Minnesota Rules
parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950 and incorporated in this chapter by reference.
DEGRADATION FEE: The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by the City to recover costs associated with the
decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation cost.
DELAY PENALTY: The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or
restoration as established by permit.
DEPARTMENT: The Department of Public Works of the City.
DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR: Any person authorized by the City to carry out inspections related to the provisions of this chapter.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Department of Public Works of the City, or her or his designee.
EMERGENCY: A condition that: a) poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property; or b) requires immediate repair
or replacement of facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
EQUIPMENT: Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain facilities in any right-of-way.
EXCAVATE: To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
EXCAVATION PERMIT: The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-ofway.
An excavation permit allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit.
EXCAVATION SUBDIVISION PERMIT FEE: Money paid to the City by an applicant to cover the costs as provided in section 7-6-13
of this chapter.
FACILITY OR FACILITIES: Tangible asset in the public right-of-way required to provide utility service. The term does not include
facilities to the extent the location and relocation of such facilities are preempted by Minnesota Statutes, section 161.45, governing
utility facility placement in State trunk highways.
5-YEAR PROJECT PLAN: Shows projects adopted by the City for construction within the next five (5) years.
HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR: A designated portion of the public right-of-way within which telecommunications right-of-way users
having multiple and competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a common conduit system or other common
structure.
HOLE: An excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having a length less than the width of the pavement or adjacent
pavement.
LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE: A local person or persons, or designee of such person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept
service and to make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
MANAGEMENT COSTS: The actual costs the City incurs in managing its rights-of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those
associated with registering applicants; engineering, surveying, issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way or small wireless facility
permit applications; preparatory construction work, inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting,
or moving user facilities during right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately
performed after providing notice and the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-of-way or small wireless facility permits.
Management costs do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way, unreasonable
fees of a third party contractor used by the City, or the fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session
Laws 1997, chapter 123; Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162 or 237.163 or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the City
fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to section 7-6-31 of this chapter.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is no larger than twenty four inches (24") long, fifteen inches (15") wide,
and twelve inches (12") high, and whose exterior antenna, if any, is no longer than eleven inches (11").
OBSTRUCT: To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-ofway.
OBSTRUCTION PERMIT: The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way,
allowing the holder to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way, for the duration specified therein,
including a blanket permit for a period of time and for types of work specified by the Director, if deemed appropriate in his discretion.
OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE: Money paid to the City by a permittee to cover the costs as provided in section 7-6-13 of this chapter.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 170/454
PATCH OR PATCHING: A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in nature. A patch consists of: a) the compaction of
the subbase and aggregate base, and b) the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum of two feet (2') beyond the
edges of the excavation in all directions. A patch is considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the City's 5-year
project plan.
PAVEMENT: Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with
bituminous, concrete, aggregate, or gravel.
PERMIT: Has the meaning given "right-of-way permit" in Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by the City under this chapter.
PERSON: An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this State, however organized, whether public or private, whether
domestic or foreign, whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or political.
PROBATION: The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions of this chapter.
PROBATIONARY PERIOD: One year from the date the permittee has been notified in writing that it has been placed on probation.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHT-OF-WAY: Has the meaning given it in Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162, subdivision 3.
REGISTRANT: Any person who: a) has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located in any right-of-way, or b) in any way
occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way.
RESTORATION COST: The amount of money paid to the City by a permittee to achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1
to 13 of Minnesota Rule 7819.1100 subpart 1, on file with the Director.
RESTORE OR RESTORATION: The process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and
foundation, is returned to the same condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT: Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this
chapter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY USER: A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162, subdivision 4;
or a person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who
has a right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
SERVICE LATERAL: An underground facility that is used to transmit, distribute, or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water
from a common source to an end use customer. A service lateral is also an underground facility that is used in the removal of
wastewater from a customer's premises.
SERVICE OR UTILITY SERVICE: Means and includes: a) services provided by a public utility as defined in Minnesota Statutes
216B.02, subdivisions 4 and 6; b) services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including transporting of voice or data
information; c) services of a cable communications system as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 238.02, subdivision 3; d) natural
gas or electric energy or telecommunications services provided by the City; e) services provided by a cooperative electric association
organized under Minnesota Statutes, chapter 308A; and f) water, sewer, steam, cooling or heating services.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets the following qualifications:
A. Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet;
and
B. All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility, provided such equipment is in aggregate no more than
twenty eight (28) cubic feet in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation
boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment concealed from public view or behind an existing
structure or concealment; or
C. A micro wireless facility.
SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION: An application made to excavate or obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to
extend, a permit that had already been issued.
TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHT-OF-WAY USER OR A RIGHT-OF-WAY USER: A person owning or controlling a facility in the rightof-
way or seeking to own or control a facility in the right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for providing wireless service or
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 171/454
transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes of this chapter, a cable communication system
defined and regulated under Minnesota Statutes chapter 238, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or
electric energy services, a public utility as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 216B.02, a municipality, a Municipal gas or power
agency organized under Minnesota Statutes, chapters 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized under
Minnesota Statutes, chapter 308A, are not telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this chapter, except to the extent
these entities are offering wireless services.
TEMPORARY SURFACE: The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only
to the edges of the excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of pavement included in the City's two year
plan, in which case it is considered full restoration.
TRENCH: An excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having a length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement
or adjacent pavement.
TWO YEAR PROJECT PLAN: Shows projects adopted by the City for construction within the next two (2) years.
UTILITY POLE: A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate telecommunications or electric service.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of wireless services between user equipment and a
wireless service network, including:
A. Equipment associated with wireless service;
B. A radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment,
regardless of technological configuration;
C. A small wireless facility.
WIRELESS SERVICE: Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed
location or by means of a mobile device that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless service does not include services regulated
under title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including a cable service under United States Code, title 47, section
522, clause (6).
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A new or existing structure in a public right-of-way designed to support or capable of
supporting small wireless facilities, as reasonably determined by the City.
WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY: A facility used to transport communications data by wire from a wireless facility to a
communications network. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-4: ADMINISTRATION:
The Director is the principal City official responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits and small wireless
facility permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The Director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-
2019)
7-6-5: UTILITY COORDINATION COMMITTEE:
The City may create an advisory Utility Coordination Committee. Participation on the committee is voluntary. It will be composed of
any registrants that wish to assist the City in obtaining information and by making recommendations regarding use of the right-ofway,
and to improve the process of performing construction work therein. The City may determine the size of such committee and
shall appoint members from a list of registrants that have expressed a desire to assist the City. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-6: REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY:
A. Registration: Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in
or on the right-of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment,
must register with the City. Registration will consist of providing application information and paying a registration fee.
B. Registration Prior To Work: No person may construct, install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any
facilities or any part thereof in any right-of-way without first being registered with the City.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 172/454
C. Mailbox And Tree On Right-Of-Way: Only one mailbox per household (meeting Cottage Grove's standard detail plate) and one
deciduous tree (1 on each right-of-way for a corner lot) are allowed on the right-of-way. There must be one support post for one
mailbox and two (2) support posts for multiple mailboxes.
D. Other Items Placed On Right-Of-Way: Any other items located on the right-of-way are placed at the risk of the property owner.
Items placed in the right-of-way may be subject to damage due to routine maintenance (such as snowplowing, utility repairs, etc.)
by the City upon which no replacement or compensation will be given. In addition, if items in the right-of-way pose a safety
hazard, they are subject to removal by the City or representative of the City without any compensation or replacement. Examples
of items not allowed on the boulevard without written permission from the City include, but are not limited to: irrigation systems,
rocks, landscaping, play equipment, fencing, invisible fencing, retaining walls, large mailbox construction, lighting, bollards and
private walkways.
E. Compliance: Nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the provisions of the Minnesota Statutes, chapter 216D,
Gopher One Call Law. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-7: REGISTRATION INFORMATION:
A. Information Required: The information provided to the City at the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Each registrant's name, gopher one call registration certificate number, address and e-mail address if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers.
2. The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local
representative or designee shall be accessible for consultation at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the
local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of registration.
3. A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
a. Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the registrant by an insurance company authorized to do business in
the State of Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the City;
b. Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property
damage arising out of the: 1) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and
permittees, and 2) placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents,
employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against any liability arising from completed operations,
damage of underground facilities and collapse of property;
c. Either naming the City as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for
whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages or otherwise providing evidence satisfactory to the Director that the
City is fully covered and will be defended through registrant's insurance for all actions included in Minnesota Rule part
7819.1250;
d. Requiring that the City be notified thirty (30) days in advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a
coverage term;
e. Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage, workers' compensation and umbrella coverage
established by the City in amounts sufficient to protect the City and the public and to carry out the purposes and policies of
this chapter.
4. The City may require a copy of the actual insurance policies if necessary to ensure the Director that the policy provides
adequate third-party claim coverage and City indemnity and defense coverage for all actions included in the indemnity required
by Minnesota Rule part 7819.1250.
5. Such evidence as the Director may require that the person is authorized to do business in Minnesota.
B. Notice Of Changes: The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at all times by providing to the City
information as to changes within fifteen (15) days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of any change. (Ord.
1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-8: REPORTING OBLIGATIONS:
A. Operations: Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December 1 of each year, file a construction and major
maintenance plan for underground facilities with the City. Such plan shall be submitted using a format designated by the City and
shall contain the information determined by the City to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 173/454
of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.
The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
1. The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in
this section, a "next-year project"); and
2. To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five
(5) years following the next calendar year (in this section, a "5-year project").
The term "project" in this section shall include both next-year projects and 5-year projects.
By January 1 of each year the City will have available for inspection in the City's office a composite list of all projects of which
the City has been informed of the annual plans. All registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of the current
status of this list. Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project in its list of next-year projects, and must
notify the City and all other registrants of all such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at any
time join in a next year project of another registrant listed by the other registrant.
B. Additional Next Year Projects: Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for
failure to include a project in a plan submitted to the City if the registrant has used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate
and plan for the project. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-9: PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
A. Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way or install or
place facilities in the right-of-way without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way or small wireless facility permit from
the City to do so.
1. Excavation Permit: An excavation permit is required by a registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such
permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities described therein,
to the extent and for the duration specified therein.
2. Obstruction Permit: An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion
of the right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the duration specified
therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
3. Small Wireless Facility Permit: A small wireless facility permit is required to erect or install a wireless support structure, to
collocate a small wireless facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless facility in the right-of-way. Such permit shall remain in
effect for the length of time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked. Small wireless facilities are prohibited outside of the
rights-of-way.
B. Permit Extensions: No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless:
1) such person makes a supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit, and
2) a new permit or permit extension is granted.
C. Delay Penalty: In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000 subpart 3 and notwithstanding the provisions herein, the City shall
establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration.
The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by City Council ordinance. A delay penalty will not be imposed for delays
due to force majeure, including inclement weather, civil strife, acts of God, or other circumstances beyond the control of the
applicant.
D. Permit Display: Permits issued under this section shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the
indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the City. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-10: PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
Application for a permit is made to the City and must be signed by the applicant. Right-of-way and small wireless facility permit
applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:
A. Registration with the City pursuant to this section;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 174/454
B. Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location
and area of the proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed facilities;
C. Payment of money due the City for:
1. Permit fees, and escrow for management costs;
2. Past due permit fees;
3. Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the
rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the City;
D. Payment of disputed amounts due the City by posting security or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least one
hundred ten percent (110%) of the amount owing;
E. Posting a construction performance bond or an escrow for excavation permits when deemed necessary. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-11: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS:
A. Permit Issuance: If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter, the City shall issue a permit.
B. Conditions: The City may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant
thereunder to protect the public health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
C. Small Wireless Facility Or Small Wireless Support Structure Permit Conditions: The City desires high quality wireless services to
accommodate the needs of residents and businesses. At the same time, the City strives to minimize the negative impacts that
small wireless facilities can create. These negative impacts include, but are not limited to, interference with right-of-way user sight
lines, impacts to right-of-way user circulation, incompatible aesthetics with the surrounding area, fall zone risk, clear zone risk,
creating navigation obstacles, interference with future travel way expansion plans, interference with the delivery of other utility
services, interference with stormwater management facilities and increased noise pollution. In addition to any conditions imposed
by the City pursuant to subsection B of this section, the erection or installation of a small wireless facility or small wireless support
structure shall be subject to the following:
1. Location: To preserve the significant financial investment made by the City in the public improvements and aesthetic
enhancements surrounding the landscaping, special lighting, pedestrian friendly walkways and similar amenities in the rightsof-
way, in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, approval for the location of small wireless facilities and support
structures shall be accommodated in the following order:
a. In the right-of-way on or adjacent to a principal arterial, other arterial, major collector, or minor collector roads, as classified
by the Metropolitan Council Functional Classification System.
b. Collocated on existing wireless support structures within the right-of-way.
c. Located on a new wireless support structure within the right-of-way that replaces an existing wireless support structure of the
same height.
d. Located on a new wireless support structure within the right-of-way that replaces an existing wireless support structure
whose height is less than or equal to fifty feet (50').
e. Located on a new wireless support structure within the right-of-way whose height is similar to nearby structures.
f. Located on a new wireless support structure within the right-of-way whose height is less than fifty feet (50').
2. Other Requirements:
a. To avoid excessive clutter visible from public areas, a new wireless support structure shall be separated from other wireless
support structures by a minimum of six hundred feet (600').
b. No new wireless support structure shall exceed fifty feet (50') in height.
c. Any new wireless support structure shall be of the same design and look as similar as possible to the newest light standard
support structures that exist on the street or in the neighborhood where the support structures are proposed to be located.
d. When an applicant proposes to replace an existing wireless support structure with a structure of the same height and the
existing wireless support structure exceeds fifty feet (50') in height, the City may impose conditions or requirements to protect
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 175/454
the public health, safety or welfare or to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
e. When an applicant proposes collocation on an existing wireless support structure, the small wireless facility shall not block
light emanating from the structure or otherwise interfere with the intended purpose of the structure.
f. All wireless support structures shall be reasonably protected against unauthorized climbing. The base of the tower to twelve
feet (12') above ground level shall be designed in a manner to discourage unauthorized climbing.
g. There shall be no advertising or identification of any kind on the wireless support structures, except for warning signs or
signs related to equipment information that is required by the manufacturer, or by Federal, State or local regulations. Use of
the smallest and lowest visibility radio frequency warning sticker and/or node identification sticker allowed by government or
by utility regulations shall be the same color as the pole.
h. Small wireless facilities shall not be illuminated by artificial means, except when mounted on an existing light pole, or when
required by Federal, State or local regulations, or when the lighting is part of a camouflage design of the support structure.
i. For wireless support structures made of metal, all wiring shall be mounted on the interior of the support structure so that there
is no exposed wiring. For wireless support structures made of wood, wiring may be surface-mounted but shall be enclosed in
conduit that matches the color of the support structure. A minimal amount of wiring may be exposed from the attachments to
the support structure.
j. No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet (10') above its wireless support structure or more than two and a half feet
(21/2') outward from the wireless support structure.
k. The diameter of a new wireless support structure that replaces an existing wireless support structure shall not exceed the
diameter of the existing wireless support structure by more than fifty percent (50%).
l. Any ground equipment related to small wireless facilities must be placed underground and approved by the City Engineer.
m. Non-reflective, matte and anti-graffiti painting shall be required on all small wireless facilities. All attachments shall match
the color of the support structure. Any fasteners shall be made of stainless steel or of corrosive resistant material.
n. Small wireless facilities and wireless support structures must comply with all Federal, State and local regulations.
D. Small Wireless Facility Collocation Agreement: If a small wireless facility is to be collocated on a small wireless support structure
owned or controlled by the City, or any other City-owned asset or infrastructure in the right-of-way, it may only do so after the
applicant has executed a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement with the City. When an applicant proposes to
replace a City-owned wireless support structure, the City may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation
requirements on the replacement of such structure. The standard collocation agreement may require the following payments for
each City-owned structure:
1. Up to one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year for rent;
2. Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year for maintenance;
3. A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
a. Seventy three dollars ($73.00) per radio node less than or equal to one hundred (100) maximum watts;
b. One hundred eighty two dollars ($182.00) per radio node over one hundred (100) maximum watts; or
c. The actual costs of electricity, if the actual cost exceeds the foregoing.
Such costs and payments may be automatically adjusted pursuant to the amounts set forth in Minnesota Statutes section
237.163, subd. 6(g), or as may be amended from time to time. The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to,
and not in lieu of, the required small wireless facility permit, and any obstruction or excavation permits that may be required.
E. Action On Small Wireless Facility Permit Applications:
1. Approval Or Denial: The City shall approve or deny a small wireless facility permit application within sixty (60) days after filing
of such application for an existing structure and ninety (90) days for a new wireless support structure. For applications involving
both new and existing structures, the longer deadline applies. The small wireless facility permit, and any associated building
permit application, shall be deemed approved if the City fails to approve or deny the application within the review periods
established in this section.
2. Consolidated Applications: An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless facility permit application addressing the
proposed collocation of up to fifteen (15) small wireless facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by the City, provided that all
small wireless facilities in the application:
a. Are located within a two-mile radius;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 176/454
b. Consist of substantially similar equipment; and
c. Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures.
In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the City may approve some small wireless facilities sites and
deny others but may not use denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless facilities in the application.
3. Tolling Of Deadline: The deadline for action on a small wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:
a. The City receives applications from one or more applicants seeking approval of permits for more than thirty (30) small
wireless facilities within a seven-day period. In such case, the City may extend the deadline for all such applications by thirty
(30) days by informing the affected applicants in writing of such extension.
b. The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information and the City provides written notice of incompleteness to
the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application. Upon submission of additional documents or information, the
City shall have ten (10) days to notify the applicant in writing of any missing information.
c. The City and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing to toll the review period.
An approval of a small wireless facility permit under this section authorizes the installation, placement, maintenance, or
operation of a small wireless facility to provide wireless service and shall not be construed to confer authorization to provide
any service other than a wireless service, or to install, place, maintain, or operate a wireline backhaul facility in the right-ofway.
(Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-12: EXEMPTIONS FROM SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMITS:
The City shall not require a right-of-way user to pay a small wireless facility permit fee, obtain a small wireless facility permit, or enter
into a small wireless facility collocation agreement solely in order to conduct any of the following activities:
A. Routine maintenance of an existing small wireless facility;
B. Replacement of a small wireless facility with a new facility that is substantially similar or smaller in size, weight, height, and
wind or structural loading than the small wireless facility being replaced;
C. Installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cable strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with National Safety Codes.
However, if any of the aforementioned work will hinder free and open passage of the right-of-way, an obstruction permit is required
pursuant to subsection 7-6-9A2 of this chapter. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-13: PERMIT FEES:
A. Fee Schedule And Fee Allocation: The City's permit fee schedule shall be available to the public and established in advance
where reasonably possible. The permit fees shall be designed to recover the City's actual costs incurred in managing the right-ofway
and shall be based on an allocation among all users of the right-of-way, including the City.
B. Payment Of Permit Fees: No permit shall be issued without payment of the appropriate permit fees as set by City Council
resolution. The City may allow applicant to pay such fees within thirty (30) days of billing, or on some other payment plan agreed
to by the Director at his discretion.
C. Nonrefundable: Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the City has revoked for a breach as stated in section 7-6-23 of this
chapter are not refundable. Permit fees for which the City has denied the permit application are not refundable.
D. Application To Franchises: Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in
addition to the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-14: RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 177/454
A. Timing: The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein,
must be completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not be done because of
circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under section 7-
6-17 of this chapter.
B. Patch And Restoration: Permittee must patch its own work. The City may choose either to have the permittee restore the surface
and subgrading portions of the right-of-way or to restore the surface portion of the right-of-way itself.
1. City Restoration: If the City restores the surface portion of the right-of-way, permittee shall pay the costs thereof within thirty
(30) days of billing. If, following such restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper backfilling, the permittee
shall pay to the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, all costs associated with correcting the defective work.
2. Permittee Restoration: If the permittee restores the right-of-way itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit
post a construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.3000.
3. Degradation Fee In Lieu Of Restoration: In lieu of right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation
fee. However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for replacing and compacting the subgrade and aggregate based
material in the excavation and the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
C. Standards: The permittee shall perform patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by
the City and shall comply with Minnesota Rule 7819.1100.
D. Duty To Correct Defects: The permittee shall correct defects in patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. Upon
notification from the City, permittee shall correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the
City. Unless otherwise agreed to by the Director, said work shall be completed within five (5) calendar days of receipt of the notice
from the City, not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days
when work is prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under section 7-6-17 of this chapter.
E. Failure To Restore: If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the City, or fails
to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the City, the City shall notify the permittee in writing of the specific
alleged failure or failures and shall allow the permittee ten (10) days from receipt of said written notice to cure said failure or
failures, unless otherwise extended by the Director. In the event the permittee fails to cure, the City may at its option perform the
necessary work and permittee shall pay to the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If
permittee fails to pay as required, the City may exercise its rights under the construction performance bond. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-
2019)
7-6-15: JOINT APPLICATIONS:
A. Joint Application: Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
B. Shared Fees: Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or excavation, which the City does not perform, may
share in the payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint permit, registrants must agree among
themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on their applications.
C. With City Projects: Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or excavation performed by the City, whether or not it is a joint
application by two (2) or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the excavation or obstruction and
degradation portions of the permit fee, but a permit would still be required. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-16: SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS:
A. Limitation On Area: A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do
any work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee which determines that an area greater
than that specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area: 1) make application
for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required thereby, and 2) be granted a new permit or permit extension.
B. Limitation On Dates: A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work
before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish the
work by the permit end date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an
extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be
submitted before the permit end date. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 178/454
7-6-17: OTHER OBLIGATIONS:
A. Compliance With Other Laws: Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary
permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by the City or other applicable rule, law or regulation. A permittee
shall comply with all requirements of local, State and Federal laws, including Minnesota Statutes sections 216D.01-09 (gopher
one call excavation notice system). A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established
rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the
work.
B. Prohibited Work: Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the City, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be
done when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
C. Interference With Right-Of-Way: A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water
through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with, unless otherwise approved by the Director. Private vehicles of
those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance with City
parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area unless specifically
authorized by the permit.
D. Traffic Control: A permittee shall implement traffic-control measures in the area of the work and shall use traffic-control procedures
in accordance with the most recent manuals on uniform traffic control, traffic control devices and traffic zone layouts published by
the State of Minnesota.
E. Trenchless Excavation: As a condition of all applicable permits, permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including,
but not limited to, horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in Minnesota Statutes, chapter 216D and
Minnesota Rules chapter 7560, and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing underground utilities before excavating,
as determined by the Director. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-18: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
A. The City may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the City determines that the
denial is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current
use.
B. Any denial of a right-of-way or small wireless facility permit must be made in writing and must document the basis for the denial.
The City must notify the applicant in writing within three (3) business days of the decision to deny the permit. If a permit
application is denied, the applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit its application. If applicant user
resubmits the application within thirty (30) days of receiving written notice of the denial, no additional filing or processing fee shall
be imposed. The City must approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after the revised application is
submitted. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-19: INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS:
The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance
with Minnesota Rules 7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with
Minnesota Statutes, sections 237.162 and 237.163. Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minnesota
Rules chapter 7560 and this chapter. Service lateral installation is further subject to those requirements and conditions set forth by
the City in the applicable permits and/or agreements referenced in subsection 7-6-24B of this chapter. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-20: INSPECTION:
A. Notice Of Completion: When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion
certificate in accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1300.
B. Site Inspection: Permittee shall make the work site available to the City and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
C. Authority Of Director:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 179/454
1. At the time of inspection the Director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life,
health, safety or well being of the public.
2. The Director may issue an order to the permittee to correct any work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other
applicable standards, conditions, or code. If the work failure is a "substantial breach" within the meaning of Minnesota Statutes
section 237.163 subdivision 4(c), the order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the
permit after a specified period determined by the Director. The permittee shall present proof to the Director that the violation
has been corrected within the time period set forth by the Director in the order. Such proof shall be provided no later than the
next business day following the day of completion. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the Director
may revoke the permit pursuant to section 7-6-23 of this chapter. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-21: WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT:
A. Emergency Situations: Each registrant shall immediately notify the Director of any event regarding its facilities that the registrant
considers to be an emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency.
Within two (2) business days after the occurrence of the emergency the registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the
fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for the
actions it took in response to the emergency.
If the City becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the City will attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the City may take whatever
action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities
occasioned the emergency.
B. Nonemergency Situations: Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs
or excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, pay an unauthorized work permit fee in an amount established
from time to time by the City Council, deposit with the City the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and
comply with all of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-22: SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION:
If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall
notify the City of the accurate information as soon as this information is known. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-23: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
A. Substantial Breach: The City reserves its right to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial
breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A
substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
1. The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
2. An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate
any fraud or deceit upon the City or its citizens;
3. Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way permit;
4. The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete
work is due to reasons beyond the permittee's control; or
5. The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to
section 7-6-20 of this chapter.
B. Written Notice Of Breach: If the City determines that the permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of
any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the City shall make a written demand upon the permittee to
remedy such violation. The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A substantial
breach, as stated above, will allow the City to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the
breach.
C. Response To Notice Of Breach: Within a time established by the Director following permittee's receipt of notification of the breach,
permittee shall provide the City with a plan to cure the breach, acceptable to the City. Permittee's failure to submit a timely and
acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to timely implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation of the
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 180/454
permit. Further, permittee's failure to contact the City, or permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to
reasonably implement the approved plan, may result in probation for up to one full year.
D. Cause For Probation: The City may establish a list of conditions of the permit, that if breached will be grounds to place the
permittee on probation. The City shall not enforce a probation program unless and until it has established such conditions, which
it may amend from time to time.
E. Reimbursement Of City Costs: If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the City for the City's reasonable costs,
including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorney fees incurred in connection with such revocation.
F. Automatic Revocation: If a permittee, while on probation, commits a breach as outlined in subsection D, "Cause For Probation", of
this section, permittee's permit will automatically be revoked and permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year
except for emergency repairs.
G. Notification: Any revocation of a right-of-way or small wireless facility permit must be made in writing and must document the
basis for the revocation. The City must notify the right-of-way user in writing within three (3) business days of the decision to
revoke a permit. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-24: MAPPING DATA:
A. Information Required: Each registrant and permittee shall provide mapping information required by the City in accordance with
Minnesota Rules 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within ninety (90) days following completion of any work pursuant to a permit, the
permittee shall provide the Director accurate maps and drawings certifying the "as built" location of all equipment installed, and
owned and maintained by the facilities and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the City's electronic maps and
drawings pursuant to this subsection. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder's
registration.
B. Service Laterals: All permits issued for the installation or repair of service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in
Minnesota Rules 7560.0150 subpart 2, shall require the permittee's use of appropriate means of establishing the horizontal
locations of installed service laterals, and the service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the Director reasonably
requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the Director evidence satisfactory to the Director of the installed
service lateral locations. Compliance with this section, with applicable Gopher State One Call Law, and Minnesota Rules
governing service laterals installed after December 31, 2005, shall be a condition of any City approval necessary for: 1) payments
to contractors working on a public improvement project including those under Minnesota Statutes, chapter 429, and 2) City
approval of performance under development agreements, or other subdivision or site plan approval under Minnesota Statutes,
chapter 462. The Director shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such information to the City. Failure to
provide prompt and accurate information on the service laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit issued for the
work or for future permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-25: UNDERGROUNDING:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public and is intended to foster: 1)
safe travel over the right-of-way, 2) nontravel related safety around homes and buildings where overhead feeds are connected
and 3) orderly development in the City. Location and relocation, installation and reinstallation of facilities in the right-of-way must
be made in accordance with this section. This section is intended to be enforced consistently with State and Federal law
regulating right-of-way users, specifically including, but not limited to, Minnesota Statutes, sections 161.45, 237.162, 237.163,
300.03, 222.37, 238.084 and 216B.36 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, title 47, USC section 253.
B. Undergrounding Of Facilities: Facilities newly installed, constructed or otherwise placed in the public right-of-way or in other public
property held in common for public use must be located and maintained underground pursuant to the terms and conditions of this
section and in accordance with applicable construction standards, subject to the exceptions below. Aboveground installation,
construction, modification, or replacement of meters, gauges, transformers, street lighting, pad mount switches, capacitor banks,
reclosers and service connection pedestals shall be allowed. The requirements of this section shall apply equally outside of the
corporate limits of the City coincident with City jurisdiction of platting, subdivision regulation or comprehensive planning as may
now or in the future be allowed by law.
C. Exceptions To Undergrounding: The following exceptions to the strict application of this section shall be allowed upon the
conditions stated:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 181/454
1. Transmission Lines: Aboveground installation, construction, or placement of those facilities commonly referred to as "high
voltage transmission lines" upon which a conductor's normal operating voltage equals or exceeds twenty three thousand
(23,000) volts (phase to phase) shall be allowed only by prior approval of the Council; provided, however, that sixty (60) days
prior to commencement of construction of such a project, the City shall be furnished notice of the proposed project and, upon
request, the right-of-way user involved shall furnish all relevant information regarding such project to the City. This provision
shall not be construed as waiving the requirements of any other ordinance or regulation of the City as the same may apply to
any such proposed project.
2. Technical And Economic Feasibility: Aboveground installation, construction, or placement of facilities shall be allowed in
residential, commercial and industrial areas where the Council, following consideration and recommendation by the Planning
Commission, finds that:
a. Underground placement would place an undue financial burden upon the landowner, ratepayers, or right-of-way user or
would deprive the landowner of the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights; or
b. Underground placement is impractical or not technically feasible due to topographical, subsoil or other existing conditions
that adversely affect underground facilities placement.
3. Temporary Service: Aboveground installation, construction, or placement of temporary service lines shall only be allowed:
a. During new construction of any project for a period not to exceed twenty four (24) months;
b. During an emergency in order to safeguard lives or property within the City;
c. For a period of not more than seven (7) months when soil conditions make excavation impractical.
D. Undergrounding Of Permanent Replacement, Relocated Or Reconstructed Facilities: If the City finds that one or more of the
purposes set forth in subsection A of this section would be promoted, the City may require a permanent replacement, relocation
or reconstruction of a facility of more than three hundred feet (300') to be located, and maintained underground, with due regard
for seasonal working conditions. For purposes of this section, reconstruction means any substantial repair of or any improvement
to existing facilities. Undergrounding may be required whether a replacement, relocation or reconstruction is initiated by the rightof-
way user owning or operating the facilities, or by the City in connection with: 1) the present or future use by the City or other
local government unit of the right-of-way or other public ground for a public project, 2) the public health or safety, or 3) the safety
and convenience of travel over the right-of-way.
E. Retirement Of Overhead Facilities: The City Council may determine whether it is in the public interest that all facilities within the
City, or facilities within certain districts designated by the City, be permanently placed and maintained underground by a date
certain or target date, independently of undergrounding required pursuant to subsection B of this section (new facilities) and
subsection D of this section (replacement facilities). The decision to underground must be preceded by a public hearing, after
published notice and written notice to the utilities affected (2 weeks published: 30 days written). At the hearing the Council must
consider items in subsection G1 through G4 of this section and make findings. Undergrounding may not take place until City
Council has, after hearing and notice, adopted a plan containing items in subsection H1 through H6 of this section.
F. Public Hearings: A hearing must be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each hearing any person
interested must be given an opportunity to be heard. The subject of the public hearings shall be the issue of whether facilities in
the right-of-way in the City, or located within a certain district, shall all be located underground by a date certain. Hearings are not
necessary for the undergrounding required under subsection B or D of this section.
G. Public Hearing Issues: The issues to be addressed at the public hearings include, but are not limited to:
1. The costs and benefits to the public of requiring the undergrounding of all facilities in the right-of-way.
2. The feasibility and cost of undergrounding all facilities by a date certain as determined by the City and the affected utilities.
3. The tariff requirements, procedure and rate design for recovery or intended recovery of incremental costs for undergrounding
by the utilities from ratepayers within the City.
4. Alternative financing options available if the City deems it in the public interest to require undergrounding by a date certain and
deems it appropriate to participate in the cost otherwise borne by the ratepayers.
Upon completion of the hearing or hearings, the City Council must make written findings on whether it is in the public interest to
establish a plan under which all facilities will be underground, either Citywide or within districts designated by the City.
H. Undergrounding Plan: If the Council finds that it is in the public interest to underground all or substantially all facilities in the public
right-of-way or in nonright-of-way public ground, the Council must establish a plan for such undergrounding. The plan for
undergrounding must include at least the following elements:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 182/454
1. Timetable for the undergrounding.
2. Designation of districts for the undergrounding unless the undergrounding plan is Citywide.
3. Exceptions to the undergrounding requirement and procedure for establishing such exceptions.
4. Procedures for the undergrounding process, including, but not limited to, coordination with City projects and provisions to
ensure compliance with nondiscrimination requirements under the law.
5. A financing plan for funding of the incremental costs if the City determines that it will finance some of the undergrounding costs,
and a determination and verification of the claimed additional costs to underground incurred by the utility.
6. Penalties or other remedies for failure to comply with the undergrounding.
I. Facilities Location:
1. In addition to complying with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes sections 216D.01-09 (one call excavation notice system),
before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has facilities located in the area to be excavated shall
mark the horizontal placement of all said facilities. To the extent its records contain such information, each registrant shall
provide information regarding the approximate vertical location of its facilities to excavators upon request. Nothing in this
subsection is meant to limit the rights, duties, and obligations of facility owners or excavators as set forth in Minnesota Statutes
sections 216D.01-09. Any right-of-way user whose facility is less than twenty inches (20") below a concrete or asphalt surface
shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor in an effort to establish and mark the exact horizontal and vertical
location of its facility and the best procedure for excavation.
2. All facilities shall be placed in appropriate portions of right-of-way so as to cause minimum conflict with other underground
facilities. When technically appropriate, all utilities shall be installed, constructed or placed within the same trench.
J. Developer Responsibility: All owners, platters, or developers are responsible for complying with the requirements of this section,
and prior to final approval of any plat or development plan, shall submit to the Director written instruments from the appropriate
right-of-way users showing that all necessary arrangements with said users for installation of such facilities have been made.
(Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-26: RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A right-of-way user shall promptly and at its own expense, with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and
relocate its facilities in the right-of-way when it is necessary to prevent interference, and not merely for the convenience of the City, in
connection with: a) a present or future City use of the right-of-way for a public project; b) the public health or safety; or c) the safety
and convenience of travel over the right-of-way. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-27: INTERFERENCE BY OTHER FACILITIES:
When the City does work in the right-of-way in its governmental right-of-way management function and finds it necessary to maintain,
support, or move a registrant's facilities to carry out the work without damaging registrant's facilities, the City shall notify the local
representative as early as is reasonably possible. The City costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be
paid within thirty (30) days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the
right-of-way which it or its facilities damages. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-28: RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION; RESERVATION OF RIGHT:
If the City vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way are
governed by Minnesota Rules 7819.3200. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-29: INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY:
By registering with the City, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the
City in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.1250. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-30: ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 183/454
A. Discontinued Operations: A registrant who has determined to discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the City must provide
information satisfactory to the City that the registrant's obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way under this chapter have been
lawfully assumed by another registrant.
B. Removal: Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in
conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is waived by the City. (Ord. 1001,
2-20-2019)
7-6-31: APPEAL:
A right-of-way user that: a) has been denied registration; b) has been denied a permit; c) has had permit revoked; or d) believes that
the fees imposed are not in conformity with Minnesota Statutes section 237.163, subdivision 6 may have the denial, revocation, or
fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its next
available meeting. A decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by
written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-32: RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS:
A permittee's or registrant's rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
7-6-33: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any
court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent
provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. If a regulatory body or a court of competent
jurisdiction should determine by a final, nonappealable order that any permit, right or registration issued under this chapter or any
portions of this chapter is illegal or unenforceable, then any such permit, right or registration granted or deemed to exist hereunder
shall be considered as a revocable permit with a mutual right in either party to terminate without cause upon giving sixty (60) days'
written notice to the other. The requirements and conditions of such a revocable permit shall be the same requirements and
conditions as set forth in the permit, right or registration, respectively, except for conditions relating to the term of the permit and the
right of termination. Nothing in this chapter precludes the City from requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by
law, in addition to requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 1001, 2-20-2019)
Title 8
WATER AND SEWER
Chapter 1
WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
8-1-1: MANAGEMENT OF WATER AND SEWAGE SYSTEMS:
A. The water and sewer systems as they are now constituted or shall hereafter be enlarged or extended shall be operated and
maintained under the provisions of this Chapter subject to the authority of the City Council at any time to amend, alter, change or
repeal the same. (1971 Code § 26-1; amd. 2000 Code)
B. The City Council shall have charge and management of the water and sewer systems, subject to such delegation of the authority
to the City Engineer, City Administrator and to other City employees as the City Council shall provide. (1971 Code § 26-2)
8-1-2: CONNECTION PERMITS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall make any type of connection to the water system, sanitary sewer, or storm sewer system except
upon making an application therefor on a form provided by the City and receiving a permit issued by the City for such purposes.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 184/454
B. Application For Permit: The application shall include the legal description of the property to be served, the uses for which the
connection is requested, and the size of the service line to be used.
C. Fees: At the time of making such application, there shall be paid to the City Building Inspection Division the following fees for the
following purposes:
1. Utilities: No connections shall be made with respect to any sanitary sewer, water system, or storm sewer system serving the
property of any person or occupants of the land, parcel, or premises affected that have not paid or provided for the payment of
the full and proportionate share of the utilities, which share shall be payable as follows:
a. For service to property to which service lines have not been previously run from the street laterals to the property line, the
owner, occupant, or user shall pay into the City Treasury an amount of not less than the cost of making the necessary
connections, taps, and installation of pipe and appurtenances to provide service to the property and the necessary street
repairs.
b. For service to property to which service lines have been run to the property line, but which have not been paid for, the owner,
occupant, or user shall pay in cash or agree to pay charges in the form of special assessments to be levied against the
property to be spread over a number of years coincident with the maturity requirements of any special improvement bonds
sold for the purpose of financing the construction of the sanitary sewer, City water, or storm sewer system serving the
property. Such cash payment or assessment charge shall be in the principal amount of not less than the payments made by
or charges placed against comparable properties for like services for such sanitary sewer, water, or storm sewer system in
an amount as may be established by the City Council. In the instance of services run to the property lines as provided under
subsection C1a of this Section, the payment to the City of any amount required under this subsection C1b shall be reduced
by the amount paid to the City under said subsection C1a. Payment to the city in the form of a special assessment charge
shall be in the form of equal annual installments together with interest on the unpaid balance from year to year, which interest
shall be computed at the then prevailing statutory rate of interest. (Ord. 672, 11-17-1999; amd. 2000 Code)
2. Area And Connection Charges: Before proceeding with the construction, enlargement, alteration, or repair of any water or
sewer lines connecting the water system, sanitary sewer system, or storm sewer system in any house or building, the owner or
his/her agent shall first obtain a permit for such purposes from the city through its building inspection division. The fees for area
charges and connection charges shall be established by ordinance of the city council. All connection and trunk charges are in
addition to the sewer availability charges imposed by section 8-1-14 of this chapter. (Ord. 768, 3-16-2005)
a. Area charges shall be collected for:
(1) All new commercial, industrial, or institutional development. The area charges shall be computed on the acreage of all tax
parcels included in the development site.
(2) Expansion of existing commercial, industrial, or institutional uses, when additional land is acquired and where city
approval is required for the subdivision of the additional land. The charges shall be computed on the acreage of the
additional land which is being added to the existing development.
(3) Residential development or any new residential lot, where city approval for the residential construction is required. The
area charges shall be computed on the gross land area being developed, excluding from the computation the acreage for
ponding areas, major highway rights of way and floodplains. (Ord. 672, 11-17-1999; amd. 2000 Code)
b. Area charges and connection fees shall be paid at the time a building permit is obtained, unless a subdivision agreement,
development agreement, or resolution approving a subdivision, rural subdivision, or lot division provides otherwise. (Ord.
693, 2-21-2001)
3. Water Meters: Before any water conveyed through the city water system shall be used on the land or premises of any person,
there shall first be installed a water meter that will accurately measure the water actually consumed on the premises, except
and unless such installation shall be exempted by the city. All meters installed shall be of a type approved by the city. If a
proposed meter location is not readily accessible to city personnel, the building official may require installation of outside
reading remote meters. All meters shall be purchased by the applicant from the city and after installation shall become and
remain the property of the city. (Ord. 672, 11-17-1999; amd. 2000 Code)
8-1-3: WATER METERS:
A. Property Of City: All water meters installed shall be and remain the property of the city or its successor.
B. Application For Meter: All applications for the installation, maintenance, and repair of water meters shall be made to the city water
and wastewater division. City water and wastewater division staff shall proceed to comply with such application within a
reasonable time thereafter.
C. Authority To Install, Maintain, Repair And Break Seal: No person other than the city or its designee shall install, maintain, or repair
any water meter within the city limits. Every water meter connected to the water system shall be sealed by or under the direction
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 185/454
of the building official, and no person shall break or remove such seal; provided, however, that a plumber licensed to do business
in the City may break such seal or remove such meter for necessary repairs. In all cases where a seal is broken or a meter is
removed by a licensed plumber, such plumber shall notify the Building Official of the fact within twenty four (24) hours after the
seal is broken or the meter is removed. Whenever any seal attached to a water meter by or under the direction of the Building
Official is found broken, the broken condition of such seal shall be prima facie evidence that such seal was broken contrary to the
terms and provisions in violation of this Chapter.
D. Accessibility Of Meters: All water meters connected to the water system shall be accessible to the Building Official or designee at
any reasonable hour of any business day. The refusal of admission by any owner or occupant of any premises wherein a water
meter is installed after such owner or occupant has been notified that admission is desired for the purpose of inspecting a water
meter installed in such premises shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
E. Repairs: Meters shall be repaired from time to time as is necessary to ensure accurate measuring of the flow of water; except, that
whenever a meter has been damaged due to negligence on the part of persons other than the employees of the City, the owner,
occupant, or user of the premises or such other persons desiring the use of the water shall reimburse the City within a reasonable
time and, upon demand therefor, the water service and supply to such premises may be shut off or discontinued as determined to
be in the best interest of the City.
F. Additional Meters: In the event a customer utilizes water in such a way that it is not discharged into the City sanitary sewer system,
installation of additional meters may be authorized to measure the volume of such consumption to prevent payment of sewer
charges on that amount. Any such additional meters now installed or installed in the future between the City water main and the
customer's primary water service meter shall comply in all respects with all ordinances and regulations governing water meters
set forth herein.
G. Meter Tests: Whenever a water user questions the accuracy of the meter and desires that his/her meter be tested, he/she shall
pay a fee established by Council resolution if the meter tests accurate within a range of minus three percent (-3%) to plus one
and one-half percent (+11/2%). If it is not accurate within this range, no charge will be made for testing, and adjustment on the
water bill will be made for the period of time that the meter is assumed to be inaccurate, not to exceed two (2) billing periods.
(Ord. 672, 11-17-1999; amd. 2000 Code)
H. Tampering With Meters: No person shall tamper with, alter, bypass or in any manner whatsoever interfere with the proper use and
functioning of any water meter within the City. (1971 Code § 26-5)
8-1-4: CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Valves Required: There shall be installed in every connection to the City water system one full-way valve which shall be installed
at a point between the curb stop and the meter so that the water may be turned off and the meter and house plumbing entirely
drained. There shall be installed another full-way valve in the pipe on the house side of the meter.
B. Pipe Specifications: All service pipes connected to the City system shall be a type K copper, a minimum of one inch (1") inside
diameter or its approved equal, and shall be laid at a depth not less than seven and one-half feet (71/2') below the established
grade, or as low as the street mains.
C. Separate Lines Required: Separate water and sewer service lines shall be required of each unit of a dwelling, whether it be singlefamily,
town house, or duplex-type construction.
D. Connection By Certified Contractor: All connections to the water system or sanitary sewer system shall be performed by a person
currently certified by the Minnesota Utilities Contractors Association. (Ord. 672, 11-17-1999)
8-1-5: EXCAVATIONS:
A. Supervision: All installation work or repair of connections to the water and sewer systems, including grades, bends, and
backfilling, shall be performed under the direction and supervision of the City.
B. Permit Required: No digging in any permanent type street shall be permitted except by special permission from the City.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 186/454
C. Protective Devices: All work and excavations shall be protected by barricades and warning markers and lights reasonable and
suitable to the purpose.
D. Nonliability Of City: The city shall be held harmless for any claim or loss as might otherwise arise for damage, loss, or injury
caused by or arising by reason of such work being performed, and the applicant causing such work to be done shall give
undertaking to the city with respect thereto. (Ord. 672, 11-17-1999)
8-1-6: LIABILITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF AND REPAIRS TO WATER AND SEWER LINES:
After the initial connection has been made to the sanitary sewer line or to the water system, the responsibility for maintenance and
repair shall be as follows:
A. Sanitary Sewer Lines:
1. The owner, occupant, or user of the premises shall be responsible for all maintenance from the premises to the sanitary sewer
main.
2. The city shall be responsible for the repair of any break between the curb line and the sewer main.
B. Water Lines:
1. The owner, occupant, or user of the premises shall be responsible for all maintenance and repair of water lines between the
premises and the curb stop.
2. The city shall be responsible for all maintenance and repairs of the water lines from the curb stop to the water main.
C. Curb Stop Box Installation:
1. The curb stop box shall be maintained at a height at finished grade of the land or property, and the owner of such property shall
not interfere with the same.
2. No structure or driveway shall be installed in such a manner as to interfere with access to the curb stop box.
3. The homeowner shall be responsible to ensure that the curb stop box remains at finished grade where there is any
landscaping or where grade changes are made.
D. Grease Interceptors: All restaurants and grease producing facilities shall make all necessary provisions to supply and maintain
approved grease interceptors as per the state plumbing code.
E. Definition: "Maintenance", as used in this section, shall include repair of any break, cleaning and/or removal of roots, debris, or
clogs between the premises and the sewer main. (Ord. 672, 11-17-1999)
8-1-7: CONSENT TO RULES, REGULATIONS AND RATES:
Every person applying for water or sewer service, every owner of property for which any such application is made, every person
accepting water or sewer service and every owner of property where such service is accepted shall be deemed upon making such
application or accepting such service to consent to all rules, regulations and rates as established by this chapter and as may
hereafter be set forth and adopted by the city council by ordinance. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
8-1-8: RATES AND CHARGES; BILLS FOR SERVICE; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
A. Authority: The city council shall have the authority to prescribe by ordinance the rates to be charged for water and sewer service
to the customer from time to time and may prescribe the date of billing, a discount for payment within a prescribed period, penalty
for failure to pay within such period and such further rules and regulations relative to the use and operation of such systems as it
may deem necessary from time to time.
B. Meter Readings; Billing Areas: The city council may provide a system of water meter reading by postcard, meter person, or any
other method deemed suitable to the purpose by the council. The council may also establish billing areas or districts and provide
for the reading of meters and billing charges by calendar quarters or monthly quarters or such periodic intervals as the city council
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 187/454
shall determine suitable and necessary from time to time. The sewer charge for residential users shall be based on the lower of
the actual water use for that quarter or the average winter consumption; the winter use for that quarter or the average winter
consumption; the winter consumption shall be a minimum of two thousand (2,000) gallons determined on a monthly basis. The
sewer consumption for commercial users shall be the actual water use. (Ord. 817, 5-16-2007)
C. Discontinuance Of Service: The city reserves the right to discontinue service to any customer of the water and sanitary sewer
system without notice when necessary for repairs, additional connection or reconnection, for nonpayment of charges or bills, or
for disregard of any rules or regulations in connection with the use or operation of such system. Whenever any service has been
discontinued for nonpayment of the charges or bills, for disregard of any rules or regulations, or for any other purpose, it shall not
be resumed except upon payment of the charges or bills accrued, together with interest thereon, or upon compliance with the
rules and regulations previously violated and payment to the City of a restoration fee established by Council ordinance. (Ord. 783,
2-15-2006)
D. Delinquent Bills; Lien: In the event a water or sewer bill is unpaid at the end of the calendar quarter or the billing period under
which the billing is sent out, the billing shall be considered delinquent, the service may be discontinued as provided in subsection
C of this section, and the City Council may cause the charges noted in such billing to become a lien against the property served
by certifying to the County Auditor the amount of such delinquent bill in accordance with the statutes of the State. (Ord. 672, 11-
17-1999; amd. 2000 Code)
E. Final Meter Readings; Water Shutoff; Reconnections: After a final meter reading, the water shall be forthwith shut off, unless a
responsible party assumes the obligation of payment of the new water bill. Any reconnection or turn on outside of the Water and
Wastewater Division's regular working hours shall be charged a fee established by Council ordinance. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
F. Meter Failures; Determination Of Charges: If a meter fails to register or accurately measure the water, the charge for water
consumed shall be paid for at the established rate based upon past average billings. (Ord. 672, 11-17-1999; amd. 2000 Code)
8-1-9: WATER CONSERVATION:
A. Emergency Regulations: The Mayor or assigned designee may impose emergency water usage regulations by limiting the times
and hours, or completely prohibiting water use of the City's water system for sprinkling lawns, landscaping and gardens, irrigation,
and other uses. The Mayor or assigned designee must give notice by publication or by posting in the City Hall and other public
places.
B. Watering Lawns And Gardens:
1. The watering and sprinkling of lawns and/or gardens from a Municipal water supply system shall be permitted on even
numbered days for property with even numbered addresses and on odd numbered days for property with odd numbered
addresses; except, that no property may be watered on the thirty first day of any month.
2. Outdoor watering is prohibited between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
3. The foregoing limitations shall apply only to property served by City water.
4. A violation of a provision of this subsection is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both. Each act of
violation and each day on which a violation occurs or continues is a separate violation.
C. Exempt Watering Activities:
1. Hand watering flower beds, washing vehicles, and water apparatus used by children playing are exempt from the even-odd day
and time of day watering bans.
2. Watering lawns and landscaping for the first thirty (30) days after the establishment or planting of new lawns or landscaping is
permitted with a permit from Public Works.
D. Leak In Service Line: Any owner, occupant, or user of premises who shall discover a leak in a service line to the premises shall
notify the Public Works Department within twenty four (24) hours. Any water wasted due to failure of such person to comply with
this regulation shall be estimated by the City Water and Wastewater Division and be charged against the owner of such premises
at the established rate. (Ord. 986, 7-19-2017)
8-1-10: NONLIABILITY OF CITY FOR WATER DEFICIENCY:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 188/454
The City shall not be held liable at any time for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to the customer whether the same be
occasioned by shutting off the water for repairs or connections or for any cause whatever. (1971 Code § 26-14)
8-1-11: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
Whenever any premises are connected to the City water system, there shall be maintained a complete physical separation between
the City water supply system and the private water supply system so that it is impossible to intentionally or unintentionally allow any
water produced by a private system to be introduced in the supply line from the City system. (1971 Code § 26-19)
8-1-12: VALVES:
A. Backflow Valves: All water lines serving commercial, industrial, or multiple dwelling structures which are connected to the
Municipal water system shall contain an automatic backflow valve to prevent contamination of the Municipal water in the event of
low pressure. The valve shall be of a type approved by the building official. This subsection shall be retroactive. (Ord. 672, 11-17-
1999; amd. 2000 Code)
B. Hydrant Shutoff Valves: All fire hydrants installed in the City, except those in single-family residential districts, shall be equipped
with a shutoff valve in the water supply line. (1971 Code § 26-22)
8-1-13: DISCHARGE OF STORM AND SURFACE WATERS:
A. Discharge To Sanitary Sewers Prohibited: No owner, occupant or user of any premises shall direct into or allow any storm water or
surface water to drain into the sanitary sewer system of the City.
B. Discharge Pipe: A discharge pipe shall be installed to the outside wall of all new and remodeled buildings with rigid pipe (plastic,
copper, galvanized or black pipe) three-fourths inch (3/4") inside diameter minimum with a union or other approved coupling for
easy disconnection for repair or replacement. The discharge pipe shall have a hose bib or three-fourths inch (3/4") hose
connector at the outside of the house wall, and shall be installed at the time of sump basket installation. (Ord. 608, 12-21-1994)
8-1-14: SEWAGE SERVICE AVAILABILITY AND CONNECTION CHARGES:
A. Statement Of Purpose: The Metropolitan Council Environmental Services (MCES) Agency reserves unused capacity in the
metropolitan disposal system (MDS) each year for local government units in which new buildings will be connected to the system
or new connections to the system are commenced during each year and allocates the debt service costs of such unused capacity
for the year among such local government units. In order for the City to pay such costs allocated to it each year, sewer service
availability and connection charges are levied for all new connections or increased volume to the metropolitan disposal system.
B. Service Availability Charge Established:
1. For the purpose of paying costs of reserve capacity allocated to the City each year by the Metropolitan Council Environmental
Services Agency, there is hereby established a service availability charge (SAC) for:
a. The availability of treatment works and interceptors comprising the metropolitan disposal system; and
b. Connections, direct and indirect, to the metropolitan disposal system.
2. The charge is imposed on each building or structure in the City and each connection to the metropolitan disposal system
directly or through the City's system, inside any sewer service area established by the Metropolitan Council Environmental
Services Agency. The charge shall be payable upon the issuance of a building permit or a connection permit, as the case may
be, but no charge shall be due upon the issuance of a connection permit if a charge was paid upon issuance of a building
permit.
3. The service availability charge (SAC) for each building or structure shall be equal to the estimated number of units of sewage
volume that it will discharge. Service availability charge (SAC) determinations and related fees are established by the
Metropolitan Council Environmental Services Agency and allocated as follows:
a. Single-family homes, town homes, condominiums, apartments and duplex units with plumbing for laundry facilities shall
comprise one SAC unit each.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 189/454
b. Condominiums and apartments may receive a twenty percent (20%) rate reduction if there is no plumbing for laundry
facilities within each dwelling unit. This is generally evidenced by common laundry facilities.
c. Other buildings and structures shall be assigned one unit for each one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons of flow or part
thereof which it is estimated they will discharge.
d. Public housing units and housing units subsidized under any government program for low and moderate income housing
may receive a twenty five percent (25%) reduction of the unit equivalent for that type of housing. Application for the reduction
must be made in writing to the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services Agency.
C. Information Provided: The Building Official shall prepare or revise building permit or sewage connection permit application forms
to provide information necessary for the computation of the number of units assignable to the building or structure in question and
shall collect the applicable charge before issuance of a permit. The City shall make such information available to the Metropolitan
Council Environmental Services (MCES) Agency on a report format provided by them for that purpose or upon request. If, upon
filing a report covering such permit with the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services (MCES) Agency, the MCES Agency
determines that a greater number of units is assignable to the building or structure in question, any additional cost allocated to the
City as a result shall be paid by the person or company to whom the permit was granted. (Ord. 672, 11-17-1999; amd. 2000
Code)
8-1-15: WASTE CONTROL REGULATIONS:
The waste discharge rules and fees as established for the metropolitan disposal system, as regulated by the Metropolitan Council
Environmental Services Agency, are hereby adopted by reference as if stated herein in full. (Ord. 672, 11-17-1999)
8-1-16: INDUSTRIAL USER STRENGTH CHARGE:
A. Recitals: The Metropolitan Council Environmental Services Agency, a metropolitan area agency organized and existing under the
laws of the State, in order to receive and retain grants in compliance with the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972 and regulations thereunder, imposes an industrial user sewer strength charge upon users of the metropolitan disposal
system (as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 473.121, subdivision 24) to recover operation and maintenance costs of
treatment works attributable to the strength of the discharge of industrial waste, such sewer strength charge being in addition to
the charge based upon the volume of discharge. In order for the City to pay such costs based upon strength of industrial
discharge and allocated to it each year by the Commission, it is hereby found, determined, and declared to be necessary to
establish sewer strength charges and a formula for the computation thereof for all industrial users receiving waste treatment
services within or served by the City. Furthermore, Minnesota Statutes section 444.075, subdivision 3, empowers the City to
make such sewer charge a charge against the owner, lessee, occupant, or all of them and certify unpaid charges to the County
Auditor as a tax lien against the property served.
B. Strength Charges Established: For the purpose of paying the costs allocated to the City each year by the Metropolitan Council
Environmental Services Agency that are based upon the strength of discharge of all industrial users receiving waste treatment
services within or served by the City, there is hereby approved, adopted, and established, in addition to the sewer charge based
upon the volume of discharge, a sewer charge upon each person, company, or corporation receiving waste treatment services
within or served by the City, based upon strength of industrial waste discharged into the sewer system of the City (the "strength
charge").
C. Payment Of Charges: It is hereby approved, adopted, and established that the strength charge established by subsection B of this
Section shall be paid by each industrial user receiving waste treatment services and subject thereto before the twentieth day next
succeeding the date of billing thereof to such user by or on behalf of the City, and such payment thereof shall be deemed to be
delinquent if not so paid to the billing entity before such date. Furthermore, it is hereby established, approved, and adopted that if
such payment is not paid before such date, an industrial user shall pay interest compounded monthly at the rate of two-thirds of
one percent (2/3%) per month on the unpaid balance due.
D. Failure To Pay; Tax Lien: As provided by Minnesota Statutes section 444.075, subdivision 3, it is hereby approved, adopted, and
established that if payment of the strength charge established by subsection B of this Section is not paid before the sixtieth day
next succeeding the date of billing thereof to the industrial user by or on behalf of the City, said delinquent sewer strength charge,
plus accrued interest established pursuant to subsection C of this Section, shall be deemed to be a charge against the owner,
lessee, and occupant of the property serviced, and the City or its agent shall certify such unpaid delinquent balance to the County
Auditor with taxes against the property served for collection as other taxes are collected; provided, however, that such certification
shall not preclude the City or its agent from recovery of such delinquent sewer strength charge and interest thereon under any
other available remedy. (Ord. 672, 11-17-1999; amd. 2000 Code)
8-1-17: INSPECTIONS; ENTRY POWERS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 190/454
The City, by any authorized employee, agent, or contractor, shall have the right to enter and be admitted to any land, property, or
building in the City that is connected to City water and sewer systems for the following purposes:
A. Inspection and maintenance of materials, plumbing work, and fixtures of all kinds used by or in connection with the City water and
sewer systems.
B. Repair of materials, plumbing work, and fixtures of all kinds used by or in connection with the water and sewer systems.
C. Replacement of materials, plumbing work, and fixtures of all kinds used by or in connection with water and sewer systems,
specifically including the water meters and their accompanying wiring and attached meter recording device. (Ord. 672, 11-17-
1999)
Chapter 2
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS
(Rep. by Ord. 971, 11-2-2016, eff. 12-31-2016)
Chapter 3
STORM WATER UTILITY CHARGES
8-3-1: STORM SEWER SYSTEM; STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
Minnesota statutes section 444.075, authorizes cities to impose just and reasonable charges for the use and availability of storm
sewer facilities ("charges"). By this chapter, the city elects to exercise such authority. (Ord. 697, 6-6-2001)
8-3-2: FINDINGS AND DETERMINATIONS:
In providing for such charges, the findings and determinations set out in this section are made:
A. In the exercise of its governmental authority and in order to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare,
the city has constructed, operated and maintained a storm sewer system ("the system"). This section is adopted in the further
exercise of such authority and for the same purposes.
B. The system, as constructed, heretofore has been financed and paid for through the imposition of special assessments, ad valorem
taxes, and storm water area charges. Such financing methods were appropriate to the circumstances at the time they were used.
It is now necessary and desirable to provide an alternative method of recovering some or all of the future costs of improving,
maintaining and operating the system. Additionally, new regulations have been imposed which require upgrades to the system to
address water quality issues. To address the system's long term financial needs the city finds it reasonable to impose charges as
provided in this chapter.
C. In imposing charges, it is necessary to establish a methodology that undertakes to make them just and equitable. Taking into
account the status of completion of the system, past methods of recovering system costs, the topography of the city and other
relevant factors, it is determined that it would be just and equitable to assign responsibility for some or all of the future costs of
operating, maintaining and improving the system on the basis of the expected storm water runoff from the various parcels of land
within the city.
D. Assigning costs and making charges based upon typical storm water runoff cannot be done with mathematical precision but can
only be accomplished within reasonable and practical limits. The provisions of this chapter undertake to establish a reasonable
and practical methodology for making such charges. (Ord. 697, 6-6-2001)
8-3-3: RATES AND CHARGES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 191/454
A. Land Use Rate Calculation: Rates and charges for the use and availability of the system are to be determined through the use of a
"residential equivalent factor" which assesses the amount of runoff from an acre of single-family urban development during a
standard one year rainfall. Calculations for the storm water utility for other land uses are based upon their residential equivalency
factor. The rates for commercial, industrial, schools and churches land uses also take into consideration the amount of hard
surface on the property and the acreage of the site. (Ord. 697, 6-6-2001)
B. Calculation Of Fees: The calculation of fees for the land uses within the city will be determined by the city's fee ordinance as
amended from time to time.
C. Other Land Uses: Other land uses not listed in the fee ordinance table are to be classified by the city administrator by assigning
them to the classes most nearly like the listed uses, from the standpoint of probable hydrologic response. Appeals from the city
administrator's determination of the proper classifications may be made to the city council in the same manner as other appeals
from administrative determinations.
D. Adjustments Of Charges: The city council may by ordinance, from time to time, adopt policies providing for the adjustment of
charges for parcels or grounds of parcels, based upon hydrologic data supplied by affected property owners, demonstrating an
actual hydrologic response substantially different from the calculation being used for the parcel or parcels. The adjustment may
be made only after receiving the recommendation of the city administrator and may not be made effective retroactively. If the
adjustment would have the effect of changing the calculation for all or substantially all of the land uses in a particular
classification, however, such adjustment must be accomplished by amending the calculation table found within the city fee
ordinance table. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
E. Excluded Lands: A charge for system availability of service will not be made against land which is either: 1) public street right of
way, or 2) vacant and unimproved, or fallow, with substantially all of its surface having vegetation as ground cover.
F. Supplying Information: The owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises must supply the city with such information as the
city may reasonably request related to the use, development and area of the premises. Wilful failure to provide such information
or to falsify it is a violation of this section.
G. Estimated Charges: If the owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises fails or refuses to provide the information
requested, as provided above, the charge for such premises must be estimated and billed in accordance with such estimate,
based upon information then available to the city.
H. Billings And Collections: The finance department shall render bills for charges for the use and availability of the system. The
council may also establish billing areas or districts and bill charges by calendar quarters or monthly quarters or such periodic
intervals as the city council shall determine suitable and necessary. Bills are payable at the office of the city finance department
and may be rendered in conjunction with other utility billings.
I. Penalties And Remedies For Delinquency Or Default In Paying Billings: Penalties and remedies for late payments or nonpayment
of billings are the same as those applicable to billings rendered for water and sanitary sewer service. In the event a bill becomes
delinquent, the city council may cause the delinquent charges to become a lien against the property served by certifying to the
county auditor the amount of such delinquent bill in accordance with state statute, section 444.075.
J. Use Of Revenues: Revenues received from charges are to be placed in a separate storm sewer system account and used to pay
the normal, reasonable and current costs of operating, maintaining, and improving water quality within the system. (Ord. 697, 6-6-
2001)
Chapter 4
STORMWATER; ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLICIT CONNECTION
8-4-1: FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT:
A. The city of Cottage Grove hereby finds that nonstormwater discharges to the city's municipal separated storm sewer system
(MS4) are subject to higher levels of pollutants that enter into receiving water bodies and adversely affect the public health, safety
and general welfare by impacting water quality, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses of environmental resources,
and hindering the ability of the city of Cottage Grove to provide adequate water, sewage, flood control, and other community
services.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 192/454
B. The purpose of this chapter is to promote, preserve and enhance the natural resources within the city of Cottage Grove and
protect them from adverse effects occasioned by nonstormwater discharges by regulating discharges that would have an adverse
and potentially irreversible impact on water quality and environmentally sensitive land.
C. The intent of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Cottage Grove, Minnesota, by
requiring illicit discharge management practices for all discharge activities. (Ord. 854, 3-4-2009)
8-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: The public works department of the city whose officers and employees are authorized to
enforce this chapter and that is led by the director of public works.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP): Practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of the waters of the state, including
schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, and other management practice, and also includes treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge, or waste disposal or drainage from raw
material storage.
DISCHARGE: The addition; including, but not limited to, introducing, releasing, leaking, spilling, casting, throwing, or emitting; of any
pollutant to the waters of the state or to any disposal system.
GROUND WATER: Water contained below the surface of the earth in the saturated zone including, without limitation, all waters
whether under confined, unconfined, or perched conditions, in near surface unconsolidated sediment or regolith, or in rock
formations deeper underground.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter
the storm sewer system including, but not limited to, any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage,
process wastewater, and wash water and any connections to the storm sewer system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of
whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
Any drain or conveyance connected from a residential, commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system that has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as
exempted in subsection 8-4-5B1 of this chapter.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial stormwater permits as defined in 40 CFR section 122.26(b)(14).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): The system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the
city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): The program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing,
terminating, monitoring, and enforcing permits under the clean water act (sections 301, 318, 402, and 405) and United States code of
federal regulations title 33, sections 1317, 1328, 1342, and 1345 authorizing the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
NONSTORMWATER: Discharge not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchise, association or governmental entity recognized by law and acting
as either the owner or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution, including any sewage, industrial waste, hazardous waste, or other
wastes discharged into a disposal system or to waters of the state.
POLLUTE: To discharge pollutants into waters of the state.
POLLUTION: The direct or indirect addition of pollutants into waters of the state.
STORM SEWER SYSTEM: Conveyance or system of conveyances that is owned and operated by the city or other entity and
designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater.
STORMWATER: Precipitation runoff, stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and any other water surface runoff and drainage.
SURFACE WATER: All waters of the state other than groundwaters, which include ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, wetlands, public
ditches, tax ditches, and public drainage systems except those designed and used to collect, convey, or dispose of sanitary sewage.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 193/454
WATERS OF THE STATE: Streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or
private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. (Ord. 854, 3-4-2009; amd. Ord.
940, 3-4-2015)
8-4-3: APPLICABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Applicability: This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm sewer system generated on any developed and undeveloped
land unless explicitly exempted by the authorized enforcement agency.
B. Enforcement1: The authorized enforcement agency shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
854, 3-4-2009)
8-4-4: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
The standards set forth in this chapter and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards. This chapter does not
intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of
pollutants. (Ord. 854, 3-4-2009)
8-4-5: STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF CONTROL:
A. Illegal Disposal And Dumping:
1. No person shall throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, keep, or otherwise discharge or allow others to discharge any substance
into the MS4 or the storm sewer system or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or drainage
structure, business place, or upon any public or private plot of land, so that the same is or will become a pollutant, except in
containers, recycling bags, or other lawfully established waste disposal facilities.
2. No person shall intentionally dispose of grass, leaves, dirt, or landscape material into the storm sewer system or into a water
resource, buffer, street, road, alley, catch basin, culvert, inlet, ditch, natural watercourse, flood control channel, canal, storm
drain or any stormwater system.
B. Illicit Discharges And Connections:
1. No person shall cause or allow others under its control to cause any illicit discharge to enter the MS4 or any surface water
unless such discharge:
a. Consists of nonstormwater that is authorized by an NPDES point source permit obtained from the MPCA;
b. Is associated with firefighting activities or other activities necessary to protect public health and safety; or
c. Is one of the following exempt discharges: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn
watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
ground water, foundation or footing drains (but not active ground water dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
dechlorinated swimming pools, and any other water discharge not containing pollutants.
2. Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement authority prior to the time
of the test.
3. No person shall use any illicit connections to intentionally convey nonstormwater into the storm sewer system.
4. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm sewer system is prohibited. This
prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
5. A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows
such a connection to continue.
C. Good Housekeeping Provisions: Any owner or occupant of property within the city shall comply with the following good
housekeeping requirements:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 194/454
1. Chemical Or Septic Waste: No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or otherwise expose any chemical or septic waste
in an area where discharge to streets or the storm sewer system or MS4 may occur. This section shall apply to both actual and
potential discharges.
a. Individual septic systems must be maintained to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare and to prevent failure,
which has the potential to pollute surface water.
b. Recreational vehicle sewage shall be disposed to a proper sanitary waste facility. Waste should not be discharged in an area
where drainage to streets or the storm sewer system may occur.
c. For chlorinated pools, water should sit seven (7) days without the addition of chlorine (to allow for the evaporation of
chlorine) before discharge.
2. Runoff Of Water From Residential, Commercial, And Industrial Property: Runoff of water from residential property shall be
minimized to the maximum extent practicable. Runoff of water from the washing down of paved areas in commercial or
industrial property is prohibited unless necessary for health or safety purposes and not in violation of any other provisions in
this code.
3. Mobile Washing Companies: Mobile washing companies, including, but not limited to, carpet cleaning, and mobile vehicle
washing, shall dispose of wastewater to the sanitary sewer. Wastewater from these company activities should not be
discharged where drainage to streets or a storm sewer system may occur.
4. Storage Of Materials, Machinery, And Equipment:
a. Objects, such as motor vehicle parts, containing grease, oil or other hazardous substances, and unsealed receptacles
containing hazardous materials shall not be stored in areas susceptible to runoff or drainage into the storm sewer system or
MS4.
b. Any machinery or equipment that is to be repaired or maintained in areas susceptible to runoff or drainage shall be placed in
a confined area to contain leaks, spills, or discharges.
5. Debris And Residue: Debris and residue shall be removed, as noted below:
a. All motor vehicle parking lots; including, but not limited to, commercial, nonprofit organization, and multi-family residential
parking lots; and private streets should be swept, at a minimum of once a year in the spring to remove debris. Such debris
should be collected and properly disposed.
b. Fuel and chemical residue or other types of potentially harmful material, such as animal waste, garbage or batteries shall be
removed as soon as possible and properly disposed.
c. Household hazardous waste may be disposed of through the county collection program or at any other appropriate disposal
site and shall not be placed in a trash container.
D. Industrial Activity Discharges: Any person subject to an industrial activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with
all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the authorized
enforcement agency prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. All facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with
industrial activity must adhere to the following guideline:
1. Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to
implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants
to the MS4. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the NPDES permit.
E. Notifications Of Spills: Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or
responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials
which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm sewer system, the MS4,
or waters of the state, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person
shall notify the authorized enforcement agency no later than the next business day. If the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three
(3) years. Failure to provide notification of a release as provided herein is a violation of this chapter.
F. Access To Buildings For Inspection, Monitoring, And/Or Dye Testing:
1. The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect all buildings under this chapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a building has security measures in force that require proper
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 195/454
identification and clearance before entry into the premises, the owner or its designee shall make the necessary arrangements
to allow access to the authorized enforcement agency.
2. Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, dye testing, examination and copying of records that relate to the discharge of stormwater.
3. The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up at any building such devices as are necessary in the opinion
of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring, sampling or dye testing of the facility's stormwater discharge.
4. The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
discharger at its own expense.
5. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
6. Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency access to a facility are a violation of this chapter.
7. If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is
discharged, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this section, or that there is a
need to inspect or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized
enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of jurisdiction.
8. This section applies to commercial, industrial, and residential buildings and facilities.
G. Requirement To Prevent, Control, And Reduce Stormwater Pollutants By The Use Of Best Management Practices: The
authorized enforcement agency will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or
facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm sewer system, or waters of the state.
The owner or operator of such activity, operation, or facility, shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge or prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm sewer system through the use of these
structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises that is, or may be, the source of
illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent
the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water management plan (SWMP) as
necessary for compliance with the requirements of the NPDES permit.
H. Watercourse Protection: Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep
and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that
would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the
use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
I. Suspension Of Storm Sewer System Access:
1. Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice,
suspend storm sewer system discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the state. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or
waters of the state, or to minimize danger to persons.
2. Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have
their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency
will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the city council for a
reconsideration. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates its MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this
section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
J. Violations:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any requirement of this chapter. Any person
who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter may be subject to enforcement actions outlined in this
chapter and state and federal law.
2. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the authorized enforcement agency
is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving proper notice, to take any and all measures necessary to
abate the violation or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 196/454
3. In addition to the processes and penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any
provision of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare and is declared and deemed a nuisance under this
code.
K. Enforcement2:
1. Notice Of Violation: Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to
meet a requirement of this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to
the responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
a. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
b. The elimination of illicit connections or illicit discharges;
c. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
d. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
e. The payment of administrative and remediation costs; and
f. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
2. Deadline For Remediation Or Restoration: If abatement of a violation or restoration of affected property is required, the notice
shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that,
should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
3. Appeal; Hearing: Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement
agency by filing an appeal with the authorized enforcement agency within ten (10) days from the date of the notice of violation.
A hearing on the appeal will be before the city council within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the appeal. The decision of the city
council shall be final.
4. Collection Of Charges: If the bill received for abatement or restoration is not paid within thirty (30) days, the city may draw the
amount of the bill from any financial guarantees the city may hold or may assess the property from which the violation occurred
or is occurring. After notice and hearing as provided pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 429.061, the city council may then
spread the charges against the property benefited as a special assessment under Minnesota statutes section 429.101, for
certification to the county auditor and collection along with the current taxes the following year or in annual installations not
exceeding ten (10) years as the city council may determine in each case.
5. If Violation Is Not Corrected: If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of
violation, or provided by the city council after an appeal, then the authorized enforcement agency may enter upon the subject
private property and take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for
any person, owner, agent, or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the authorized enforcement agency, or its
designated contractor, to enter the premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord. 854, 3-4-2009)
6. Documentation Of Enforcement:
a. Name of the person responsible for violating the terms and conditions of this chapter.
b. Date(s) and location(s) of the observed violation(s).
c. Description of the violation(s), including reference(s) to relevant regulatory mechanisms.
d. Corrective action(s), including completion schedule.
e. Date(s), and type(s) of enforcement used to compel compliance.
f. Referrals to other regulatory organizations (if any).
g. Date(s) violation(s) resolved. (Ord. 940, 3-4-2015)
L. Penalty: The offending party will be issued an administrative citation for the unsatisfactory condition at the time the written notice
of violation is given. Any person who fails to take remedial measures, fails to cure, or continues to violate this chapter may be
subject to civil and criminal penalties. Remedies are not exclusive of any other remedies available under applicable federal, state,
or local laws. It is within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies. The city may recover attorney fees, court costs,
and related expenses (including, but not limited to, sampling and monitoring expenses) associated with the enforcement of this
chapter to the extent permitted by law.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 197/454
M. Compensatory Action: In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the city may
impose alternative compensatory actions upon a violator, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops,
stormwater pond cleanup, or related activities. (Ord. 854, 3-4-2009)
Title 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
9-1-1: EXTERIOR FACING MATERIALS:
A. Statement Of Policy: The City Council deems and hereby declares that the use of exterior facing materials in the construction,
moving, alteration of, or repairs to buildings or structures, which materials are not of permanent nature or have a tendency,
because of the nature of the material, to quickly become unsightly, tends to result in substantial depreciation of values in the
neighborhood and in the City at large. Because this substantial depreciating effect can or will discourage orderly growth patterns
and disrupt planned land use to the detriment of public health, wealth, safety, morals and general welfare, the use of such
materials may be authorized by the City Council only after the closest possible scrutiny. (1971 Code § 6-1)
B. Unsuitable Materials; Exemptions: The following materials shall be generally unsuitable for exterior surfaces. Such materials,
however, may be used in special arrangement or combination with other materials of a permanent nature or integral to an
architectural design of general acceptance and appeal:
1. Concrete masonry units.
2. Common clay brick.
3. Sand lime brick.
4. Concrete brick.
5. Unfinished structural clay tile.
6. Sheet metal, either plain or corrugated.
7. Exposed unfinished concrete.
8. Prefabricated assembly for wall or roof assembly.
9. Unfinished metal prefabricated wall surfaces. (1971 Code § 6-2)
C. Factors Considered Prior To Approval: In approving the use of any of the materials enumerated in subsection B of this Section,
the City Council shall consider the following:
1. The location of the structure in relation to abutting streets and thoroughfares.
2. The zoning district in which the structure is or will be located.
3. The proximity of the structure to the boundaries of another zoning district of different classification.
4. The degree of variance of design to neighboring buildings and structures.
5. If an addition to an existing building or structure, the degree of variance of design to the existing building or structure.
6. The existence and effect of natural or artificial screening either existing on the site or proposed as part of the construction site.
(1971 Code § 6-3)
D. Preliminary Approval:
1. In the event an owner intending to apply for a building permit under Chapter 3 of this Title desires to use any of the materials
included in subsection B of this Section as exterior finish materials, such owner may present to the Building Official a request
for preliminary approval for the use of such materials prior to the preparation of final drawings and application required by this
Title and other ordinances. Such request for preliminary approval shall include such sketches and other information as may be
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 198/454
necessary to indicate accurately the use to be made of such materials and the appearance of the exterior of such structure
when completed.
2. If such request for preliminary approval of materials is granted by the Building Official for the City Council, the sketch and other
information shall be properly marked for identification by the building official and be filed thereby in his/her office, and such data
shall become a part of the building permit application when filed. (1971 Code § 6-4; amd. 2000 Code)
E. Provisions Additional: The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be supplementary to the zoning ordinance and City
Building Code, and shall be enforced and administered in conjunction and in harmony with each. (1971 Code § 6-5)
9-1-2: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS1:
All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are
otherwise dangerous to human life, or which, in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health or public welfare, by
reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster damage or abandonment, as specified in the
Building Code or any other effective ordinances, are, for the purpose of this section, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are
hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the
procedure specified in the Building Code or by any other procedure provided by law. (1971 Code § 6-8)
Chapter 2
BUILDING CODE
9-2-1: STATE CODE ADOPTED:
A. Building Code: The Minnesota state building code as adopted by the commissioner of administration pursuant to Minnesota
statutes chapters 16B.59 to 16B.75, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations established, adopted and published
from time to time by the Minnesota commissioner of administration, through the building codes and standards division is hereby
adopted by reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this code. The Minnesota state
building code is hereby incorporated in this code as if fully set out herein.
B. Application, Administration, And Enforcement: The application, administration, and enforcement of the code shall be in
accordance with the Minnesota state building code. The code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by
Minnesota statutes, 16B.62, subdivision 1, when so established by this code.
A Minnesota certified building official designated by the city to administer the Minnesota state building code1 shall enforce said
code. (Ord. 759, 3-17-2004)
C. Permits And Fees: The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in Minnesota statutes, 16B.62,
subdivision 1.
Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by council ordinance
from time to time. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by this code in
accordance with Minnesota statutes 16B.70. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
9-2-2: SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ADOPTED:
(Rep. by Ord. 759, 3-17-2004)
9-2-3: SCOPE:
The building code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, reconstruction, alteration and repair of farm dwellings and buildings.
(1971 Code § 6-7; amd. 2000 Code)
9-2-4: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 199/454
A. Right Of Entry:
1. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or whenever the building official or
his/her authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any
condition which makes such building or premises unsafe as defined in section 9-1-2 of this title, the building official or his/her
authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any
duty imposed upon the building official by this code; provided, that if such building or premises be occupied, he/she shall first
present proper credentials and demand entry; and if such building or premises be unoccupied, he/she shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If
such entry is refused, the building official or his/her authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by
law to secure entry.
2. No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after
proper demand is made as herein provided, to properly permit entry therein by the building official or authorized representative
for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the building code. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
3. "Authorized representative" shall include the building official and deputies.
B. Stop Work Orders: Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the provisions of the building code, the building official
may order the work stopped by notice, in writing, served on any person engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, or
posted on the property where work is being performed, and any such persons shall forthwith stop work until authorized by the
building official to proceed with the work.
C. Occupancy Violations: Whenever any structure is being used contrary to the provisions of the building code, the building official
may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use
to be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice or make the structure, or
portion thereof, comply with the requirements of the building code; provided, however, that in the event of an unsafe building,
section 9-1-2 of this title shall apply.
D. Nonliability Of Building Official; Suits:
1. The building official or any employee charged with the enforcement of the building code, acting in good faith and without malice
for the city in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself liable personally, and he/she is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by
reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his/her duties.
2. Any suit brought against the building official or employee, because of such act or omission performed by him/her in the
enforcement of any provisions of the building code, shall be defended by the legal department of the city until final termination
of the proceedings.
E. Cooperation Of Other Officials: The building official may request, and shall receive so far as may be necessary in the discharge of
his/her duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the city. (1971 Code § 6-8; amd. 2000 Code)
9-2-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure in the city or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation
of any of the provisions of the building code. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the building code shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or
portion thereof, during which any violation of any of the provisions of the building code is committed, continued or permitted, and
upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1971 Code § 6-8;
amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 3
BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES; FEES
9-3-1: BUILDING PERMITS:
A. Permit Required; Authority To Issue: No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
convert, or demolish any building or structure in the City or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate building
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 200/454
permit for each such building or structure from the Building Official. The Building Official shall have the authority to issue permits
for the moving, demolition, erecting, enlargement or alteration of all buildings or structures.
B. Exceptions: Permits shall not be required for minor remodeling or alteration work, provided a record of such work has been filed
with and approved by the Building Inspection Division, and the construction shall not increase the physical size, create a room, or
alter the structural framework of the existing building.
C. Application For Permit: To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor, in writing, on a form furnished for that
purpose. Every such application shall:
1. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made.
2. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot, block, tract, and house and street address, or similar
description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.
3. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
4. Be accompanied by plans and specifications as required in subsection D of this Section.
5. State the valuation of the proposed work.
6. Be signed by the permittee, or his/her authorized agent, who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
7. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the Building Official.
D. Plans And Specifications:
1. Plans And Specifications Required; Exceptions:
a. For a residential building permit application, two (2) sets of full size plans and two (2) sets of eight and one-half inch by
eleven inch (81/2" x 11") plans, and a certificate of survey prepared by a land surveyor showing the building elevations and
site drainage conforming to the grading plans for the project, and if there are no drainage plans, a proposed drainage/run-off
shall be reflected.
b. For commercial and industrial permit applications, four (4) sets of full size plans and specifications and a certificate of survey
by a registered land surveyor showing the building elevations and site drainage conforming to the grading plans for the
project, and if there are no drainage plans, a proposed drainage/run-off shall be reflected.
c. When authorized by the Building Official, plans and specifications need not be submitted for minor remodeling or alteration
work; provided, that the work which is proposed does not involve work which can affect the safety of either the occupants or
the public.
2. Information On Plans And Specifications: Plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale upon paper and shall be of sufficient
clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the
building code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the house
and street address of the work and the name and address of the owner and person who prepared them. Plans shall include a
plot plan showing the location of the proposed building and of every existing building on the property. In lieu of detailed
specifications, the Building Official may approve references on the plans to a specific section or part of the building code or
other ordinances or laws. Computation, stress diagrams, and other data sufficient to show the correctness of the plans shall be
submitted when required by the Building Official.
3. Retention Of Plans: One set of approved plans, specifications, and computations shall be retained by the Building Official for a
period of not less than ninety (90) days from date of completion of the work covered therein, and one set of approved plans and
specifications shall be returned to the applicant, which set shall be kept on such building or work at all times during which the
work authorized thereby is in progress. Plans submitted for checking for which no permit is issued and on which no action is
taken by the applicant for ninety (90) days shall be returned to the last known address of the applicant; to renew action on said
plans, a payment of a new plan-check fee shall be required.
E. Issuance Of Permit:
1. The application, plans, and specifications filed by an applicant for a permit shall be checked by the Building Official. Such plans
may be reviewed by other departments of the City to check compliance with the laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction. If
the Building Official is satisfied that the work described in an application for permit and the plans filed therewith conform to the
requirements of the building code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the fees specified have been paid, he/she
shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant.
2. When the Building Official issues the permit, he/she shall endorse, in writing, or stamp on both sets of plans and specifications
"APPROVED". Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified, or altered without authorization from
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 201/454
the Building Official, and all work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans.
3. The Building Official may issue a permit for the construction of part of a building or structure before the entire plans and
specifications for the whole building or structure have been submitted or approved, provided adequate information and detailed
statements have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of the building code. The holder of such permit shall
proceed at his/her own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire building or structure will be granted. (1971 Code
§ 6-8; amd. 2000 Code)
F. Denial Of Permits; Appeals: In any instance where a building permit or a request for a preliminary approval is denied, the applicant
shall be entitled to an appeal of the denial. The appeal shall be heard by the City Council sitting as a board of review at any
regular or special meeting. The applicant may present any additional information he/she deems pertinent, which shall be
considered by the City Council together with the original application and all papers submitted therewith. The City Council, as
board of review, shall issue its findings and conclusions within thirty (30) days after such review hearing. (1971 Code § 6-20)
G. Validity:
1. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an
approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the building code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or
cancel the provisions of the building code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful.
2. The issuance of a permit based on plans and specifications shall not prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring the
correction of errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in
violation of the building code or of any other ordinance of the City.
H. Expiration Of Permit:
1. Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this Section shall expire by limitation and become null and
void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of
such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is
commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first
obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half (1/2) the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no
changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and provided, further, that such
suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year.
2. The exterior of any building shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days of start of construction. No occupancy or
use of a structure shall be allowed until the exterior is completed and all necessary inspections conducted. In the case of a
demonstrated hardship, the building official may allow for an extension of time to complete the exterior. No extension shall
exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. In order to renew action on such permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new
full permit fee.
I. Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit: The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under this section
whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied or in violation of any ordinance or
regulation or any of the provisions of this section. (1971 Code § 6-8; amd. 2000 Code)
9-3-2: USE OR OCCUPANCY:
A. Certificate Of Occupancy:
1. Certificate Required: No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification
of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor
as provided in the building code. (1971 Code § 6-8; amd. 2000 Code)
2. Issuance Of Certificate; Conditions: After final inspection when it is found that the building or structure complies with the
provisions of the building code and an as built survey has been submitted, the building official shall issue a certificate of
occupancy which shall contain the following:
a. The building permit number.
b. The address of the building.
c. The name and address of the owner.
d. A description of that portion of the building for which the certificate is issued.
e. A statement that the described portion of the building complies with the requirements of the building code for group of
occupancy in which the proposed occupancy is classified.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 202/454
f. The name of the building official.
3. Temporary Certificate: A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building official for the use of a portion or
portions of a building or structure prior to the completion of the entire building or structure and submittal of an as built survey.
(Ord. 936, 11-19-2014)
4. Certificate To Be Posted: The certificate of occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall not be
removed except by the building official.
B. Change In Use: Changes in the character or use of a building shall not be made except as specified in the building code. (1971
Code § 6-8; amd. 2000 Code)
9-3-3: INSPECTIONS:
All construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official, and certain types of
construction shall have continuous inspection by special inspectors, as specified in subsection B of this section.
A. Inspections Generally:
1. Lot Survey: A survey of the lot may be required by the building official to verify compliance of the structure with approved plans.
2. Inspection Record Card: Work requiring a building permit shall not be commenced until the permit holder or his/her agent shall
have posted an inspection record card in a conspicuous place on the front premises and in such position as to allow the
building official conveniently to make the required entries thereon regarding inspection of the work. This card shall be
maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy has been issued.
3. Approvals Required: No work shall be done on any part of the building or structure beyond the point indicated in each
successive inspection without first obtaining the written approval of the building official. Such written approval shall be given
only after an inspection shall have been made of each successive step in the construction as indicated by each of the
inspections required in subsection A4 of this section. There shall be a final inspection and approval on all buildings when
completed and ready for occupancy.
4. Required Inspections:
a. Reinforcing steel or structural framework of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without
first obtaining the approval of the Building Official.
b. The Building Official, upon notification from the permit holder or his/her agent, shall make the following inspections and shall
either approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify the permit holder or his/her agent wherein the
same fails to comply with the building code:
(1) Footings Inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected and when all materials for the footings
are delivered on the job. Where concrete from a central mixing plant (commonly termed "transit mixed") is to be used,
materials need not be on the job.
(2) Foundation Inspection: To be made after the footings and foundation walls are completed and dampproofed and before
backfill material is placed against foundation.
(3) Frame Inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking, and bracing are in place and all pipes, chimneys
and vents are complete.
(4) Insulation Inspection: To be made before sheet rock work commences.
(5) Lath And/Or Wallboard Inspection: To be made after all lathing and/or wallboard, interior and exterior, is in place, but
before any plastering is applied or before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and finished.
(6) Final Inspection: To be made after building is completed and ready for occupancy.
c. In addition to the called inspections specified above, the Building Official may make or require any other inspections of any
construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the building code and other laws which are enforced by the
Building Inspection Division.
d. For the purpose of determining compliance with the building code, the Building Official may cause any structure to be
reinspected.
B. Special Inspections:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 203/454
1. Special Inspections Enumerated: In addition to the inspections to be made as specified in subsection A of this Section, the
owner or his/her agent shall employ a special inspector who shall be present at all times during construction on the following
types of work:
a. Concrete: On concrete work when the design is based on an "f" in excess of two thousand (2,000) pounds.
b. Masonry: On masonry work which shall have special inspection when required by the Building Official.
c. Welding: On all structural welding.
d. Reinforced Gypsum Concrete: When cast-in-place reinforced gypsum concrete is being mixed or deposited.
e. Special Cases: On special construction or work involving unusual hazards or requiring constant inspection.
2. Special Inspector: The special inspector shall be a qualified person approved by the Building Official and shall furnish
continuous inspection on the construction and work requiring his/her employment. He/she shall report to the Building Official, in
writing, noting all building code violations and other information as required.
3. Exemptions:
a. The Building Official may waive the requirement for the employment of a special inspector if he/she finds that the
construction or work is such that no unusual hazard exists.
b. Special inspections required by this Section and elsewhere in the building code shall not be required where the work is done
on the premises of a fabricator approved by the Building Official to perform such work without special inspection. The
certificate of approval shall be subject to revocation by the Building Official if it is found that any work done pursuant to the
approval is in violation of the building code. (1971 Code § 6-8; amd. 2000 Code)
9-3-4: FEES:
A. Building Permit Fees: Building permit fees shall be established by ordinance of the city council from time to time. No permit as
required by this chapter shall be issued until the fees prescribed by said ordinance have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a
permit be approved until the additional fees, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure have been
paid. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
B. Plan Checking Fees:
1. When a plan check is required, a plan checking fee computed according to the uniform building code shall be charged by the
city.
2. Where plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan checking, or the city incurs costs due to the plan check
over the amount specified, an additional plan check fee shall be charged at a rate established by the building official.
3. Plans for all proposed buildings shall be prepared by an architect registered by the state board of architecture, engineering,
land surveying landscape architecture, geoscience and interior design as required by Minnesota statutes section 326.02 et seq.
4. The plan checking fee shall be paid by the applicant to the city prior to issuance of a building permit by the building official.
C. Service Availability Charge: Applicants for building permits for all new residential, commercial or industrial construction within the
metropolitan sewer service area shall be required to pay a sewer service availability charge in accordance with a schedule which
shall be established by the metropolitan council environmental services from time to time, said charge to be payable at the time of
the issuance of a building permit.
D. Determination Of Value: The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of the building code shall be
determined by using the most current estimate of construction costs as furnished by the Minnesota state building code division.
E. Exemptions From Fees: All proposed buildings which shall be wholly owned by a governmental unit or political subdivision shall
be exempt from the building permit fees and plan checking fee, provided the designing architect or engineer shall submit
evidence to the building official to substantiate that the provisions of the ordinance will be and are followed when such provisions
are applicable. (1971 Code § 6-8; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 4
ELECTRICAL CODE
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 204/454
9-4-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all installations of electrical conductors, fittings, devices and fixtures, hereinafter referred
to as "electrical equipment", within or on public buildings and premises. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to installations
used by electrical supply or communication agencies in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or for the operation
of signals or the transmission of intelligence, and located within or on buildings or premises used exclusively by such agency or on
public thoroughfares. (1971 Code § 10-1)
9-4-2: DEFINITION:
As used in this Chapter, "reasonably safe to persons and property", as applied to electrical installations and electrical equipment,
means safe to use in the service for which the installation or equipment is intended without unnecessary hazard to life, limb or
property. (1971 Code § 10-2)
9-4-3: INSTALLATION STANDARDS:
A. General Standards: All installations of electrical equipment shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity
with the provisions of this Chapter, the applicable statutes of the State and all orders, rules and regulations issued by authority
thereof.
B. Compliance With Electrical Code: Conformity of installations of electrical equipment with applicable regulations set forth in the
most current edition of the National Electrical Code1, thirty (30) days being available for public inspection, National Electrical
Safety Code or electrical provisions of other safety codes which have been approved by the American Standards Association
shall be prima facie evidence that such installations are reasonably safe to persons and property, together with such additions
and exceptions contained herein. (1971 Code § 10-3; amd. 2000 Code)
9-4-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required; Exemptions: No electrical equipment shall be installed within or on any building, structure or premises, publicly
owned, nor shall any alteration or addition be made in any such existing equipment without first securing a permit therefor from
the Electrical Inspector except as provided in Section 9-4-1 of this Chapter, and except, that no permit will be required to execute
any of the following classes of electrical work:
1. Public service corporations shall not be required to obtain permits or inspection for work upon or in connection with their own
properties.
2. Manufacturers shall not be required to obtain permits or inspection for work incorporated within equipment as a part of product
manufacturing.
3. Permits shall be granted only to holders of master electricians' licenses who are registered and bonded by the State; except,
that licensed journeymen electricians and qualified apprentices may wire their own property and be granted a permit to do
same hereunder.
B. State License Required: Every applicant for permit in the City shall furnish a certificate from the State Board of Electricity stating
that he/she has passed the examination as master electrician as prescribed by such Board and that he/she holds a master
electrician's State license. (1971 Code § 10-4; amd. 2000 Code)
C. Application For Permit; Issuance: Application for a permit under this Chapter, describing the work to be done, shall be made in
writing to the Electrical Inspector by the person installing the work. The application shall be accompanied by such plans,
specifications and schedules as may be necessary to determine whether the installation as described will be in conformity with
the requirements of this Chapter. If it shall be found that the installation as described will conform with all legal requirements and if
the applicant has complied with all provisions of this Chapter, a permit for such installation shall be issued.
D. Deviation From Installation Procedures: No deviation may be made from the installation prescribed in the permit without the
written approval of the Electrical Inspector. (1971 Code § 10-5)
9-4-5: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 205/454
A. Duties And Powers: It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. He/she shall, upon
application, grant permits for the installation or alteration of electrical equipment and shall make inspections of electrical
installations all as provided in this Chapter. He/she shall keep complete records of all permits as provided in this Chapter and
shall keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections and reinspections made and other official work performed in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. He/she shall also keep on file a list of inspected electrical equipment issued by or
for Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., which list shall be accessible for the public reference during regular office hours. (1971 Code
§ 10-7; amd. 2000 Code)
B. Certain Conduct Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the Electrical Inspector to engage in the business of the sale, installation or
maintenance of electrical equipment, either directly or indirectly. He/she shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in
such business in the City at any time while holding such office. (1971 Code § 10-8; amd. 2000 Code)
C. Entry Powers; Dangerous Conditions:
1. The Electrical Inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building or premises in the discharge of
his/her official duties or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or test of the electrical equipment contained
therein or its installation.
2. When any electrical equipment is found by the Electrical Inspector to be dangerous to persons or property because it is
defective or defectively installed, the person responsible for the electrical equipment shall be notified in writing and shall make
any changes or repairs required in the judgment of the Electrical Inspector or place such equipment in safe condition, and if
such work is not completed within fifteen (15) days or any longer period that may be specified by the Electrical Inspector in
such notice, the Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or order the discontinuance of electric service to
such electrical equipment. In cases of emergency, where necessary for safety to persons or property or where electrical
equipment may interfere with the work of the Fire Division, the Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or
cause the disconnection immediately of any electrical equipment. (1971 Code § 10-9; amd. 2000 Code)
9-4-6: INSPECTIONS:
A. Notice Of Inspection: Upon the completion of any installation of electrical equipment which has been made under a permit, it shall
be the duty of the person making the installation to notify the Inspector that the installation is ready for inspection, and within
twenty four (24) hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, of the time such notice is given or as soon thereafter as
practicable, the Inspector shall make such inspection. (1971 Code § 10-10)
B. Certificate Of Approval:
1. Issuance Of Certificate: Where the Electrical Inspector finds the installation to be in conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter, he/she shall issue to the person making the installation a certificate of approval, with duplicate copy for delivery to the
owner authorizing the use of the installation and connection to the supply of electricity, and shall send written notice of such
authorization to the agency supplying the electric service.
2. Temporary Certificate Of Approval: When a certificate of approval is issued authorizing the connection and use of a temporary
installation, such certificate shall be issued to expire at a time to be stated therein and shall be revocable by the Electrical
Inspector for cause. (1971 Code § 10-11; amd. 2000 Code)
C. Concealed Equipment: When any electrical equipment is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of the
building, the person installing the equipment shall notify the Electrical Inspector, and such equipment shall not be concealed until
it has been inspected and approved by the Electrical Inspector or until twenty four (24) hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays, shall have elapsed from the time of such notification; provided, that on large installations, where the concealment of
equipment proceeds continuously, the person installing the electrical equipment shall give the Electrical Inspector due notice, and
inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the work. (1971 Code § 10-12)
D. Work Done Under Annual Permit: At regular intervals the Electrical Inspector shall visit all premises where work may be done
under annual permits and shall inspect all electrical equipment installed under such a permit since the date of the last previous
inspection. He/she shall issue a certificate of approval for such work as is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter after the fee required has been paid. (1971 Code § 10-13; amd. 2000 Code)
E. Notice Of Defects: If, upon inspection, the installation is not found to be fully in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, the
Electrical Inspector shall at once forward to the person making the installation a written notice stating the defects which have
been found to exist. (1971 Code § 10-14)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 206/454
Chapter 5
PLUMBING CODE
9-5-1: CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by reference the most recent edition of the Minnesota department of health plumbing code (chapter 4715)1,
a copy of which is on file in the office of the building official. (1971 Code §§ 19-5, 19-6; amd. 2000 Code)
9-5-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: Before proceeding with any plumbing construction, enlargement, alteration or repair, the owner of the property
where such plumbing is proposed, or his/her agent, shall first obtain a permit for such purpose from the building official.
B. Application For Permit: Application for such permit shall be made to the building official and shall show the owner of the property,
the legal description of the property where the work is proposed, the nature of the proposed work and the identity of the
contractor who is to perform the work. (1971 Code § 19-1; amd. 2000 Code)
9-5-3: FEES:
A. Permits: The city council shall determine a uniform fee for issuance of plumbing permits by ordinance from time to time. Such fee
must be paid upon approval of the application for the permit and before work commences.
B. Renotification: The city council shall also determine by ordinance from time to time a uniform fee for renotification where work is
found defective and requires correction and reinspection. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
9-5-4: ENFORCEMENT; INSPECTIONS:
A. Enforcement Official: It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Inspections:
1. Inspections Required; Defects: All plumbing work hereafter constructed shall be inspected, and if found not to be in accordance
with the plumbing code, shall be corrected.
2. Corrections By City; Costs: If, after written notice to the person installing work requiring correction thereof, such person
neglects or refuses to conform to such order, the building official may remove such work and charge the cost thereof to the
person installing the same.
3. Number Of Inspections: At least two (2) inspections shall be required, one when the rough work is completed and one upon
completion of the work.
C. Provisions Are Additional: The provisions of this section are in addition to and not in lieu of the plumbing code adopted in section
9-5-1 of this chapter. (1971 Code § 19-4; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 6
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
9-6-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The state uniform fire code, most current edition with amendments, one copy of which is marked as the official copy and which is on
file with the city clerk, is hereby adopted in its entirety as the fire code for the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, except such portions as are modified or amended by other sections
of this chapter. Every provision contained in the fire code as amended, except as modified or amended by this chapter, is hereby
adopted and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. (1971 Code § 12-3; amd. 2000 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 207/454
9-6-2: MODIFICATIONS TO CODE:
A. Permits:
1. Each permit issued by the fire division, pursuant to the Minnesota uniform fire code shall be issued for a one year period unless
otherwise provided in this section.
2. Tank installation permits shall be valid until revoked by the fire chief or his/her designee. (1971 Code § 12-3.1; amd. 2000
Code)
3. Permit fees shall be in such amount as provided by ordinance of the city council from time to time. Pro rata adjustments, on a
monthly basis, shall be made for permits in effect less than one full year. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
4. The fire chief shall establish procedures and forms to carry out the intent of this section.
B. Appeals: Whenever the fire chief shall refuse to grant a permit, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire code do not
apply or that the true intent and meaning of the fire code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may
appeal from the decision of the chief to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision of the chief.
C. New Materials, Processes Or Occupancies: The fire chief, the building official and the city administrator shall act as a committee
to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes, or occupancies
which shall require permits. The chief shall then effect changes to the fire code.
D. Violations: Any person who shall violate any provision of the fire code or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to
comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or
who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction,
within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each day that
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of these penalties shall not be held to
prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (1971 Code § 12-3.1; amd. 2000 Code)
9-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
CHIEF OR FIRE CHIEF: The chief officer of the Fire Division appointed by the City Council or the chief officer's representative.
CORPORATION COUNSEL: The Attorney for the City of Cottage Grove.
JURISDICTION: The City of Cottage Grove. (1971 Code § 12-5; amd. 2000 Code)
9-6-4: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
A. Fire Chief: The City Fire Chief, or the representative authorized by him/her, shall enforce the provisions of this Chapter within the
City.
B. Fire Inspectors: The City Fire Chief may detail such members of the Fire Division as inspectors as shall from time to time be
necessary. The City Fire Chief may recommend the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made,
shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members
and nonmembers of the Fire Division, and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only
for cause. (1971 Code § 12-4; amd. 2000 Code)
9-6-5: STORAGE LIMITS:
A. Storage Of Flammable Or Combustible Liquids In Outside Aboveground Tanks:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 208/454
1. The limits referred to in section 15.201 of the State Uniform Fire Code, in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids in
outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, are hereby established as being all platted land within the City.
2. The limits referred to in section 15.601 of the State Uniform Fire Code, in which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible
liquids are prohibited, are hereby established as being all platted land within the City. (1971 Code § 12-6)
B. Bulk Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gases: The limits referred to in section 20.105(a) of the State Uniform Fire Code, in which
bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as being all platted land within the City. If a hardship
arises under this subsection, the City Council may grant a variance of a limited duration. (1971 Code § 12-7)
C. Storage Of Explosives And Blasting Agents: The limits referred to in section 11.106(b) of the State Uniform Fire Code, in which
storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as being all platted land within the City. (1971
Code § 12-8)
9-6-6: ANNUAL REPORT OF FIRE CHIEF:
The City Fire Chief shall prepare and submit an annual report to the Mayor and City Council. It shall contain a statement of all
proceedings under the fire code, with such statistics as the City Fire Chief may wish to include therein, and shall contain any
recommended amendments to the fire code which, in his/her judgment, are desirable. (1971 Code § 12-12; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 7
STRUCTURE AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE1
(Rep. by Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
Chapter 8
SIGNS
9-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the general welfare, health, safety, and aesthetics within the city
through the establishment of comprehensive standards, regulations, and procedures governing the erection, use, and/or display
of devices, signs, or symbols serving as visual communicative media to persons situated within or upon public rights of way or
properties. Signs are an essential element of any community. Their location, number, size, design, and relationship to each other
and to other structures have a significant influence upon a community's appearance and welfare.
B. Intent: The provisions of this chapter are intended to encourage creativity, a reasonable degree of freedom of choice, an
opportunity for effective communication, and a sense of concern for visual amenities on the part of those designing, displaying, or
otherwise utilizing needed communicative media of the types regulated by this chapter, while at the same time assuring that the
public is not endangered, annoyed, or distracted by unsafe, disorderly, indiscriminate, or unnecessary use of such communicative
facilities. (Ord. 938, 1-21-2015)
9-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined in the zoning ordinance of the city shall be given the meanings set
forth in the zoning ordinance:
ABANDONED SIGN: Any sign and/or its supporting sign structure that remains without a message or whose display surface remains
blank for more than one year or that pertains to a time, event, or purpose that no longer applies. Abandoned signs are not legally
established nonconforming signs.
ADDRESS SIGN: A sign on a building displaying numbers only, whether written or in numeric form, used for proper identification of
the location of the building.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 209/454
ALTERATION: Any major change to a sign excluding routine maintenance, painting, or changing of copy of an existing sign.
ANIMATED OR FLASHING SIGN: Any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by any movement or rotation, or which
gives the visual impression of such movement by use of lighting, including blinking, chasing, scrolling, or other animation effects, or
signs which exhibit intermittent or sequential flashing of natural or artificial light or color effects.
AREA IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A monument sign which identifies the name of a neighborhood, a residential subdivision, a multifamily
complex consisting of three (3) or more structures or ten (10) or more units, a commercial development consisting of three (3)
or more separate structures, a shopping center area, an industrial area consisting of three (3) or more structures or any combination
of the above, which does not specifically identify the individual business therein.
AWNING: A rooflike cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal, or glass, designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a
decorative embellishment that projects from a wall or roof of any structure primarily over a window, door, wall, or the like.
BALLOON SIGN: A bag or membrane which is inflated with air, has air actively blown through it to inflate it, or is filled with a lighter
than air gas typically intended to rise or float above the ground and is greater than twenty four inches (24") in diameter.
BANNER: A temporary attention getting device which resembles a flag or similar type of advertisement constructed of a strip of cloth,
paper, or other material supported either between poles or fastened to a building.
BEACON: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as
the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
BENCH SIGN: A sign which is affixed or painted to a bench, such as a bus bench.
BILLBOARD: See definition of Off Premises Sign.
BUILDING FACADE: That portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves
and the entire width of the building elevation.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average elevation of the adjoining ground level, or the established grade adjacent
to the building, whichever is lower, to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, to a point of the roof
directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, the uppermost point on a round or other arch type roof, or to the highest gable on a
pitched or hip roof.
BUILDING MARKER: Any sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental information about its construction, which
sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
BUSINESS: Any establishment, occupation, employment, or enterprise wherein merchandise is manufactured, exhibited, or sold or
which occupies time, attention, labor, and materials or where services are offered for compensation.
CANOPY: A rooflike structure projecting over a doorway.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged
without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A "changeable copy sign" shall also include reader board signs.
COMMEMORATIVE OR MEMORIAL SIGN: A sign, tablet, or plaque commemorating or memorializing a person, event, structure, or
site.
COMMERCIAL SPEECH: Speech that is advertising a business, profession, commodity, service, or entertainment.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR: The officer or other person charged with the administration and enforcement of this
chapter or his/her duly authorized deputy.
COPY AND GRAPHIC: The wording and other display messages such as logos or symbols on a sign.
COPY AND GRAPHIC AREA: The area in square feet of the smallest four (4) sided figure which encloses the copy and graphic of a
sign.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign erected on public or private property which is designated to guide vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
DISTRICT: A specific zoning district as defined in the city zoning ordinance.
DYNAMIC DISPLAY: Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have movement or that appear to change, caused by any method
other than physically removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent movement or change is in the display,
the sign structure itself, or any other component of the sign. This includes a display that incorporates a technology or method
allowing the sign face to change the image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its components. This
also includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking, or animated display and any display that incorporates rotating
panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, "digital ink", video display, or any other method or technology that allows the
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 210/454
sign face to present a series of images or displays.
ERECT: The activity of constructing, building, raising, assembling, placing, affixing, attaching, creating, painting, drawing, or any
other way of bringing in to being or establishing.
FACADE: A false, superficial, or artificial appearance of a building side, given special architectural treatment.
FLAG: Any fabric or similar lightweight material attached at one end of the material, usually to a staff or pole, so as to allow
movement of the material by atmospheric changes and that contains distinctive colors, patterns, symbols, emblems, insignia, or
other symbolic devices.
FLASHING SIGN: An illuminated sign which contains flashing lights or exhibits noticeable changes in color or light intensity.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign that is placed in the ground and not affixed to any part of a structure or building.
FRONTAGE: The front side of a building or tenant space.
GOVERNMENTAL SIGN: A sign which is erected by a governmental unit for the purposes of identification, information, or directing
or guiding traffic.
GRADE: The elevation or level of the ground at the place the sign is to be erected.
GROSS SIGN AREA CALCULATION: The method of calculating the allowable square footage of signs shall be as follows:
A. Individual Letters Or Figures: When attached onto a surface such as a building, canopy, wall, or awning, the area shall be the
smallest rectangle that encompasses all of the letters or symbols unless the letters and/or symbols are separated by two feet
(2') or more in length, in which case the letter(s) and symbol(s) area shall be calculated separately and added together.
B. Monument And Pylon Signs: The smallest rectangle, square, circle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the
entire area of the sign face, including all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with all the
background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed and in no case passing through or between elements of
such sign. The area shall not include the main supporting sign structure but shall include other ornamental attachments that are
not a part of the main support of the sign.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 211/454
C. Wall Signs: The smallest rectangle, square, circle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the entire area of the
frame, including all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with all the background, whether open
or enclosed, on which they are displayed and in no case passing through or between elements of such sign. The area shall not
include the main supporting sign structure but shall include other ornamental attachments that are not a part of the main
support of the sign. Letter(s) and symbol(s) separated by two feet (2') or more in length shall be calculated separately and
added together.
HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the base of the sign at grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: Any sign which states the name or address or both of the business or occupant of the lot or building where
the sign is placed and may be a directory listing the names, addresses, profession or occupation, and business of occupants.
ILLEGAL SIGN: A sign that is erected without first complying with all city ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of its
construction and erection or use. Abandoned signs and unsafe signs are also illegal signs.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign that contains an element designated to emanate artificial light internally or externally.
INFORMATIONAL SIGN: Any sign erected for the safety or convenience of the public including "no parking", "entrance/exit", "loading
only", "telephone", "manager's office", "danger", and other signs that do not promote or contain advertising or identification of a
business, property, or product.
LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING SIGNS: Any sign and its support structure lawfully erected prior to the effective date
of any provision of this chapter that fails to conform to the requirements of this chapter.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 212/454
LIMITED TENANT BUILDING: A commercial retail establishment or a group of commercial retail establishments with the designed
occupancy of three (3) or fewer tenants which has shared parking and a visual appearance as a contiguous structure which may or
may not be planned, constructed, or managed as a total entity. This includes single tenant retail structures.
LOGO: A symbol, image, insignia, word, word abbreviation, or initials which are designed for easy recognition, and which represents
or identifies in graphic form, a nation or organization of nation; businesses; states or cities; or fraternal, religious and civic
organizations or any educational institutions, irrespective of whether they are made of permanent, semipermanent, or temporary
materials.
MERCHANDISE SIGN: A temporary A-frame or sandwich board style sign advertising merchandise or services displayed outside an
enclosed building.
MONUMENT SIGN: A freestanding sign independent from any building or other structure that is mounted on the ground or mounted
on a base that is at least as wide as the sign, but in no event shall the base exceed one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the greatest
width of the sign. A monument sign is typically solid from grade to the top of the structure; however, a monument sign may include
open area below the face of the sign if the sign complies with the monument sign supporting sign structure design criteria.
MOTION SIGN: Any sign which revolves, rotates, has any moving parts, or gives the illusion of motion including animated or flashing
signs.
MURAL: A work of graphic art painted on a building wall, which contains no commercial advertising or logos and which does not
serve to advertise or promote any business, product, activity, service, interest, or entertainment.
NAMEPLATE: See definition of Identification Sign.
NONCOMMERCIAL FLAG: Any flag other than a business or commercial flag, including, without limitation, a flag of any
governmental, religious, charitable, fraternal, or political organization or cause.
NONCOMMERCIAL SIGN: A sign that does not contain speech but promotes a message concerning political, religious, social,
ideological, public service, or informational topics.
NONCONFORMING SIGN:
Illegal: A sign which was constructed after the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter or amendments thereto which
does not conform to the requirements of this chapter which were in effect on the date of construction of the sign.
Legal: A sign which lawfully existed prior to the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter or amendments thereto but
which does not conform to this chapter.
OBSOLETE SIGN: Any sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or products sold at that location or premises
where the sign is located.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign bearing a commercial message that is located on a property that is not the premises, property, or site
of the use identified or advertised on the sign.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign bearing a commercial message that is located on the premises, property, or site of the use identified or
advertised on the sign.
PARAPET: A low wall which is located on a roof of a building.
PENNANT: A relatively long tapering flag.
PERMANENT SIGN: Any sign which is not a temporary sign.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign other than a wall sign which is affixed to a building and which extends perpendicular from the building
wall.
PYLON SIGN: A sign supported by a post or posts so that the sign and supports are finished to grade and the post or posts are
encased in a material consistent with the sign and where the base width dimension is a minimum of forty percent (40%) of the width
of the sign.
REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT SIGN: A sign placed on the premises of a subdivision or other real estate development related to
the subdivision or real estate development.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign placed upon a property advertising that particular property for sale, rent, or lease.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected and constructed wholly upon the roof or parapet of a building, supported by the roof structure, and
extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 213/454
ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL: Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any
design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is
separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches (6").
ROOFLINE: The uppermost line of the roof of a building or in the case of an extended facade, the uppermost height of such facade.
ROTATING SIGN: A sign which revolves or rotates on its axis by mechanical means.
SHOPPING CENTER: An integrated grouping of commercial stores where the building/structure which houses the store is under
single ownership or control.
SIGN: Any letter, word, symbol, device, poster, picture, reading matter, or representation in the nature of an advertisement,
announcement, message, or visual communication, whether painted, posted, printed, affixed, or constructed, which is displayed
outdoors for informational, corporate identification, or communicative purposes and is visible to the general public.
SIGN STRUCTURE: The supports, uprights, raceway, bracing, and framework for a sign, including the sign area.
STREET FRONTAGE: The proximity of a parcel of land to one or more streets. An interior lot has one street frontage, and a corner
lot has two (2) frontages.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign which is erected or displayed for a limited period of time, including signs affixed or attached to
vehicles, including trailers, and capable of being readily removed such as fliers, banners, inflatable signs, A-frame signs, or flying
signs.
UNSAFE SIGN: Any sign that is out of order, in disrepair, rotten, hazardous, or in any other manner unsafe.
WALL SIGN: A sign which is affixed to the exterior wall of a building and which is parallel to the building wall and which does not
project more than twelve inches (12") from the surface to which it is attached, nor extend beyond the top of the parapet wall.
WINDOW SIGN: A sign affixed to or inside of a window in view of the general public. This does not include merchandise on display
or business hours. (Ord. 938, 1-21-2015)
9-8-3: PERMITS:
A. Sign Permit Requirements: All signs must be constructed in accordance with all applicable city code provisions, including
requirements for obtaining permits and payment of required fees. No sign, unless exempted by this chapter, shall be erected,
altered, reconstructed, or moved in the city without first securing a permit from the city.
1. Application For Permit: The following information shall be submitted within or along with the permit application for a sign:
a. Name, address, and telephone number of person making application.
b. Name, address, and telephone number of person owning the sign.
c. A site plan drawn to scale showing the location of lot lines, buildings, structures, parking areas, existing and proposed signs,
and any other physical features of the property where the sign will be located.
d. Plans, location, specifications, number of signs and their dimensions and square footage, and method of construction and
attachment to the building or placement method in the ground.
e. Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any
direction in the amount required by this chapter and all other state or federal laws and ordinances of the city.
f. Written consent of the owner or lessee of any site on which the sign is to be erected if the applicant is not the owner of the
property.
g. Such other information as is required by the building official or community development director to show full compliance with
this chapter and all other state or federal laws and ordinances of the city. The building official may waive subsections A1d
and A1e of this section.
2. Sign Contractors:
a. License Required; Application, Fee: No person shall install, erect, or maintain any sign within the city for which a permit is
required without having first obtained a license from the city. An applicant shall complete and file the application form
required by the community development director and pay the fee set by the city council.
b. Insurance Requirements: No license granted under the terms stated herein shall become effective until the licensee has filed
with the city clerk a copy of a certificate of insurance in the licensee's name for a minimum of one million dollars
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 214/454
($1,000,000.00) combined single limit liability coverage for injury to or death of any one person or persons, or
damage/destruction of property in any one accident.
B. Exceptions: No permit or license for the sign installation thereof shall be required for the following signs which shall be permissible
in all zoning districts. These exceptions shall not be construed so as to excuse the installer of the sign, or the owner of the
property upon which the sign is located, from conforming to the other provisions of this chapter, the zoning ordinance, or this
code.
1. Address Signs: Address signs not exceeding three (3) square feet.
2. Noncommercial Flags: Noncommercial flags.
3. Building Markers: Building markers not exceeding four (4) square feet.
4. Commemorative Or Memorial Signs: Commemorative or memorial signs not exceeding four (4) square feet.
5. Noncommercial Signs: Noncommercial signs in accordance with the following:
a. In a state general election year, all noncommercial signs of any size may be posted in any number within or outside the
public right of way on private property from forty six (46) days before the state primary in a state general election year until
ten (10) days following the state general election. Noncommercial signs may be placed in a city right of way on private
property only if they are located more than ten feet (10') from the back of the curb or more than two feet (2') from the edge of
a sidewalk or trail, whichever is farthest from the street curb and/or mounted on the face of a fence if the fence is less than
ten feet (10') from the back edge of the street curb or less than two feet (2') from the edge of a sidewalk or trail.
b. If there is a primary for any office in a year that is not a state general election year, noncommercial signs may be posted
within or outside the public right of way on private property twenty one (21) days before the primary election. When there is
no primary, noncommercial signs may be posted twenty one (21) days before the general election.
c. All noncommercial signs except those otherwise permitted by this chapter must be removed within ten (10) days following
the general election.
6. Public Notices Or Signs Required: Official public notices or signs required by local, state, or federal regulations and all
governmental signs, including, but not limited to, traffic control and other regulatory purpose signs, street signs, informational
signs, danger signs, and railroad crossing signs.
7. Window Signs: Window signs placed within a building and within view of the general public not exceeding forty percent (40%)
of total window area in accordance with the following:
a. Window signs consisting solely of individual alphabetic letters, numerals, or other symbolic characters without any
background may be displayed but the net area of the window sign shall not cover more than forty percent (40%) of the total
window area.
b. A window sign that includes opaque objects, logos, and other images with any type of background may be displayed, but the
net area of the window sign shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total window area. Opaque objects without any
lettering, numerals, other symbolic characters, logos, or any other images are limited to window coverage area.
c. The "total window area" shall be measured and calculated so as to include one continuous panel of glass or other
transparent material or a set of two (2) or more panels divided by mullions of six inches (6") in width or narrower. Panels
surrounded on all sides by solid walls or mullions wider than six inches (6") shall be considered individual windows.
d. The net area shall be determined by measuring a box around each group of characters, objects, images, logos, and any
background to the objects, images, and logos.
e. For purposes of this section, any banner attached to the outside of a window shall not be considered a window sign and shall
be considered a temporary sign for which a permit is required.
f. Hours of operation and "open"/"closed" signs shall not be included in window sign area calculation.
g. Window signs may be illuminated, but flashing lights are prohibited.
8. Signs Not Exceeding Three Square Feet Of Display Surface: A sign not exceeding three (3) square feet of display surface on a
residential building stating merely the name, address, and/or profession of an occupant.
9. Informational And Directional Signs: Informational and directional signs posted on the premises to which they pertain, provided
the signs are no more than four (4) square feet in size per sign.
10. Merchandise Signs: Merchandise signs in accordance with the following:
a. Must be within twenty feet (20') from the main entrance to the business or service being advertised.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 215/454
b. One sign is permitted per business or service.
c. Must be removed at the end of each business day.
d. May be no larger than six (6) square feet in size per side.
e. Merchandise signs in the public right of way or public easements are prohibited.
11. Nameplate: Nameplate not exceeding two (2) square feet in size.
12. Temporary Real Estate Development Signs: New construction temporary real estate development sign(s) advertising new
construction are permitted in accordance with the following:
a. One freestanding temporary sign permitted announcing the development no larger than thirty two (32) square feet and not
exceeding more than eight feet (8') in height.
(1) Sign is permitted to be located on the property under development.
(2) Sign shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from all property lines.
(3) Sign shall be allowed until eighty percent (80%) of the construction in the development is completed.
(4) If an area identification sign exists on the site, then the new construction temporary sign must be located a minimum of
two hundred feet (200') away from the area identification sign.
b. No more than three (3) temporary directional signs for each model home may be posted within the subdivision.
(1) Sign(s) may be no more than eighteen inches by eighteen inches (18" x 18") in size.
(2) Must be located within the developing subdivision.
(3) May not be closer than ten feet (10') to the back of the curb nor closer than two feet (2') to any sidewalk or trail.
(4) Sign(s) shall be allowed until eighty percent (80%) of the construction in the development is completed.
13. Real Estate Signs: On site real estate signs for the sale or lease of property are allowed subject to the following regulations:
a. One sign per street frontage is permitted.
b. In residential districts, signs must not exceed six (6) square feet in area and six feet (6') in height.
c. Permitted as window signs not exceeding forty percent (40%) of total window area.
d. In nonresidential districts, one banner sign attached to the principal structure no larger than thirty two (32) square feet and/or
a freestanding sign with a maximum height of twelve feet (12') and no larger than thirty two (32) square feet is permitted.
e. Real estate signs must be removed within seven (7) days following lease or sale closing or building is fully occupied.
14. Official Government Flags/Emblems: Official government flags and emblems.
15. Home Security Signs: Home security signs, "no trespassing", and "no parking" signs provided that the total signage on any
individual tax parcel shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area and such signs shall not be illuminated or placed in the public
right of way.
16. Murals: Murals.
C. Prohibited Signs: The following signs are specifically prohibited in any district:
1. Motion Signs: Motion signs, including rotating, animated, and flashing signs other than dynamic display signs as permitted
elsewhere in this chapter.
2. Roof Signs: Roof signs.
3. Signs Painted On Walls: Signs painted on walls excluding murals.
4. Obsolete Or Abandoned Signs: Obsolete or abandoned signs shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent, or
person having the beneficial use of the building, structure, or property upon which the sign may be found within ten (10) days
after written notification from the building official.
5. Illegal Signs: Illegal signs and illegal nonconforming signs.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 216/454
6. Signs Attached To Utility Poles, Streetlights, And Trees: Signs attached to utility poles, streetlights, and trees other than
governmental or traffic signs.
7. Searchlights Or Beacons: Searchlights or beacons unless otherwise permitted with a special event permit or grand opening
permit.
8. Signs On Bridges And Overpasses: No person shall display, place, erect, post, maintain, install, affix, or carry any sign,
including a hand carried sign, on any portion of a pedestrian bridge or overpass that passes over a freeway or a controlled
access highway when such highway has a speed limit of more than fifty five (55) miles per hour.
9. Unsafe Or Dangerous Signs: No sign shall be permitted that is a hazard to the public health, safety, convenience, or general
welfare.
10. Benches And Bus Shelter Signs: Signs on bus shelters and bus benches are prohibited.
11. Tethered Balloons/Balloon Signs: Tethered balloons and balloon signs.
12. Off Premises Signs: Off premises signs.
13. Signs Within The Clear View Triangle: On corner lots, no signs are permitted within a clear view triangle. The clear view
triangle is that area that begins at the intersection of the front property line and corner side property line and is measured back
ten feet (10') along both property lines. Those points are then connected with a straight line.
14. Obscene Contents Of Signs: No sign shall contain any obscene matter as defined by Minnesota statutes section 617.241.
15. Pennants: Pennants.
16. Signs Containing Audio Speakers: Signs containing audio speakers or any form of pyrotechnics.
17. Obstructing Signs: Signs that obstruct windows, doors, fire escapes, or an opening intended to provide ingress or egress to
any structure or building.
18. Signs Affixed To Fences Or Natural Surfaces: Signs affixed to fences, trees, rocks, or other similar natural surfaces, or
attached to public utility poles, bridges, towers, or similar public structures.
19. Signs That Resemble Traffic Signs/Signals: Signs that appear in color or design to resemble a traffic sign or signal or that
make use of words, symbols, or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse pedestrian or vehicular
traffic. (Ord. 938, 1-21-2015)
9-8-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 217/454
A.Sign Chart:
PR - Permit required; n/a - Not allowed; A - Allowed
Sign Type
Zoning District
References
AG-1
&
AG-2
R-1
&
R-2
R-
2.5
R-3, R-
4, R-5,
& R-6
R-2A, R-
2B, R-2C
& R-2D
R-2E
& R-
2F
B-
1
B-2
&
B-3
PB
NB
I-1,
I-2
& I-
3
I-4
I-5
Abandoned n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
9-8-3C4
Address A A A A A A A A A A A A A 9-8-3B1
Animated or flashing n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
9-8-3C1
Area identification PR PR
PR
PR PR PR PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
9-8-5A1
Awning n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a A A A A A A A 9-8-6C
Balloons and tethered
balloons
n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
9-8-3C11
Banner - temporary PR PR
PR
PR PR PR PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
9-8-5A2 9-
8-6D
Beacon n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
9-8-3C7
Bench and bus shelter n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
9-8-3C10
Billboard n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
9-8-3C12
Canopy n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a A A A A A A A 9-8-6C
Changeable copy/reader
board - permanent
PR PR
PR
PR PR PR PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
9-8-4P1
Changeable copy/reader
board - temporary
PR PR
PR
PR PR PR n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
9-8-4P2
Commemorative/memorial
A A A A A A A A A A A A A 9-8-3B4
Dangerous or unsafe n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
9-8-3C9
Directional/informational A A A A A A A A A A A A A 9-8-3B9
Directional/informational -
off premises
n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
9-8-3C12
Dynamic display n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
9-8-4I
Governmental A A A A A A A A A A A A A 9-8-3B6
Identification/nameplate/
building marker
A A A A A A A A A A A A A 9-8-3B11
Illegal n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
9-8-3C5
Illuminated PR PR
PR
PR PR PR PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
9-8-4H
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 218/454
Legally established
nonconforming
A A A A A A A A A A A A A 9-8-7
Merchandise A A A A A A A A A A A A A 9-8-3B10
Monument PR PR
PR
PR PR PR PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
9-8-6A
Motion n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
9-8-3C1
Noncommercial flag A A A A A A A A A A A A A 9-8-3B2
Obsolete n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
9-8-3C4
On premises temporary PR PR
PR
PR PR PR PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
9-8-3B5 9-
8-5A2 9-8-
6D
Projecting n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
9-8-4N
Pylon n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
9-8-6A
Real estate A A A A A A A A A A A A A 9-8-3B13
Real estate development A A A A A A n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
9-8-3B12
Roof n/a n/a
n/a
n/a n/a n/a n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
9-8-3C2
Wall sign PR PR
PR
PR PR PR PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
9-8-6B
Window A A A A A A A A A A A A A 9-8-3B7
B. Color Of Signs: All signs which have their backs visible to public view shall have such backs painted in a neutral color compatible
with the background against which they are set.
C. Signs Affixed Flat Against Building Walls: No sign affixed flat against a building wall shall extend beyond any edge of such wall,
nor shall any such sign extrude more than twelve inches (12") from the wall.
D. Changing Copy Of Sign: The changing of the copy or message of a painted, plastic face, or printed sign is permitted provided that
there is no change in the size, shape, or lighting of the sign and provided that such change is not done in a manner so as to
constitute a flashing sign.
E. Compliance With Building And Electrical Code: All signs shall comply with all applicable provisions of the building code and, if
applicable, electrical code.
F. Approval Of Property Owner: No sign shall be placed on any property without the approval of the property owner.
G. Height Above Public Ways: Except for necessary poles, uprights, pedestals, and other support structure elements, no portion of
any sign located over a public right of way shall be less than eight feet (8') above grade level, except for signs that are designed
such that they present no hazard to pedestrians or vehicles.
H. Illuminated Signs: Illuminated signs shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Any illuminated sign located within fifty feet (50') of a residential lot line shall be diffused or indirect so as not to reflect direct
rays of light into adjacent residences. All illuminated signs in business and industrial districts in close proximity to residential
districts or residential uses shall be designed, to the extent practical, so as to illuminate the sign and not the residential property
or residential use.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 219/454
2. Illuminated signs lighted by any means, whether as an integral part of the sign or a light away from the sign, such as
floodlights, shall be governed as follows:
a. Any combination of signs or light sources which cast a light on a public street shall not exceed one foot-candle (foot-candle
meter reading) as measured at the property line.
b. Any combination of signs or lights which cast light on property zoned for residential use shall not exceed five-tenths (0.5) of a
foot candle (foot-candle meter reading) as measured at the property line of such residential property.
c. In no instance shall exposed light bulbs be utilized to light signs, property, or merchandise. The lights shall be hooded or
controlled in some manner so as to direct light away from public streets or adjacent or nearby property.
d. The illumination source shall not be placed so as to cause or create a traffic hazard or to conflict with traffic control signs or
lights.
e. The illumination electrical power supply, wiring, and conduits must not be visible on the exterior of the sign.
3. The illumination of building facades with neon or light emitting diode (LED) architectural lighting shall be permitted when
properly maintained.
4. The display luminosity of dynamic signs shall be limited to five thousand (5,000) nits (illuminative brightness measurement)
during daylight hours, and seven hundred fifty (750) nits between a half hour before sunset to a half hour after sunrise as
measured utilizing industry accepted standards.
I. Dynamic Display Signs: Dynamic display signs shall be governed as follows:
1. Permitted Locations:
a. On wall or monument signs located:
(1) On properties located in any commercial or industrial zoning district.
(2) On properties with a conditional use permit for religious or institutional use.
(3) On government buildings or sites located in any zoning district.
(4) On temporary signs used for traffic control during construction or maintenance projects on state, county, or local roads.
2. Prohibited Locations:
a. On pylon signs except for retail uses required by Minnesota statutes to display prices.
b. As window signs greater than three (3) square feet.
c. As portable signs.
d. On rooftops.
e. In residential and agricultural districts.
3. Setback Requirements: Ten feet (10') from edge of sign to any property line.
4. Display Size:
a. Twenty four (24) square feet maximum per property.
b. Included in total wall and monument signage square footage calculations.
5. Display Height: Fifteen feet (15') maximum from grade to top of sign.
6. Display Image: Pictures, graphics, logos, symbols, images, and messages displayed on the on site dynamic sign must be
static.
7. Display Transition: Scrolling, the appearance of motion, flashing, animation, motion video, and similar transitions are
prohibited.
8. Display Frequency: One hour minimum between changes in display transition. Emergency notifications or alerts posted on
government or institutional signs are exempt from this section.
J. Planned Unit Developments: Planned unit developments (PUDs) or planned development overlays (PDOs) shall submit a
comprehensive sign plan at such time when the total PUD or PDO is reviewed by the planning commission. Due to the multiple
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 220/454
land uses in a planned unit development, all signs shall be compatible in character, materials, and color with each other and the
surrounding land uses.
K. Shopping Centers: A comprehensive sign plan shall be submitted for shopping centers at the time when the building plans are
reviewed by the planning commission.
L. Mississippi River Critical Area: Within the designated Mississippi River critical area, no sign is permitted that is visible from the
river, except those necessary for safe navigation along the river.
M. Statues, Sculptures, And Architectural Features: Symbols, statues, sculptures, and integrated architectural features of a design
which deviates from the architectural character of the surrounding structures shall require a conditional use permit.
N. Projecting Signs: Permitted only in business and industrial districts, subject to the following restrictions:
1. The maximum sign area shall be twenty (20) square feet per building face.
2. Not less than eight feet (8') of clearance shall be provided between the sidewalk elevation and the lowest point of the projecting
sign.
3. Signs shall project from the face of the building no more than the lesser of one-third (1/3) of the sidewalk width or four feet (4').
Sidewalk width shall be measured perpendicular from the face of the building at the proposed sign location.
O. Contractor Signs: Contractor signs denoting the architect, engineer, or contractor placed on premises are permitted when
construction, repair, or renovation is in the process, provided such signs are five (5) square feet or less.
P. Changeable Copy Signs:
1. Permitted as a permanent sign in accordance with the requirements set forth in subsections A and/or D of this section and
section 9-8-6 of this chapter.
2. Permitted as a temporary sign in accordance with the requirements set forth in subsection 9-8-5A2 of this chapter. (Ord. 938,
1-21-2015)
9-8-5: SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL AND AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS:
A. Design Standards:
1. Area Identification Signs:
a. Monument Sign: Must be a monument sign.
b. Located At Entrance: Shall be located at the entrance to the project or subdivision.
c. Located On Private Property: Shall be located on private property and prohibited on public rights of way unless specifically
approved by the city council.
d. Maximum Permitted: A maximum of two (2) area identification signs, not exceeding a total of one hundred (100) square feet
in sign area with no more than fifty (50) square feet per sign, may be permitted at each project entrance or subdivision
entrance. Two (2) signs are permitted at each project entrance only to create a gateway effect at opposite corners of the
entrance to the project.
e. Maximum Height: The maximum height of an area identification sign shall be ten feet (10').
f. Multiple-Family Buildings: A multiple-family complex consisting of three (3) or more structures or ten (10) or more units shall
be allowed an area identification sign not to exceed sixty four (64) square feet.
2. On Premises Temporary Signs:
a. Residential or agricultural lots greater than three (3) acres in size are permitted no more than two (2) separate on premises
temporary signs at one time in accordance with the following:
(1) Combined area of sign(s) must be no more than thirty two (32) square feet.
(2) Sign(s) may be posted for no more than fifteen (15) consecutive calendar days at a time.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 221/454
(3) Sign(s) must be set back from the roadway edge a minimum of twenty five feet (25').
(4) A no fee temporary sign permit is required.
(5) Nine (9) temporary sign permits permitted per property per calendar year.
(6) Banner signs must be attached to the principal structure.
3. Places Of Worship, Parks, Hospitals, Schools, And Other Nonresidential Buildings:
a. Places of worship, parks, community centers, hospitals, schools, libraries, city, and other nonresidential buildings are
permitted one monument sign upon their property with a building permit. Such sign shall not exceed a total of fifty (50)
square feet and shall not exceed a height of ten feet (10').
b. In addition to monument signage, wall signage is permitted provided that the wall sign area shall not exceed fifty (50) square
feet.
c. If signage in excess of subsections A3a and A3b of this section is desired, a conditional use permit shall be required. (Ord.
938, 1-21-2015)
9-8-6: SIGNS IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Monument Or Pylon Sign:
1. Number Of Signs: One on premises monument or pylon sign shall be permitted on each separate property within a business or
industrial district.
2. Tenant Identification Monuments: Tenant identification monuments are not permitted in industrial districts in areas designated
for mixed uses on the city comprehensive plan map or zoned P-B, planned business, on the city zoning map.
3. Location:
a. Monument or pylon signs shall be no closer than seventy five feet (75') to another monument or pylon sign.
b. No monument or pylon sign shall be erected within the clear view triangle.
c. No monument or pylon sign shall extend above the roofline of any structure on the property on which it is located.
4. Size:
a. The size of a monument or pylon sign permitted on any individual property is determined by the gross square footage of the
principal structure located on the property.
b. One sign per tax parcel is permitted unless the tax parcel contains a multi-tenant building or limited tenant building and is
eighty thousand (80,000) gross square feet or more and has two (2) or more primary access points in which case a second
monument or pylon sign is permitted. A second monument sign at a secondary access point is permitted if the primary
freestanding sign is of monument style. The second monument sign shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the copy and
graphic area and height requirement of the permitted principal sign.
c. The following table lists the maximum size and heights for permitted monument and pylon signs:
Principal Structure (Gross Square
Feet)
Monument Pylon
Height
Copy And Graphic (Square
Feet)
Height
Copy And Graphic (Square
Feet)
Greater than 400,000 10 feet
100 15 feet
50
100,001 - 400,000 10 feet
100 15 feet
50
20,001 - 100,000 10 feet
90 15 feet
45
Less than 20,000 10 feet
70 15 feet
35
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 222/454
5. Design: The base of the monument sign shall be constructed of class I materials that match those used on the building for
which the sign is located. If no class I materials are used on the building, class II materials shall be used.
B. Wall Signs:
1. Gas station canopies or other canopies are considered principal structures for computing allowable signage.
2. The following table indicates maximum wall signage permitted per tenant wall:
Principal Structure Size
(Gross Square Feet) Individual Wall Sign Calculation
100,001 - 400,000 square
feet
200 square feet or 1.25 square feet of sign per linear foot of the tenant frontage, whichever is
less
20,001 - 100,000 square feet
150 square feet or 1.25 square feet of sign per linear foot of the tenant frontage, whichever is
less
Less than 20,000 square feet
100 square feet or 1.25 square feet of sign per linear foot of the tenant frontage, whichever is
less
3. Sign area measured shall be the allowable wall sign square footage for each of the tenant walls.
4. The city may recognize separate sign plans for buildings which will supersede the ordinance. The sign plans which have been
approved by the community development director will have the effect of a sign ordinance for the specific property.
5. Each tenant's wall sign on a multi-tenant building shall not extend closer than two feet (2') from the tenant's lease line. Wall
signs may include tenant identification, tenant logo, shopping center name, shopping center logo, or any combination of the
four (4).
6. Tenant identification shall be individually mounted or located on a raceway that is consistent in color with the wall facade.
7. All returns of tenant identification signs on a single multi-tenant building shall be uniform in color.
8. All tenant wall signs shall be internally illuminated.
9. Wall signs shall not extend above the roofline of any principal building.
10. Sign changeouts require repair to holes or other wall markings left and painting to match tenant wall facade color.
C. Awnings, Canopies, Marquees:
1. Signs on awnings, marquees, and canopies shall be considered wall signs under the terms of this section and subject to the
regulations for said signs.
a. Copy or graphics on awnings, canopies, or marquees shall be considered as part of the individual wall area calculation.
b. An awning may be designated as a sign area as an alternative or addition to a sign on the building facade, provided the
awning signage does not exceed the total sign area allowed.
c. A sign may be displayed on the side panels of the awning.
d. The sign displayed on the awning shall not be more than forty percent (40%) of the awning's principal face.
D. On Premises Temporary Signs:
1. Existing Business: A maximum of four (4) temporary sign permits may be issued to each business per calendar year for up to
fifteen (15) days each. The temporary sign must be in the form of a weatherproof banner no larger than thirty two (32) square
feet in size attached to the principal structure.
2. New Business Or Reopening Of An Existing Business Or Store Closing: One temporary sign permit per calendar year shall be
issued for no more than fifteen (15) days.
3. Removal After Expiration Of Permit: On premises temporary signs must be removed within twenty four (24) hours after the
expiration of the permit. (Ord. 938, 1-21-2015)
9-8-7: LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 223/454
A. Continuance Of Use: Any legally established nonconforming sign (legal nonconforming sign), including its structure, may be
continued at the same size and in the same manner of operation except as hereinafter specified.
B. Dangerous Conditions: A legal nonconforming sign must be removed if the sign and/or structure is declared unsafe by the building
inspection division.
C. Discontinuance Of Use: When the use of a legal nonconforming sign has been for a period of twelve (12) months or has changed
to conform to this chapter, any further use of the sign must comply with all provisions of this chapter and Minnesota statutes
section 462.357.
D. Damaged Signs: Whenever a legal nonconforming sign shall have been damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, or an
act of God and the damage of the sign and/or structure is fifty percent (50%) or more of its fair market value as estimated by the
building inspection division, it may be reconstructed and used as before if a building permit has been applied for within one
hundred eighty (180) days from the date the sign was damaged. If no building permit is applied for within one hundred eighty
(180) days from the date the sign was damaged, any subsequent use or reconstruction of the sign shall be for a use in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
E. Alteration Of Signs: A legal nonconforming sign may not be altered except as permitted by state statute.
F. Maintenance And Repair: Normal maintenance of a legal nonconforming sign is permitted, including necessary structural repairs
and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use. (Ord. 938, 1-21-2015)
9-8-8: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR REQUIREMENTS:
A. All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in repair and in proper state of preservation.
B. The display surfaces of all signs and tier supports shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times.
C. All signs which are unsafe, dangerous, and/or unsightly shall be repaired or removed. Unsafe or dangerous signs shall be
removed or otherwise properly secured by the property owner and/or sign owner upon receipt of notice to do so given by the city.
Any abandoned, unsafe, or illegal sign is hereby declared to be a danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of
Cottage Grove and is declared to be a public nuisance subject to abatement and assessment, except that legally established
nonconforming signs shall not be abated until they have been abandoned for more than one year. Unsightly signs must be
repaired or removed within fifteen (15) days of notification. The term "unsightly" shall mean a condition in which the sign has
deteriorated to the point where at least one-fourth (1/4) of the surface area of the name, identification, description, display,
illustration, or other symbol is no longer clearly recognizable at a distance of twenty feet (20'); or where paint is peeling, chipping,
or flaking from the structure surface, or where the sign has developed significant rust, corrosion, rotting, or other deterioration in
the physical appearance.
D. Every sign and the immediate surrounding premises shall be maintained by the owner or person in charge thereof in a clean,
sanitary, and inoffensive condition and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish, and weeds. Notice shall be given to
the community development director of any change in sign user, sign owner, or owner of the property on which the sign is located.
(Ord. 938, 1-21-2015)
9-8-9: INSPECTIONS:
All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the community development director. The community
development director, or any other official of the city who may be appointed by him/her, is hereby authorized to enter upon any
property or premises to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter are being obeyed. Such entrance shall be made during
business hours unless an emergency exists. The director may order the removal of any sign that is not in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 938, 1-21-2015)
9-8-10: VARIANCES:
A. Conditions Of Variances: Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in any way in carrying out the strict letter
of the provisions of this chapter, a variance may be granted, provided that all the following conditions are met:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 224/454
1. The particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the specific parcel of land involved cause a
particular hardship to the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were to be
carried out.
2. The conditions upon which a petition for a variation is based are unique to the parcel of land for which the variance is sought
and not generally applicable to other property within the same zoning classification.
3. The alleged difficulty or hardship must be caused by this chapter and not by any person presently having an interest in the
parcel of land.
4. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other land or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the parcel of land is located.
5. The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent properties, will not increase the
congestion of the public streets, will not endanger the public safety, or will not diminish or impair property value within the
neighborhood.
B. Request For Variance; Fee: A person desiring to secure a variance or to appeal the interpretation and application of any
provisions of this chapter by the community development director shall fill out and submit to the community development director
a variance form together with the required filing fee. (Ord. 938, 1-21-2015)
9-8-11: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Violations: The owner of a sign and the property owner of real property where a sign is located are required to ensure that the sign
is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter at all times. If a sign is not maintained in compliance with all requirements of
this chapter, the building official is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be
paid by the owner of the sign or the property where such sign is located. Each day that such a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. Owning a sign that fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter or permitting such a sign on
one's property shall constitute a misdemeanor.
B. Removal Of Illegal Signs; Costs: Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter, is subject to removal. Signs may be returned to the owner upon request, but the owner shall pay a fee in such
amount as provided by ordinance of the city council from time to time. Signs not retrieved by the owner within fourteen (14) days
of removal may not be returned. (Ord. 938, 1-21-2015)
Chapter 9
HISTORIC PRESERVATION AND CULTURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
9-9-1: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
The city council hereby declares as a matter of public policy that the protection, preservation, perpetuation and use of places, areas,
buildings, structures and other objects having a special historical, community or aesthetic interest or value is a public necessity and
is required in the interest of the people. The purpose of this chapter is to:
A. Safeguard the cultural resources of the city by preserving sites, structures, districts and landmarks which reflect elements of the
city's cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history;
B. Protect and enhance the city's attractions to residents and visitors;
C. Foster civic pride in the beauty and notable achievements of the past;
D. Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of the city; and
E. Promote the use and preservation of historic sites and landmarks for the education and general welfare of the people of the city.
(1971 Code § 13A-1)
9-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 225/454
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
ALTERATION: Changing the existing exterior of a property. "Major alterations" include construction work which is normally done with
the aid of plans or specifications that substantially changes the physical appearance or use of a property. "Minor alterations" include
work which is normally done without the aid of plans, specifications or skilled labor and which do not radically change the external
appearance of a property.
CULTURAL RESOURCES: Any work of people or nature that is primarily of interest for its historical, archeological, natural, scientific
or aesthetic value including, but not limited to, old houses and other structures such as barns, schools, kilns, archaeological sites,
American Indian burial grounds and earthworks, buildings identified as the work of an architect, developer or master builder whose
work has influenced the city, and structures noteworthy because of their design, detail, materials or craftsmanship.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: A discrete, geographically definable area containing buildings, structures, archaeological sites, lands and
areas linked historically through location, design, workmanship, setting or association with people or events that have made an
important contribution to our heritage.
HISTORIC SITE: Any area, place, structure, land or other object which has been duly designated as such by the city council; this
includes prehistoric aboriginal sites.
LANDMARK: A landscape feature or aggregate of landscape features which has or have a special historical or aesthetic character or
interest as part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the city.
SIGNIFICANCE: The sense of time and place in history that is conveyed by cultural resources, their educational and scientific value
and their capacity for enhancing the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of the city. (1971 Code § 13A-2; amd. 2000
Code)
9-9-3: ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON HISTORIC PRESERVATION:
A. Committee Established; Members: The city council shall establish an advisory committee on historic preservation, which shall
consist of eight (8) voting members, adult residents of the city, to be appointed by the city council. This committee shall be the
duly designated heritage preservation committee of the city, pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 471.193. (Ord. 855, 3-18-
2009)
B. Qualifications; Ex Officio Members: Members of the advisory committee on historic preservation shall be persons with
demonstrated interest and/or expertise in historic preservation. If available, at least two (2) members of the committee shall be
preservation related professionals who meet the professional qualifications standards established by the United States secretary
of the interior and the state historic preservation office. The city historic preservation officer, along with representatives of the
planning commission and the parks, recreation and natural resources commission, shall be ex officio nonvoting members. The
Washington County Historical Society shall also be invited to appoint a representative to the committee who shall serve in an ex
officio nonvoting capacity.
C. Terms Of Office: The city council shall initially designate three (3) appointees to serve a term of one year and two (2) appointees
to serve a term of two (2) years. All subsequent appointments shall be for terms of two (2) years. Members shall continue to hold
offices until their successors have been appointed.
D. Compensation: Members of the advisory committee on historic preservation shall serve without compensation but may be
reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
E. Staff: The city council shall provide the advisory committee with staff meeting the qualifications of the secretary of the interior to
carry on the staff functions of the committee. (1971 Code § 13A-3; amd. 2000 Code)
9-9-4: DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC SITES AND LANDMARKS:
A. Procedures: The city council, upon the request of the advisory committee on historic preservation, may by resolution designate a
historic site, landmark, or historic district. Prior to such designation, the city council shall hold a public hearing, notice of which
shall have been published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing; notice of
the hearing shall also be mailed to all owners of property which is proposed to be designated as a historic site, landmark or
historic district and to all property owners within one hundred meters (100 m) of the boundary of the area to be designated. Every
nomination shall be forwarded to the Minnesota Historical Society for review and comment within sixty (60) days of the advisory
committee on historic preservation's request.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 226/454
B. Eligibility Criteria: In considering the designation of any area, site, place, district, building or structure in the city as a historic site or
landmark, the advisory committee on historic preservation shall consider the following factors with respect to eligibility:
1. Its character, interest, or value as part of the history or cultural heritage of the city, the state or the United States;
2. Its association with persons or events that have made a significant contribution to the cultural heritage of the city;
3. Its potential to yield information important in history or prehistory;
4. Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of architectural type or style, or elements of design, detail materials or
craftsmanship; and
5. Its unique location or singular physical appearance representing an established or familiar visual feature of a neighborhood or
community of the City. (1971 Code § 13A-4)
9-9-5: CULTURAL RESOURCE STUDIES AND MANAGEMENT PLAN:
The advisory committee on historic preservation shall conduct a continuing survey of cultural resources in the city which the
committee has reason to believe are or will be eligible for designation as historic sites or landmarks. The committee shall also
prepare a comprehensive cultural resource management plan for the city. (1971 Code § 13A-5)
9-9-6: ALTERATIONS TO LANDMARKS OR HISTORIC SITES; REVIEW:
A. Review And Recommendations Generally: The advisory committee on historic preservation shall review and make
recommendations to the council concerning proposed alterations to a landmark or an historic site.
B. Building Or Land Use Permit: Every application for a building or land use permit which may result in the alteration of a designated
historic site or landmark in the city shall be reviewed by the advisory committee on historic preservation; thereafter, the committee
shall make a recommendation and may recommend conditions regarding approval to the city council concerning the proposed
permit. No permit will be issued by the city building official unless a certificate of appropriateness has been granted by the city
council. This certificate may contain conditions of approval that the council deems reasonable and appropriate.
C. Plats, Variances Or Conditional Uses: Every application for a preliminary or final plat, variance or conditional use permit in relation
to a designated historic site or landmark in the city shall be reviewed by the advisory committee on historic preservation, and their
recommendation shall be forwarded to the planning commission and to the city council to be considered by the planning
commission in making their recommendation to the council.
D. Other Building Permits: The advisory committee on historic preservation shall review and make recommendations to the council
concerning the issuance of city permits to do any of the following in an historic district in the city:
1. New construction.
2. Move a building.
3. Excavation.
4. Demolition.
E. Factors Considered: The advisory committee on historic preservation, upon receipt of the permit application and plans, shall
determine if the work to be performed adversely affects the designated historic site or landmark. In determining whether or not
there is an adverse effect to the historic site or landmark, the committee shall consider the following factors:
1. Whether the work will significantly alter the appearance of the building or structure so as to remove the features which
distinguish the historic site or landmark as a significant cultural resource.
2. Whether the use of the property will destroy, disturb or endanger a known or suspected archaeological feature site.
F. Standards And Guidelines: The comprehensive cultural resource management plan adopted by the city shall be the authoritative
guide to reviewing permits in relation to designated historic sites, landmarks and historic districts. The secretary of the interior's
"Standards And Guidelines For Archaeology And Historic Preservation" shall be the required basis for permit review decisions.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 227/454
G. Appeals: Any party aggrieved by a decision of the advisory committee on historic preservation shall, within ten (10) days of the
committee's action approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness, have a right to appeal such decision to the city council.
The advisory committee on historic preservation in denying a certificate of appropriateness, shall advise the applicant of his/her
right to appeal to the city council. The aggrieved party shall file with the city administrator a written notice requesting council
review of the action taken by the advisory committee on historic preservation. Upon receipt of the notice, the city administrator
shall transmit one copy to the advisory committee on historic preservation. (1971 Code § 13A-7)
9-9-7: DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS ON ZONING MAP:
The city shall place all duly designated historic districts on the official city zoning map. (1971 Code § 13A-10)
9-9-8: MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS AND DOCUMENTS:
A. Register Of Historic Sites And Landmarks: The city shall maintain a register of historic sites and landmarks. (1971 Code § 13A-6)
B. Repository For Documents: The office of the city administrator is designated at the repository for all studies, surveys, reports,
programs, and designations of historic sites and landmarks. (1971 Code § 13A-9)
9-9-9: VIOLATION:
It shall be a misdemeanor to alter, disturb, deface or materially change the appearance or use of a designated historic site, structure
or landmark without a permit. (1971 Code § 13A-8)
9-9-10: DELISTING OF HISTORIC SITES AND LANDMARKS:
A. Procedures: The city council, upon the request of a property owner of a parcel of land that contains a structure or feature that is
designated as a historic site or landmark, may by resolution remove the subject property from the city's register of historic sites
and landmarks, or from a historic district. Prior to such action, the request shall be reviewed by the advisory committee on historic
preservation. The committee shall make a recommendation on the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness to the city council.
Prior to approving the resolution regarding the removal request, the council shall hold a public hearing, notice of which shall have
been published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing; notice of the hearing
shall also be mailed to all property owners within five hundred feet (500') of the boundary of the area to be designated. Every
removal request shall be forwarded to the Minnesota Historical Society for review and comment within sixty (60) days of the
advisory committee on historic preservation's request.
B. Review Criteria: In considering the request to remove area, site, place, district, building, or structure from the local historic register,
the advisory committee on historic preservation and the city council shall consider the following factors with respect to the request
for removal:
1. Have any conditions related to the property's character, interest, or value as part of the history or cultural heritage of the city,
the state or the United States changed?
2. Is the property eligible for the national historic preservation register?
3. Does the inclusion of the property on the local historic register have a demonstrable hardship or cause negative impacts in the
current property owner's ability to manage or market the property?
4. Is the property's association with persons or events that have made a significant contribution to the cultural heritage of the city
clearly evident by the registration on the local historic register?
5. Will the property's association with persons or events that have made a significant contribution to the cultural heritage of the
city be negatively impacted by the removal from the local historic register?
6. Can the property's potential to yield information important in history or prehistory still be obtained, documented, and distributed
before and after the removal of the property from the local historic register?
7. Are there other examples on the local historic register or within the community that have similar distinguishing characteristics of
architectural type or style, or elements of design, detail, materials, or craftsmanship?
8. Would the removal of the property from the local historic register detract from the significance of its historic past within the
neighborhood and community?
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 228/454
9. Are there opportunities for the current property owner and the city to actively promote the history of the property with the site
not included in the local historic register? (Ord. 953, 12-16-2015)
Chapter 10
MANUFACTURED HOMES
9-10-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
Permits for the installation of manufactured homes shall be required and obtained by the owner of the manufactured home, the
dealer/installer, or by the manufactured home park management company. Permit fees shall be established by council ordinance
from time to time. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
9-10-2: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
No occupancy of a manufactured home will be allowed without a certificate of occupancy as issued by the building official. A
certificate of occupancy shall be issued after the approvals of the following inspections: support blocking, tiedowns, attachments, gas
line, plumbing final, and building final. (1971 Code § 6-21; amd. 2000 Code)
9-10-3: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
Manufactured homes shall meet the minimum requirements as specified in the most recently adopted edition of the state building
code1. (1971 Code § 6-21; amd. 2000 Code)
9-10-4: ALTERATIONS:
Alterations shall not be permitted without engineering and other support data provided by the home manufacturer as required by the
building official. (1971 Code § 6-21; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 11
SWIMMING POOLS
9-11-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this Chapter, the term "swimming pool" shall include any enclosure, above or below grade, having a water surface area
exceeding one hundred (100) square feet and a water depth greater than eighteen inches (18") at any point. (1971 Code § 23A-1)
9-11-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
All terms, provisions, and requirements of this Chapter shall be retroactive and shall apply to all swimming pools in existence in the
City at the time of adoption of this Chapter1. (1971 Code § 23A-4)
9-11-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: No swimming pool shall be constructed, excavated or erected within the City without first obtaining a building
permit.
B. Application For Permit: The application for a building permit shall include:
1. The type and size of pool.
2. A site plan indicating the following: location of pool; location of house; garage, fencing and other improvements on the lot;
location of filter unit, pump, and wiring indicating the type of such units; location of structures on adjacent lots; location of back6/
30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 229/454
flush and drainage outlets; grading plan, finished elevations and final treatment (decking, landscaping, etc.) around pool;
location of existing overhead or underground wiring, utility easements, trees and similar features; location of any water heating
unit. (1971 Code § 23A-3; amd. 2000 Code)
9-11-4: REQUIREMENTS IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS:
A. Precautions And Requirements During Construction:
1. In the case of underground pools, precautions shall be taken during construction to:
a. Avoid damage, hazards or inconvenience to adjacent or nearby property.
b. Assure that proper care shall be taken in stockpiling excavated material to avoid erosion, dust or other infringements upon
adjacent property.
2. All access for construction shall be over the owner's land, and due care shall be taken to avoid damage to public streets and
adjacent private or public property. The owner shall be liable for damages caused to any public or private property.
B. Location Of Pools:
1. Pools shall not be located within ten feet (10'), measured horizontally, from overhead or underground utility lines of any type.
2. Pools shall not be located within eighteen feet (18') of any utility lines that are aboveground, and shall be located no closer
than five feet (5') horizontally for underground utility lines.
C. Fences and Gates:
1. The pool shall be enclosed with fencing, at least four feet (4') high and not exceeding six feet (6') high, to prevent uncontrolled
entrance of all persons. Such fence shall have self-closing and self-latching gates with provisions for locking and shall be
completely installed prior to the filling of the pool.
2. Access points to the pool shall be provided with self-closing, lockable, self-latching gates and shall be installed prior to the
filling of the pool. For an aboveground pool, where the combined heights of the pool and deck/railing is four feet (4') or greater
above grade, and access points to the pool are provided with self-closing, lockable, self-latching gates, a separate fence shall
not be required.
D. Retaining Walls: Retaining walls shall be designed to resist the lateral pressure of the retained material in accordance with
accepted engineering practice. Walls retaining drained earth may be designed for pressure equivalent to that exerted by a fluid
weighing not less than thirty (30) pounds per cubic foot and having a depth equal to that of the retained earth. Any surcharge
shall be in addition to the equivalent fluid pressure.
E. Lighting Of Pool Area: Pool lighting shall be directed toward the pool and not toward adjacent property.
F. Quality Of Pool Water: Pool water shall be maintained in a suitable manner to avoid health hazards of any type.
G. Filling Pools From Hydrants: Filling of pools from fire hydrants or other public facilities shall require the permission of the
appropriate local city officials.
H. Drainage Of Water: To the extent feasible, back-flush water or water from pool drainage shall be directed onto the owner's
property or into approved public drainageways and shall not drain onto adjacent private land. Drainage onto public streets or
other public drainageways shall require permission of the appropriate local city officials.
I. Nuisances Prohibited: Nuisances such as undue noise, lighting of adjacent property, health and safety hazards, damage to nearby
vegetation and the like shall not be permitted.
J. Safety Devices: Safety rope and floats shall be maintained to separate and designate the deep water portion of the pool.
K. Inspections: All wiring, installation of heating units, grading, installation of pipes and all other installations and construction shall be
subject to inspection.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 230/454
L. Variances: Any proposed deviation from these standards and requirements shall require a variance in accordance with normal
zoning procedures. (1971 Code § 23A-5; amd. 2000 Code)
9-11-5: REQUIREMENTS IN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Location:
1. Pool and decking setbacks shall be regulated by section 11-3-3, Accessory Structures, of this code. Pools shall not be located
within six feet (6') of any principal structure or frost footing. (Ord. 696, 5-16-2001)
2. Pools shall not be located within any required front yard.
B. Noise Control: The filter unit, pump, heating unit and any other noisemaking mechanical equipment shall be located at least
twenty five feet (25') from any adjacent or nearby residential structure and not closer than eight feet (8') to any lot line. (1971
Code § 23A-6)
9-11-6: REQUIREMENTS IN MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING AREAS:
Private swimming pools which are intended for and used by the occupants of a multiple-family dwelling and the guests of the
occupants of such dwelling shall adhere to the following regulations:
A. Location: No part of the water surface of the swimming pool shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to any lot line.
B. Noise Control: No pumps, filter or other apparatus used in connection with or to service a swimming pool shall be located closer
than fifty feet (50') to any lot line.
C. Fencing, Screening And Landscaping: The pool area shall be adequately fenced to prevent uncontrolled access from the street or
adjacent property. Adequate screening, including, but not limited to, landscaping shall be placed between the pool area and
adjacent single-family district lot lines.
D. Decks And Patios: All deck areas, adjacent patios or other similar areas used in conjunction with the swimming pool shall be
located at least thirty feet (30') from any lot line in an adjacent single-family district. (1971 Code § 23A-7)
9-11-7: INSPECTIONS:
A. Inground Pools: The following inspections for inground pools are mandatory:
1. Staking to verify setback requirements.
2. Footing inspection during placing of concrete.
3. Compliance with the fencing requirements.
4. Electrical inspections, if applicable.
B. Aboveground Pools: The following inspections for aboveground pools are mandatory prior to filling the pool with water:
1. Verification of setback requirements.
2. Compliance with fencing and/or barrier requirements.
3. Electrical, if applicable. (1971 Code § 23A-2)
9-11-8: ENFORCEMENT:
The city building official or his/her duly authorized representative shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter. (1971 Code
§ 23A-2; amd. 2000 Code)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 231/454
Chapter 12
REGISTERED PLANTS
9-12-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of the Chapter, a "registered plant" is a person, firm, corporation, or political entity engaged in manufacturing,
processing or service which requires specialized multi-building, utilities and equipment to the extent the plant maintains full-time
personnel for the operations and maintenance of such buildings, utilities and equipment and when such plant has complied with all
the provisions of this Chapter. In addition to meeting this general definition, a "registered plant" shall contract with or shall employ an
architect or engineer and full-time certified building official by the corporation registered in the State, who shall be directly responsible
for compliance with the most recently adopted edition of the Uniform Building Code with respect to all work otherwise requiring a
permit. (1971 Code § 6-22; amd. 2000 Code)
9-12-2: SCOPE:
A. Registered plants are exempt from the individual permits, and for work on existing buildings, structures and utilities accessory
thereto that does not increase the floor area or height (for interior only). This exemption is limited to buildings owned or leased by
the registered plant and under the direct control of the holder of the registration. Said buildings or structures qualify for this
exemption after the certificate of occupancy has been issued for the structure and all interior improvements covering the initial
plan occupancy. This exemption shall not be construed to waive any other requirement of the most recently adopted edition of the
Uniform Building Code, and applicable requirements shall be complied with. The plant registration is not transferable.
B. Apparent structural changes or wall penetrations on load- bearing walls and work of that nature will be subject to standard review
process and the fee schedules under the scope of the most recently adopted edition of the Uniform Building Code. (1971 Code
§ 6-23; amd. 2000 Code)
9-12-3: APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION; APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL:
A. Contents Of Application: To obtain registration, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by
the City Building Official for that purpose. Every such application shall contain:
1. The name of the plant and building for which registration is requested.
2. A description of the property to be included under registration by address and other description that will readily identify and
definitely locate the buildings and structures to be included under the registration.
3. The name of the individual who has the authority to act on behalf of the plant vice president or site director.
4. The State registration number and the name of the registered architect or engineer and corporate certified building official who
will be responsible for the work done under the registration. Applications process shall be approved by the corporation building
official prior to submission of the permit application to the City.
5. Annual inspection with right of entry for City building officials.
B. Approval Or Disapproval: Appropriate action shall be taken by the Building Official on such application, and the applicant shall be
notified accordingly.
C. Appeals: If the application is disapproved, the applicant may appeal the decision to the advisory/appeal board in the manner
provided in the most recently adopted edition of the uniform building code. (1971 Code § 6-24; amd. 2000 Code)
9-12-4: REGISTRATION FEE; EXPIRATION; RENEWALS:
A. Registration Fee: Every applicant for registration shall pay a fee in such amount as provided by ordinance of the city council from
time to time. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
B. Expiration Of Registration; Renewals: Registrations shall expire on January 31 of each year. Registrations may be renewed each
year by payment of the fee on or before January 31. The fee shall be refunded if the application is disapproved. Any work
performed after expiration of the registration without permits and inspections required by this chapter shall be a violation of the
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 232/454
most recently adopted edition of the uniform building code. (1971 Code § 6-25; amd. 2000 Code)
9-12-5: VALIDITY OF REGISTRATION:
Registration shall be valid only as long as the named architect or engineer and certified building official remains under contract with
or employed by the registered plant in an active capacity. If the registered architect, engineer or certified building official terminates
his/her contract or leaves the employ of the registered plant, registration is suspended until another registered architect, engineer or
certified building official becomes responsible for further work done under the registration. The registered plant shall notify the city
building official immediately and shall call for inspection of any work in progress in accordance with the most recently adopted edition
of the uniform building code. Before any new work commences, while registration is invalid or suspended, permits and inspections
shall be obtained pursuant to this chapter. (1971 Code § 6-26; amd. 2000 Code)
9-12-6: WORK REPORT AND INSPECTIONS:
A. Summary Work Report; Exemptions: A summary report of all work done under the plant registration shall be prepared by the
registered architect or engineer and renewed by the corporation certified building official before submitted annually or before
December 31 to the city building official.
B. Review Of Plans; Inspection Of Work: Plans or working drawings for alterations to buildings or utilities covered by the uniform
building code need not be submitted for approval, except for those conditions listed below. Plans submitted pursuant to this
section may be reviewed and inspection of the work conducted by either the city building official or authorized representatives as
set forth in this chapter; provided, however, that work may proceed without inspection pursuant to this section. The registered
plant may request plan review or inspection of any work performed under this section upon payment of required fees if the nature
of the work is in question.
C. Plans Required To Be Submitted:
1. Plans shall be submitted to the city building official for review of works which:
a. Create a different occupancy group as defined in the most recently adopted edition of the uniform building code for all or a
portion of the building.
b. Create a different building type as defined in the most recently adopted edition of the uniform building code for all or a portion
of the building.
c. Add, alter, remove or penetrate required fire walls for area separation, occupancy separation or exterior wall construction.
d. Add, alter, remove, or penetrate exit courts, exit passageways, or horizontal exits. Exit doors may be added, moved or
removed from exit courts or passageways when an appropriate fire rate door(s) is installed or opening protection maintained
in accordance with the most recently adopted edition of the uniform building code.
e. Provide for alterations to the fire protection systems which constitutes moving more than five (5) sprinkler heads.
f. Modify load bearing structures.
2. These plans shall be submitted for review at or before the time of construction, however, work may proceed prior to the
completion of the review. (1971 Code § 6-28; amd. 2000 Code)
9-12-7: LICENSED CONTRACTORS:
All contractors working under the agreement shall be licensed in accordance with Title 3, Chapter 9 of this Code prior to any work to
be performed. (1971 Code § 6-29)
9-12-8: REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION:
A. Authority: The City Building Official may suspend or revoke the registration of a registered plant which fails to comply with any of
the registration responsibilities or for violation of any provision of the most recently adopted edition of the Uniform Building Code.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 233/454
B. Procedure: When the City Building Official deems that the registration shall be suspended or revoked, the procedure shall be as
follows:
1. The registered plant shall be notified in writing by certified mail at least seven (7) days prior to suspension or revocation.
2. Upon receipt of this notice, the registered plant may request a hearing. Such requests shall be in writing to the City Building
Official within seven (7) days of the receipt of notice.
3. If a hearing is requested by the registered plant, the City Building Official shall set a time, date, and place and so notify the
registered plant.
4. When a hearing is conducted, the registered plant and other interested parties may be in attendance. Upon completion of the
hearing, the City Building Official shall take all evidence submitted under advisement and shall notify the registered plant of
his/her findings in writing by certified mail.
5. If the decision rendered by the City Building Official is adverse to the registered plant, the registered plant may appeal the
decision to the advisory/appeals board in the manner provided in most recently adopted edition of the Uniform Building Code.
(1971 Code § 6-27; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
9-13-1: POLICY; PURPOSE; OBJECTIVE:
A. Policy: It is the policy of the City to enhance the supply of safe, sanitary and adequate structures and living conditions for its
citizens and to prevent the deterioration of the existing structures in the City.
B. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to carry out the policy stated in subsection A of this section by establishing minimum
standards and procedures for their enforcement consistent with the right to personal privacy, for the protection of life, limb, health,
property, safety and welfare of the general public.
C. Objectives: The objectives of this chapter include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Protection and preservation of the stability and character of all areas within the City.
2. The prevention and correction of conditions that adversely affect the life, safety, health and general well-being of owners,
managers, and occupants of structures in the City.
3. The establishment of minimum standards for light, space, ventilation, cooling, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements,
life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for the safe and sanitary maintenance necessary to ensure the health and
safety of owners, managers, and occupants of structures in the City.
4. The establishment of minimum standards for the maintenance of rented single and multi-family dwellings, both owner-occupied
and non-owner occupied dwellings.
5. The prevention of all blighted and deteriorating structures in the City.
6. The preservation of the value of land and all structures in the City. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-13-2: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
Except as modified or amended by the Minnesota State Building Code (or as it may be amended) or by City ordinance, or by this
chapter, the International Property Maintenance Code is adopted by reference and is made a part of this City Code as if fully set out
at length. One (1) copy of the International Property Maintenance Code, together with a copy of this chapter, each marked "Official
Copy", must be kept on file at City Hall and be available for public inspection. The chief building official must keep a reasonable
number of additional copies of the International Property Maintenance Code and this chapter available for use and inspection by the
public at reasonable times. The following provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code are modified as follows:
A. References to plumbing, mechanical, fire, and electrical codes shall be replaced by current Minnesota State-adopted plumbing,
mechanical, fire, and electrical codes.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 234/454
B. Section 101.2 is replaced as follows: Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all residential rental structures and
premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light,
ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safety
and sanitary maintenance; for the responsibility of owners, managers and occupants, for the occupancy of existing structures and
premises and for the administration and enforcement of this code.
C. The following sections are deleted: Sections 102.3 (Application of other codes), 103 (Department of Property Maintenance
Inspection), 104 (Duties and Powers of the Code Official), 106 (Violations), 107 (Notices and Orders), 109 (Emergency
Measures), 110 (Demolition), 111 (Means of Appeal).
D. Section 102.7.1 is replaced as follows: Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of the International Property
Maintenance Code and the Minnesota State Building Code, the provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code shall apply.
E. In Section 202 (General Definitions), the following definitions are deleted: Exterior Property, Garbage, Inoperable Motor Vehicle,
Rubbish, Yard.
F. In Section 202 (General Definitions), the following definitions are replaced with the definitions in Section 9-14-2 of the city code:
Dwelling Unit, Let, Owner, Structure.
G. The following sections are deleted: Sections 302.1 (Sanitation), 302.3 (Sidewalks and Driveways), 302.4 (Weeds), 302.7
(Accessory Structures), 302.8 (Motor Vehicles), 302.9 (Defacement of Property), 303 (Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs),
304.3 (Exterior Structures - Premises Identification), 304.6 (Exterior Structures - Exterior Walls), 308 (Rubbish and Garbage).
(Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-13-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Generally: This Code applies to all principal structures, their premises, and accessory structures thereto.
B. Existing Structures:
1. All structures must conform to this chapter. A building need not be altered or changed to exceed the requirements of the
Building Code in effect at the time of its construction, except in the following cases:
a. If the structure is altered or enlarged pursuant to the State Building Code;
b. If the structure is moved or relocated;
c. If the structure is determined to be unsafe or hazardous by the housing official pursuant to the State Building Code or State
law; or
d. If a change in use has occurred.
2. Occupancy in structures lawfully existing under the Building Code may be continued under this Code. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-13-4: DUTIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS OF ALL STRUCTURES:
A. Sanitation:
1. The occupant of a structure must maintain their occupied part of the structure and yard in a clean and sanitary condition, and is
responsible for the occupant's own misuse of any common areas.
2. The owner or operator of a multi-family dwelling must maintain the shared or public areas of the complex in a clean and
sanitary condition.
3. The occupant of a dwelling unit must keep all mechanical equipment and appliances, including furnace, water heater, plumbing
fixtures, air conditioner, stove, refrigerator, dishwasher and the like, in a clean and sanitary condition and is responsible for the
exercise of reasonable care in their proper use and operation.
B. Removal Of Waste Matter:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 235/454
1. The occupant of a structure must dispose of rubbish, debris, garbage and other organic waste in a clean and sanitary manner
as provided by subsection 4-2-15B of the City Code.
2. The owner or operator of a multi-family dwelling is responsible for the clean and sanitary maintenance of common storage or
disposal facilities and must dispose of rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner as provided in subsection 4-2-15B of the City
Code.
C. Appliances And Equipment: The owner or operator of all structures must make all necessary provisions for the safe operation or
repair of all faulty or inoperable mechanical equipment and appliances. This includes smoke detectors and carbon monoxide
detectors.
D. Pest Extermination:
1. The occupant or owner of a structure is responsible for the extermination of insects, vermin infestations or rodents on the
premises.
2. The owner of any multi-family dwelling is responsible for such extermination when in the opinion of the housing official, the
dwelling unit is infested or requires extermination.
3. After extermination, it is the responsibility of the owner to correct such maintenance or other problems as designated by the
housing official to eliminate the source of the infestation.
E. Heat: The owner or operator of a building containing one (1) or more dwelling units must supply facilities capable of providing
adequate heat to every habitable room therein; for the purposes of this subsection, "adequate heat" means heat sufficient to
maintain a temperature of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) at a height of three feet (3') above the floor in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments.
F. Utilities: Except as otherwise provided by law, an owner, operator or occupant may not cause service equipment or utility service
that is required by this Code to be removed, shut off or discontinued for any occupied structure let or occupied by that person,
except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary
emergencies.
G. Notice Of Maximum Occupancy: An owner or operator must advise the occupant, in writing, by insertion in the lease between the
parties or otherwise, of the maximum number of occupants permitted.
H. Transfer Of Responsibility: A contract between owner and operator, operator and occupant, or owner and occupant, with regard to
compliance with this Code, does not relieve the owner of a duty imposed by this Code. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
Chapter 14
RENTAL LICENSING
9-14-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City who live in rental units, the
property owners who operate and manage rental units, and the general public who reside next to rental units, by adopting a Rental
Dwelling Inspection and Maintenance Program that corrects substandard conditions and maintains a standard for existing and newly
constructed rental dwellings in the City. The operation of rental properties is a business enterprise that includes certain
responsibilities. Rental owners, operators and managers are responsible for taking such reasonable steps as are necessary to
ensure that the citizens who occupy such rental units, as well as neighboring properties, may pursue the quiet enjoyment of the
normal activities of life in surroundings that are safe, secure, and sanitary, free from noise, nuisances and annoyances, and free from
unreasonable fears about safety of persons and property. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
Words used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless otherwise defined in this chapter.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: A subordinate habitable dwelling unit, which has its own basic requirements of shelter, heating,
cooking and sanitation added to or created within a single-family dwelling or detached accessory structure.
APARTMENT: A community, complex or building having a common owner and containing at least one (1) rental dwelling unit.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 236/454
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The Cottage Grove City Administrator or his or her designee.
CITY APPROVED INSPECTOR'S REPORT OR INSPECTION REPORT: A rental dwelling inspection report prepared and signed by
a City inspector.
DWELLING: A building or one (1) or more portions of a building occupied or intended to be occupied for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT: A single-family dwelling or a discrete portion of a dwelling or detached structure/garage designed for occupancy
by one (1) family.
FAMILY: Those persons legally related to each other in a linear relationship such as spouses, grandparents, parents, children,
grandchildren and siblings. Family does not include branching relationships such as aunts, uncles or cousins.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY OR TO LET OR TO RENT: To permit possession or occupancy of a dwelling or rental dwelling unit, whether
or not compensation is paid, by a person who is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease.
OCCUPANT OR TENANT: Any person living or sleeping in a dwelling unit, or having possession of a space within a dwelling unit.
OPERATE: To rent, lease or grant the use and possession of a rental dwelling unit, whether or not compensation is paid.
OPERATOR OR MANAGER: Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises that is let or offered for
occupancy.
OWNER OR LICENSEE: Any person, agent, or operator having a legal or equitable interest in the property or recorded in the official
State, County or City records as holding title to the property or otherwise having control of the property.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, firm, association, company, partnership, organization or any other group acting as a unit.
RENTAL DWELLING: Any dwelling used for residential occupancy by one (1) or more persons who are not the owner or a member
of the owner's family.
RENTAL DWELLING UNIT: Any room or rooms, or space, in any rental dwelling designed or used for residential occupancy by one
(1) or more persons who are not the owner or a member of the owner's family.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. General Rules:
1. No person shall operate a rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit in the City without a license pursuant to this chapter.
2. No more than five (5) unrelated persons may reside in one (1) rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit.
3. Failure to obtain a rental license prior to renting residential property is a violation of this Code, subject to a misdemeanor
citation.
B. Applications: An application for a license shall be made on a form provided by the City. After the City has received a completed
application, including all required documentation, the appropriate fees, the applicant is required to schedule an inspection. Upon
proof of a satisfactory inspection report, the license will be submitted to the City Council for consideration. Incomplete applications
will be rejected by the City and will not be submitted to the City Council. The license application shall include:
1. Property Owner Information:
a. The name, address, and complete information of the property owner, if the property owner is an individual.
b. The name, address and complete information of at least one (1) officer, manager or director, if the property owner is a
business entity.
c. A written declaration by the licensee, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in the application is true. If the
applicant is a corporation, an officer must sign the written declaration. If the applicant is a partnership, a general partner or
his or her designee, must sign the written declaration.
2. Contact Information: For single-family residential dwellings, the license applicant must provide 24-hour contact information for
one (1) person in any of the following categories. For all other types of dwellings, the license applicant must provide 24-hour
contact information for two (2) people in any of the following categories:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 237/454
a. At least one (1) owner of the rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit.
b. At least one (1) person, if different from the owner, who is responsible for compliance with this and any other Code
requirement pertaining to the rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit, such as a property manager, who must reside in the Twin
Cities 7-County metropolitan area.
c. Any of the owner's agents responsible for management of the rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit, such as a property
management company and the name and contact information of a person at the property management company.
d. Any vendors and all vendees, if the rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit is being sold pursuant to a contract for deed.
3. Number And Type Of Units: The license application must contain the number of units and types of units (condominium,
apartment, townhome, etc.) within the rental dwelling.
4. Inspection Report: The license application must have a satisfactory City approved inspector's report before it will be submitted
to the City Council. A satisfactory City approved inspector's report may be dated within the previous twenty four (24) months for
single-family dwellings and twelve (12) months for multi-family dwellings. A tenant shall not occupy a dwelling unit that is the
subject of a compliance order until the corrective action has been completed and approved. If the owner submits an affidavit
with the housing official setting forth a date by which the corrective action will be completed, occupancy shall be permitted
pending completion of the corrective action, unless the dwelling unit has been declared as unfit for human habitation.
Inspections shall be scheduled pursuant to subsection C of this section.
5. Notification Of Changes: The applicant must notify the City Clerk in writing of any changes to the information on the application
within five (5) business days of the change.
6. Existing License Holders: Owners of rental dwellings who hold a current rental property license from the City as of the effective
date of this chapter, shall apply for a license pursuant to this chapter and shall comply with all requirements contained herein.
The existing license shall be allowed to continue for a reasonable time pending approval of the new license application.
C. Inspections:
1. The owner or the owner's agent is responsible for scheduling all required inspections with the Building Department staff.
2. If an owner or the owner's agent in charge of a dwelling unit licensed under this section fails to schedule a required inspection
within fourteen (14) days of the rental license application being deemed complete, the housing official may recommend
suspension, revocation or denial of the license following the process in section 9-14-15 of this chapter.
3. Except in the case of emergency, inspections will be conducted during normal City working hours. The housing official must
present evidence of official authority to the occupant in charge of a licensed dwelling unit.
4. The owner or the owner's property manager must be present during the inspection and must permit free access and entry for
inspection purposes. If access is denied, the housing official may administer reinspection fees or may recommend suspension,
revocation or denial of the license following the process in section 9-14-15 of this chapter.
D. Compliance Orders:
1. Compliance Order: A compliance order documenting corrective actions with compliance date will be sent to the owner. The
owner is responsible for assuring all corrective actions are made by the compliance date and a reinspection is scheduled.
2. Corrective Actions: If an owner or the owner's agent in charge of a dwelling unit licensed under this section fails to make
corrective actions listed in the compliance order or fails to schedule a reinspection by the compliance date, the housing official
may recommend suspension, revocation or denial of the license following the process in section 9-14-15 of this chapter, may
administer abatement as described in title 4, chapter 1 of this Code or may issue a misdemeanor citation.
3. Appeal:
a. Right Of Appeal; Procedure: When it is alleged by a person to whom a compliance order is directed that the compliance
order is based upon erroneous interpretation of this chapter or upon a misstatement or mistake of fact, that person may
appeal the compliance order to the City Administrator or his/her designee. The appeal:
(1) Must be in writing;
(2) Must specify the grounds for the appeal; and
(3) Must be filed with the housing official within five (5) business days after service of the compliance order.
b. Stay Of Proceedings: The filing of an appeal stays proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless such a stay in
the judgment of the housing official would cause imminent peril to life, health or property.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 238/454
c. Action On Appeal: The City Administrator or designee must act promptly on the housing official's recommendation, and the
housing official's recommendation may be reversed, modified or affirmed in whole or in part by the City Administrator. The
City Administrator's disposition of the appeal is final.
4. Reinspection Fees Authorized: The City shall be authorized to charge a reinspection fee for any required reinspection finding
noncompliance conducted after the due date for compliance.
a. Subsequent Reinspections: A fee as established by the City Council shall be charged for each subsequent reinspection
finding noncompliance that is conducted after the due date for compliance.
b. Waiver: The Community Development Director may waive a reinspection fee in case of error, mistake, injustice, or other
good cause with or without hearing.
c. Billing: The reinspection fees authorized above shall be billed directly to the owner. Failure to timely pay such fees shall be
grounds for denial, revocation, suspension, or nonrenewal of the license. This subsection shall not be considered the
exclusive method of collecting reinspection fees and shall not preclude collection by any other lawful methods. Payment shall
be due within thirty (30) days after the initial billing.
d. Assessment: For rental license reinspections, unpaid charges may be assessed against the property as follows: On or
before October 1 of each year, the City Clerk will list the total unpaid charges for reinspection fees related to rental license
violations against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable. The City Council may then spread the charges
against the property benefited as a special assessment under Minnesota Statutes section 429.101 and other relevant
statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year along with current taxes. (Ord. 982, 6-21-
2017)
9-14-4: RENEWAL:
A. An application for license renewal must be filed by November 30 of the year prior to the year in which the license expires.
B. Upon failure to comply with this provision, a letter will be sent to the owner informing them that a late fee, in addition to the
renewal fee will be due within fifteen (15) calendar days. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-5: INVESTIGATIONS:
A. Background Reports: In order to protect the general welfare of the public for all applications, criminal history background reports
from the BCA must be submitted with the application for any owner who has or would have the means to enter rental dwelling
units or any manager who has or would have the means within the scope of the individual's duties, to enter rental dwelling units.
To satisfy this requirement:
1. An owner who has or would have the means to enter rental dwelling units must provide a copy of a BCA public criminal
conviction history report, which must be dated within twenty four (24) months of the date of the application.
2. A manager must provide a BCA public criminal conviction history report and a response from the Superintendent of the BCA
required by Minnesota Statutes section 299C.68, both of which must be dated within twenty four (24) months of the application.
If not a Minnesota resident, a criminal conviction history report from the appropriate government agency in the state of
residency is also required.
B. Authorization: At the time of making an initial or renewal license application, the applicant must provide written authorization to the
City to investigate all facts set out in the application. The information obtained from the investigation shall be used to assist the
City Council in making a decision as to whether the applicant should be granted a license. The decision may be based on any of
the following criteria:
1. Whether the owner or manager subject to the investigation required in this section was convicted of a crime or offense in the
last five (5) years involving or directly relating to the business for which a license is sought; or
2. Whether the owner or manager was convicted of a "background check crime" as defined by Minnesota Statutes section
299C.67, subd. 2, or as it may be amended, within the last ten (10) years; or
3. Whether there is a material misrepresentation in the application. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-6: CHANGES IN OWNERSHIP:
A license is nontransferable: If there is a change in the ownership of the rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit, a new license is
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 239/454
required. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-7: CHANGES IN THE RENTAL DWELLING OR RENTAL DWELLING UNIT:
If changes are made in the number or type of units, the agent or property manager, the licensee shall notify the City Clerk in writing
within five (5) days of such change. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-8: LICENSE TERM:
Persons desiring to let rental dwellings or rental dwelling units must make an application to the City, provide the information required
by this chapter and pay the applicable license fees prior to any inspection or new or renewal license being issued. For single-family
residential dwelling units, license terms shall be for a period of two (2) years. For multi-family residential dwelling units, the license
term shall be for one (1) year. All license terms begin on March 1 and expire on the last day of February. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-9: CONDITIONS OF THE LICENSE:
As conditions of the license, the licensee must do the following:
A. Tenant Register: Maintain a current register of tenants and other persons who have a lawful right to occupancy of rental dwellings
or rental dwelling units, which must be available for inspection by City officials upon request. The licensee must designate the
name of the person or persons who will have possession of the register and must promptly notify the City Administrator of any
change in the identity, address or telephone numbers of such person. For purposes of this section, "current" means that the
register is updated every thirty (30) days.
B. Fire Certification: Execute a statement that the smoke detectors are properly installed and operable and that the fire exits are
accessible.
C. Tenant Screening Certification: Execute a statement that the licensee has a screening process the licensee uses during the
approval process of each tenant to attempt to insure quality tenants occupy the rental dwelling.
D. Minnesota Crime-Free Lease Addendum: Use the Minnesota Crime-Free Lease Addendum, or its equivalent, as part of its leases.
E. Display Of License Certificate: For multi-family, the license certificate must be exhibited in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the rental dwelling. One (1) license certificate must be displayed for each building. If practical, the certificate must be
displayed in the rental office or other common area accessible to all tenants of the licensed building. For single family homes and
duplexes, a copy of the license certificate must be provided to the tenants. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-10: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter does not apply to the following:
A. Hospitals.
B. State licensed residential care facilities.
C. Assisted living facilities.
D. Nursing homes.
E. Hotels or motels.
F. Single-family homes in which an individual owns the single-family home and resides in a portion of the building in which there is a
rental dwelling unit and there are a total of no more than five (5) persons within the rental dwelling unit that are unrelated to the
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 240/454
owner and to each other.
G. Accessory dwelling units. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-11: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTS OF MANAGER:
Licensees are responsible for the acts or omissions of their managers as it pertains to the rental dwelling. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-12: MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
A. Tenant Responsibilities: Tenants are responsible for the condition of the rental dwelling units that they occupy. The licensee is
responsible for the maintenance of the rental dwelling units, and the lot on which the rental dwelling sits. It is ultimately the
responsibility of the licensee to assure that every rental dwelling is maintained in compliance with all City ordinances and State
laws. A violation of any of the following laws and ordinances constitutes a public nuisance:
1. Building Code (chapter 2 of this title).
2. Animal ordinance (title 5, chapter 4 of this Code).
3. Fire Prevention Code (title 4, chapter 6 of this Code).
4. Public nuisance ordinance (title 4, chapter 1 of this Code).
5. Solid waste ordinance (title 4, chapter 2 of this Code).
B. Interior Inspections Of Rental Dwellings: The building official, building inspector, housing inspector, Fire Department personnel,
police officers and their respective representatives are authorized inspectors who may enter rental dwellings for purposes of
making inspections reasonably necessary to enforce this section. The tenant and owner shall be given notice of the inspection by
personal service, electronic communication, telephone contact or postmarked letter at least seventy two (72) hours prior to the
time the inspection is made. All authorized inspectors noted in this section have the authority to enter any rental dwelling or rental
dwelling unit at all reasonable times. Each tenant of a rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit shall give the owner, the owner's
agent or authorized City official access to any part of such rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit at reasonable times for the
purpose of inspection, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter. An
owner or tenant may refuse to permit entry to a rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit for an inspection pursuant to this chapter, in
which case, the inspector may seek an administrative search warrant authorizing such inspection.
C. Minimum Requirements And Implementation Standards:
1. Minimum Requirements: The minimum requirements imposed by this Code include those standards or requirements in effect
on the date of the construction of a building subject to this Code. It is not the intention of this Code to require all buildings to be
upgraded to meet all requirements of the present Building Code.
2. Implementation Standards: In administering this Code, the housing official will treat the following as conditions constituting an
immediate hazard to health and safety that must be corrected by the compliance date stated in the compliance order:
a. Required: Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors shall be required as follows:
(1) One (1) smoke detector shall be installed in each sleeping room.
(2) One (1) smoke detector shall be installed on each level near the sleeping rooms and stairways. All battery operated
smoke detectors shall be installed as per the manufacturer's instructions. During any remodeling (excluding minor
remodeling as determined by the housing official) all smoke detectors shall be hardwired and interconnected.
(3) All existing single-family dwellings shall be equipped with an approved carbon monoxide detector located within ten feet
(10') of each sleeping room.
(4) All multi-family or apartment dwelling units shall be equipped with an approved carbon monoxide detector located within
ten feet (10') of each sleeping room.
Exception: Multi-family dwellings may have approved and operational carbon monoxide alarms installed between fifteen
feet (15') and twenty five feet (25') of carbon monoxide producing central fixtures, provided there is a centralized alarm
system or other mechanism for responsible parties to hear the alarm at all times.
b. Unsafe, Inadequate Heating: Heating systems, dryer venting, wood burning stoves, fireplaces, and oil burners that are
unsafe due to: burned out or rusted heat exchangers (fire box); burned out, rusted, or plugged flues or drip tees; improper
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 241/454
flue pitch; improper flue clearances; improper venting; improper gas piping or gas valve installation; or being incapable of
adequately heating the living space.
c. Dryer Exhaust Ducts: Dryer exhaust ducts shall be metal and installed per the current Mechanical Code.
d. Unsafe Electrical Systems: Electrical systems that are unsafe due to: exposed busbar at panel, dangerous overloading,
damaged or deteriorated equipment, improperly tapped or spliced wiring, exposed uninsulated wires, distribution systems of
extension cords or other temporary methods, and ungrounded systems. Ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protection
must be provided for all receptacle outlets in bathrooms, garages, grade level portions of unfinished accessory buildings,
unfinished basements, kitchen countertops, wet bars and the exterior.
e. Unsafe, Unsanitary Plumbing Systems: Plumbing systems that are unsafe or unsanitary due to: leaking or improper waste
and venting of fixtures and traps, lack of water closet or washing and bathing facilities, or cross connection of the potable
water supply. All potable water systems shall be protected against backflow and back siphonage by providing an air gap
and/or backflow prevention. Water heaters that are unsafe due to: burned or rusted heat exchangers (fire box); burned,
rusted, improperly pitched, or plugged venting; improper flue clearance; leaking tanks; improper gas piping, or gas valve
installation; or leaking/corroded connections and temperature/pressure relief valves.
f. Imposed Loads: Structural systems, walls, chimneys, ceilings, roofs, foundations and floor systems that will not safely carry
imposed loads.
g. Unfit For Human Occupancy Or Use: Refuse, garbage, human waste and animal, decaying vermin or other dead animals,
animal waste and other materials rendering the dwelling and property unsanitary for human occupancy or use.
h. Infestation: Infestation of rats, insects and other vermin.
i. Stairways; Guardrails; Handrails: Stairways, guardrails, and handrails shall be maintained in a safe compliant manner. Should
corrective measures be required, all affected components shall be repaired compliant with current codes and standards.
j. Below Grade Escape Wells: Below grade escape wells shall be free of obstructions, constructed and maintained in a safe
and Code compliant manner. Window wells with a vertical depth greater than forty four inches (44") below adjacent ground
level shall be equipped with a permanently affixed ladder or steps usable with the window in the fully open position.
k. Foundation: The foundation shall be substantially watertight and protected against vermin and rodents and shall be kept in
sound condition and repair. The foundation element shall adequately support the building at all points.
l. Sidewalks; Stoop; Concrete Steps: Sidewalks, stoop, and concrete steps shall be maintained free of large cracks and breaks.
All exterior concrete shall pitch away from the structure.
m. Exterior Walls, Soffit And Fascia, And Roof: The exterior walls and roof shall be substantially watertight and protected
against vermin and rodents and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. Every exterior wall shall be free of deterioration,
holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other condition, which might allow water intrusion within the interior
portion of the walls or to the exterior spaces of the structure. The roof shall be tight and have no defects, which allow water
intrusion. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent moisture from causing dampness within the walls. All exterior wood
surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint or other protective
covering or treatment.
n. Exterior Doors, Windows, And Insect Screens: Every window, exterior door and other exterior openings shall be substantially
tight and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. Every operable window shall be capable of being easily opened. Every
window, door, screen, and frame shall completely exclude water intrusion, wind, vermin and rodents from entering the
building. Insect screens shall be installed on all operable windows and shall be maintained in a sound condition and repair.
Garages, attached or detached, shall have a fully operational overhead door or barn type door which must be kept in sound
condition and repair.
o. Yards: All trees, shrubs and brush growing against any building or fence which represents a hazard to the structural integrity
of any structure shall be removed or trimmed to prevent damage. All yards shall be graded so as to not affect the character
of the immediate residential area.
p. Grading And Drainage: All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water. All surface water shall drain away from the foundation walls of all dwellings. Damaged
gutters and downspouts shall be repaired or removed. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-13: CONDUCT IN RENTAL DWELLING OR RENTAL DWELLING UNIT:
It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to ensure that persons occupying a rental dwelling unit conduct themselves and cause
their guests to conduct themselves in such a manner as not to cause the rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit to be disorderly. For
the purposes of this section, a rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit is disorderly at any time that any of the following activities occur:
A. Violation of title 4, chapter 9, "Noise", of this Code;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 242/454
B. Violation of the laws relating to disorderly conduct, as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 609.72;
C. Violation of the laws relating to the possession of controlled substances, as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 152.01;
D. Violation of the laws relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor, as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 340A.701, 340A.702, or
340A.703;
E. Violation of the laws relating to liquor and minors, as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 340A.503(1);
F. Violation of the laws relating to prostitution or acts relating to prostitution, as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 609.321, subd.
9, Minnesota Statutes section 609.322 or 609.324;
G. Violation of the laws relating to the unlawful use or possession of a firearm in a rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit, as defined in
Minnesota Statutes sections 609.66 - 609.672;
H. Violation of the laws relating to assault, as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 609.224;
I. Violation of the laws relating to contributing to the need for protection or services or delinquency of a minor, as defined in
Minnesota Statutes section 609.378;
J. Violation of section 9-14-12, "Maintenance Standards", of this chapter. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-14: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Enforcement Procedures: The housing official may inspect on complaint, change in ownership, or otherwise when reason exists to
believe that a violation of this chapter has been or is being committed. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-15: LICENSE HEARING:
A. New Or Renewal Application Consideration:
1. City Council Action: The City Council must take action on each new and renewal license application within a reasonable time
following receipt of the recommendation from City staff regarding the application.
2. Procedure: At the City Council meeting at which the license application is considered, any person must be provided an
opportunity to be heard for or against the license. The City Council may then take any of the following actions:
a. Approve the license;
b. Deny the license;
c. Approve a provisional license;
d. Approve the license with reasonable conditions; or
e. Continue the license application.
3. Provisional License: The City Council may issue a provisional license or convert a regular license to a provisional license to
any existing business that has generated more than three (3) violations of this Code or State Statutes within the preceding 12-
month period. At the time of approval of the provisional license, the City Council shall approve a mitigation plan. The mitigation
plan may include adding security measures, improving the exterior of the property, reducing or changing the hours of operation,
holding neighborhood meetings or other steps the Council deems appropriate. The license term for a provisional license shall
coincide with the license term of a regular license for the same activity.
4. License With Reasonable Conditions: The City Council may add reasonable conditions upon approval of a regular license, in
order to promote the public health, safety and welfare, if deemed appropriate.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 243/454
B. Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Hearing: The Council or its designee may hold a hearing to take action on a license or to deny,
suspend or revoke a license or to consider other actions against the licensee.
1. Reasons: Any license may be denied, suspended or revoked for one (1) or more of the following reasons:
a. The applicant or licensee has failed to pay all of the appropriate fees related to the license or is delinquent on any other City
fees;
b. The applicant or licensee has made fraudulent statements, misrepresentations, not fully disclosed information or made false
statements on the application or investigation for or in the course of the applicant's business;
c. Conviction of any crime or offense in the previous five (5) years involving or relating to the business that is licensed or the
type of licensed activity and the applicant or licensee has failed to show competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and
present fitness to perform the duties of the business;
d. The licensee has conducted the activity in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, menace to the health,
safety and public welfare, or a disturbance of the peace or comfort of the residents of the City, upon recommendation of the
Police Chief or an appropriate City official;
e. The licensee has violated any requirements of this chapter, this Code, Zoning Code or State law related to the licensed
activity during the previous license period;
f. The licensee has violated terms and conditions of a previously issued license;
g. Expiration or cancellation of any required insurance;
h. The applicant's or licensee's license has been denied, revoked or suspended in the City, State or by another governmental
unit;
i. Failure to comply with inspections of the licensed premises;
j. Real estate or personal property taxes on the business or business premises are delinquent and the property owner and the
applicant are the same person or entity or have common ownership;
k. Based on the background report, granting a license would be a menace to the health, safety, morals and welfare of the
public;
l. The activity has been conducted without a license;
m. Any uncorrected violations of section 9-14-12, "Maintenance Standards", of this chapter;
n. Violations of section 9-14-13 of this chapter (code of conduct);
o. Uncorrected corrective orders from a compliance order; or
p. Other good cause.
2. Hearing: A hearing for consideration of denial, suspending or revoking a license will be conducted before the City Council or its
designee. At the hearing, the licensee has the right to be represented by counsel, the right to respond to the charges, the right
to present evidence through witnesses under oath and the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses under oath.
3. Notice:
a. Before holding the denial, suspension or revocation hearing regarding the license, the City must provide written notice
informing the licensee of the right to a hearing.
b. The notice must provide at least twenty (20) calendar days' notice of the time and place of the hearing and must state the
grounds for the action proposed to be taken.
c. The notice may be served upon the licensee personally or by leaving the notice at the licensed premises with the person in
charge, or by certified mail to the address on the license application or where the business activity is conducted.
4. Final Decision: Following the hearing, the City Council or its designee may take any of the following actions:
a. Take no action on the license;
b. Allow the licensed activity to continue but add reasonable conditions to the license;
c. Convert the license to a provisional license and approve a mitigation plan;
d. Suspend the license; or
e. Revoke the license.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 244/454
5. Findings: Any actions taken following a hearing shall be adopted by resolution with findings and shall be sent to or served upon
the licensee. If the license is suspended, the dates of suspension shall be fixed; if the license is revoked, the effective date of
the revocation shall be fixed. The decision by the City Council or its designee following a hearing is final.
C. Reapplication: Upon denial, revocation or nonrenewal of a license, the owner may not reapply for a license for a period of six (6)
months. Upon expiration of the six-month period, the applicant must re-apply for a new license.
D. Notification To Tenants: Upon suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of a license, the City will notify all affected tenants that the
license has been revoked, suspended or not renewed. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-16: NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDY:
Enforcement actions provided in this chapter are not exclusive, and the Council may take any action with respect to a licensee, a
tenant or the licensed premises as is authorized by this Code, State or Federal law. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-17: SUMMARY ACTION:
A. Emergency: The building official has the authority to summarily condemn or close individual rental dwelling units or areas of the
rental dwelling on the following basis:
1. When the conduct of any owner or owner's agent, representative, employee or lessee is detrimental to the public health,
sanitation, safety and general welfare of the community;
2. When the condition of the rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit is detrimental to the public health, sanitation, safety and
general welfare of the community;
3. When the property in or on which it is located, is in a condition such that it is detrimental to the public health, sanitation, safety
and general welfare of the community; or
4. When the behavior of the residents of the rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit constitutes a nuisance, fire hazard, or other
unsafe or dangerous condition.
B. Notice: Notice of summary action will be posted at the units or areas affected and will describe the units or areas affected. No
person shall remove the posted notice, other than the building official or a designated representative.
C. Appeal: Any person aggrieved by a decision or action of the building official to condemn all or part of a rental dwelling shall be
entitled to appeal to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Administrator. The City Administrator must schedule a
date for hearing before the Council and notify the aggrieved person of the date. The hearing will be conducted pursuant to section
9-14-15 of this chapter. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-18: POSTED TO PREVENT OCCUPANCY:
Whenever any rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit is found to be unfit for human habitation under the State Building Code, it shall
be posted by the building official or any other designated representative of the City, on the door of the rental dwelling or rental
dwelling unit, whichever the case may be, to prevent further occupancy. No person, other than the building official or the City
representative, shall remove or alter any posting. The building official or City representative will post the date the rental dwelling or
rental dwelling unit shall be vacated and no person shall reside in, occupy or cause to be occupied that rental dwelling or rental
dwelling unit until the building official, the City representative or Council permits it. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
9-14-19: NO WARRANTY BY CITY:
By enacting and undertaking to enforce this chapter, neither the City nor its Council, agents or employees warrant or guaranty the
safety, fitness or suitability of any rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit in the City. Owners and occupants should take appropriate
steps to protect their interests, health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 982, 6-21-2017)
Title 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 245/454
Chapter 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
10-1-1: PURPOSE:
A. The process of dividing land into homesites or separate parcels for other uses is an important factor in the growth of any
community. Few activities have a more lasting effect upon its transportation system, economy, appearance, environment and
potential land uses. Once land has been subdivided into urban lots and streets, and homes and other structures have been
constructed, the basic character of the addition to the community has become firmly established. It is then virtually impossible to
alter its basic character without substantial expense. In most subdivisions, roads and streets, water, sewers, storm sewers, park
trails and park land must be maintained and various public services provided. The welfare of the entire community is thereby
affected in many important respects. It is, therefore, to the interest of the general public, the developer and future owners that
subdivisions be conceived, designed and developed in accordance with sound rules and standards.
B. All subdivisions of land hereafter submitted for approval shall comply with the regulations set forth in this Title. It is the purpose of
these regulations to:
1. Protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare of existing and future residents and other uses of land near
the proposed subdivision by requiring properly designed lots and parcels and improved streets, park land, and access systems
and where appropriate, adequate sanitary sewer, storm sewer and public water service.
2. Encourage orderly, well-planned, attractive and safe subdivisions and development of land by establishing reasonable
standards for design and construction.
3. Preserve agricultural lands in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and any amendments thereto.
4. Secure the rights of the public with respect to acquisition of public lands and access to public waters.
5. Facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewage disposal, storm drainage, schools, parks, trails, playgrounds
and other public services and facilities, and to provide for equitable distribution of the costs for those facilities.
6. Provide erosion control measures for subdivisions that meet or exceed City standards.
7. Provide timely financial guarantees to ensure adequate construction or required improvements.
8. Provide a method of reimbursing City staff and consultants' time and materials cost as appropriate. (1971 Code § 23-1)
10-1-2: CONSISTENCY WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
No plat shall be approved that is inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the City or any element thereof, including the goals,
policies, text, land use plan, parks and open space, transportation, utilities staging program and the capital improvement program.
(1971 Code § 23-2)
10-1-3: SCOPE; CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
A. Scope Of Regulations: The rules and regulations contained in this Title governing any subdivision of land shall apply within the
community and to other land as permitted by State statutes. In the event of overlapping jurisdiction, the extent of jurisdiction shall
be determined and agreed upon between this community and the other municipalities concerned. Except in the case of
resubdivision, this Title shall not apply to any lot forming part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County records prior to
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Title1; nor is this Title intended to repeal, annul, impair or interfere with existing
provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed or in conflict with this Title, or with private restrictions
placed upon property by deed, covenant or private agreement or with restrictive covenants governing the land.
B. Conflicting Provisions: Where this Title imposes a greater restriction than existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed,
the provisions of this Title shall control. (1971 Code § 23-3)
10-1-4: COMPLIANCE PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT:
No building permit shall be issued for any construction, enlargement, alteration or repair, demolition or moving of any building or
structure on any lot or parcel until all the requirements of this Title have been fully met. (1971 Code § 23-4)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 246/454
10-1-5: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION; DEFINITIONS:
Words in the present tense include the past and future tenses; the singular includes the plural, the plural includes the singular; the
word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. In the event of conflicting provisions in the text of these regulations, the
more restrictive shall apply. For the purposes of this Title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them by this Section:
ALLEY: Any dedicated public right of way providing a minor secondary means of access to the side or rear of two (2) or more
properties.
ATTORNEY: The attorney employed by the community, unless otherwise stated.
BLOCKS: The enclosed area within the perimeter of roads, property lines or boundaries of a subdivision.
BOULEVARD: The portion of the public street right of way between the back curb line and the property line for uses such as snow
storage, sidewalk, utilities, street light and traffic or other signage and potential widening of roadways.
CITY: The City of Cottage Grove.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A subdivision development planned and constructed to group housing units into relatively tight patterns,
while providing a unified network of open space, and meeting the overall density regulations of this Title and Title 11 of this Code.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street which carries traffic from local streets to minor arterials or from collector street to collector street,
including the principal entrance streets of a residential development for circulation within such a development. Direct access may be
limited or restricted to a collector street. "Collector streets" are identified on the City's Comprehensive Plan.
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL STREET: A street designed for the primary purpose of serving industrial or commercial property which,
because of the nature and type of vehicular traffic, may require different standards of design or construction.
COMMUNITY: See definition of City.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A Comprehensive Plan prepared and adopted by the community, including a compilation of policy
statements, goals, text and maps indicating the general locations recommended for the various functional classes of land use,
transportation network, utility infrastructures, places and structures and for the general physical development of the community,
including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
CONTOUR MAP: A map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by lines connecting points of equal elevations; contour
interval being the vertical dimension between contour lines.
COPY: A print or reproduction made from a tracing or other reproducible medium.
CORNER LOT: A lot bordered on at least two (2) adjacent sides by streets or street rights of way.
COUNTY: Washington County, Minnesota.
COUNTY BOARD: The County Board of Commissioners.
CUL-DE-SAC: A local street with only one outlet and having a vehicular turnaround.
DEVELOPMENT: The building of structures and the installation of site improvements.
DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOTS: Lots which have a front line abutting on one street and a back or rear line abutting on another street.
DRAINAGECOURSE: A natural or human-made watercourse or indenture for the drainage of surface water.
EASEMENT: A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons other than the owner.
ENGINEER: The registered engineer employed by the community, unless otherwise stated.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A local street, parallel and adjacent to higher volume streets and highways, which provides access to abutting
properties and protection of through traffic.
GOVERNING BODY: The City Council.
HOLD DOWN ELEVATION: The elevation of preliminary site grading before building construction that causes earthwork balance with
below grade building excavations (basements and footings).
INTERMEDIATE ARTERIAL: Minnesota Trunk Highway 61/10.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 247/454
KEY MAP: A map drawn to comparatively small scale which shows the area proposed to be platted in relation to known geographical
features, such as City parks, the Mississippi River, wetlands and road systems.
LAND USE: Categories of how land is occupied or utilized either through the efforts of people or in a natural setting. Land uses are
generally referenced in broad categories such as residential, commercial or industrial, but can be reduced to specific categories i.e.,
single-family vs. townhouses or apartments.
LAND USES (INCOMPATIBLE): Characteristics of uses of land that may not be consistent or harmonious with one another due to
such items as height, bulk, noxious odors, noise, unsightliness, traffic generation, exterior storage or other nuisances inherent to one
land use but not to another.
LOCAL STREET: A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting properties and for local needs of a neighborhood.
LOT: A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separated from other parcels or portions by description, as on a
subdivision or record of survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease or separate use thereof. Public right of way and land under the
normal high water mark will not be included in computing the required minimum size of any parcel in the City.
METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION: A description of real property which is not described by reference to a lot or block on a plat,
but is described by starting at a known point and describing the bearings and distances of the lines forming the boundaries of the
property or delineating a fractional portion of a section, lot or area by described lines or portions thereof.
MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS: The guides, principles and specifications for the preparation of subdivision plans
indicating, among other things, the minimum and maximum dimensions of the various elements set forth in this Title.
MINOR ARTERIAL STREETS: Streets designated on the Comprehensive Plan and used primarily by faster moving traffic at heavy
volumes as traffic arteries for vehicular movement between and among neighborhoods and other large areas.
NATURAL WATERWAY: A natural passageway in the surface of the earth, so situated and having such a topographical nature that
the surface water flows through it from other areas before reaching a final ponding area. The term also includes all drainage
structures which have been constructed or placed for the purpose of conducting water from one place to another.
OWNER: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide such land under these regulations.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A public right of way across or within a block for pedestrians.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City.
PLAT: A map or drawing which graphically delineates the boundaries of land parcels for the purposes of identification and record of
title. The "plat" is a recorded legal document and must conform to all State laws.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: The map or drawing showing the layout of a proposed subdivision which will be legally described by lot and
block descriptions, with required supporting data.
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS: Contracts entered into between private parties, constituting a restriction on the use of private property
within a subdivision for the mutual benefit of the property owners, to provide protection against undesirable aspects of development
which may tend to impair the stability of values.
RESERVE STRIPS: A strip of land placed between lot lines and street to control access into public lands or leading to public facilities
or major destination points within the community.
RIGHT OF WAY: Land covered by a public road or dedicated for public use or for certain private use. The shortest distance between
two (2) right-of-way descriptions shall determine its width.
SKETCH PLAN: A drawing showing the proposed subdivision of property or adjacent property not necessarily drawn to scale, and
exact accuracy not being a requirement to illustrate feasibility of the street system or lotting pattern.
STREET (PRIVATE): A street, serving as vehicular access to two (2) or more parcels of land, which is not dedicated to the public but
is owned by one or more private parties.
STREET (PUBLIC): A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as street, collector highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court or otherwise which is dedicated to the public.
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right of way of a street.
SUBDIVIDER: The owner, agent or person having control of a subdivision, as the term is used in this Title.
SUBDIVISION: The division of an area, parcel or tract of land into two (2) or more parcels, tract lots, or long-term leasehold interests
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 248/454
where the creation of the leasehold interest necessitates the creation of streets, roads or alleys, for residential, commercial,
industrial, or other use or any combination thereof, except those divisions when a new street is being created by a governmental
agency which results in a division of a parcel of land. The term includes resubdivision and when appropriate to the context, shall
relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided or for adjustments in boundary lines except those separations:
A. Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots or interests will be twenty (20) acres or larger in size and five hundred feet (500') in
width for residential uses and five (5) acres or larger in size for commercial and industrial uses.
B. Creating cemetery lots.
C. Resulting from court orders.
SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered under State laws.
THOROUGHFARE: A street primarily designed to carry higher volumes of vehicular traffic than a collector street and providing for
vehicular movement between and among larger areas, designated in the Comprehensive Plan as "minor arterials" or "arterials".
TRACING: A plat or map drawn on transparent material which can be reproduced by using regular reproduction procedures.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The zoning ordinance or resolution controlling the use of land as adopted by the City and as set forth in Title
11 of this Code. (1971 Code § 23-7; amd. 2000 Code)
10-1-6: VARIANCES:
A. Application For Variance; Consideration: Applications for a variance shall be made in writing by the subdivider at the time when
the preliminary plat is filed for consideration. Such application shall state fully all facts relied upon by the subdivider as to the
applicant's opinion why each variance finding applies to the property in question. The applications shall be supplemented with
maps, plans or other additional data which aids City staff, the Planning Commission and City Council in the analysis of the
proposed project. Such variances shall be considered at the same time as the preliminary plat. Any variance or modification thus
considered shall be recorded and entered in the minutes of the governing body, setting forth the reasons for granting or denying
the variance.
B. Findings Of Fact: Upon receiving a report from the Planning Commission, the governing body may grant a variance in any
particular case where the subdivider can show that, by reason of exceptional topography or other physical conditions, strict
compliance to these regulations could infringe on the reasonable subdivision of the land. Such relief may be granted; provided,
there is no detriment to the public welfare and no impairment of the intended purpose of this Title and all of the following
applicable findings can be met:
1. There are unique circumstances or conditions affecting said property, such that the strict applications of the provisions of this
Title would infringe on the reasonable subdivision of the land.
2. The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner.
3. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the other property in the area in which
said property is situated and will not have an adverse effect upon traffic safety.
C. Considerations: In making this finding, the City Council shall consider: 1) the nature of the proposed use of the land and existing
use of the land in the vicinity; and 2) the probable effect of the proposed variance upon traffic conditions, public or private utilities,
or parks in the vicinity.
D. Conditions Of Variances: In granting variances as herein provided, the Council shall prescribe conditions that it deems necessary
to protect the public interest. In making a determination, the Council shall find that:
1. The proposed subdivision variance will promote the development of a more desirable project for the community.
2. The proposed subdivision variance will be in harmony with adjacent areas.
3. The proposed subdivision variance will not adversely affect the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan, text or
amendments thereto, or other ordinances of the City.
4. The proposed variance will not be contrary to the purpose and intent of this Title. (1971 Code § 23-5)
10-1-7: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any provision of this Title or who sells, leases or offers for sale or lease any lot, block or tract of land
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 249/454
regulated by this Title before all the requirements of the regulations of this Title have been complied with shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. (1971 Code § 23-6)
Chapter 2
PLATTING PROCEDURES
10-2-1: GENERAL PLATTING REQUIREMENTS:
A. When Platting Required: All divisions of property or boundary adjustments within the City shall be accomplished through the
platting process unless waived by Minnesota Statutes section 462.358. No conveyance of land by resulting parcels, tracts, lots or
interests, without City approval, shall be made or recorded unless the resulting parcels, tracts, lots or interests are twenty (20)
acres or larger in size and five hundred feet (500') in width in residential and agricultural districts, and five (5) acres or larger in
size for commercial and industrial districts, or unless such parcel was a separate parcel of record at the time of the effective date
of the ordinance codified in this Title, September 16, 19921.
B. Exemptions From Platting Requirements: The Council, with the advice of the Planning Commission, may waive the platting
requirement for a registered land survey in the following cases:
1. Rural Subdivision: The division of a single parcel of land into two (2) separate parcels. The newly created parcels shall meet all
requirements of this Title and be located in the R-1, R-2, AG-1 or AG-2 zoning districts.
2. Simple Lot Division:
a. A simple, easily described division or boundary adjustment of a previously platted lot and block of record may be exempted
from the full platting requirement, provided the resultant parcels meet all other requirements of this Title.
b. If a land division is exempted from the platting requirement, a registered land survey shall be filed and reviewed subject to
the same procedures as are required for the filing of preliminary plat for platting purposes. All registered land surveys shall
be prepared in conformance with Minnesota Statutes section 508.47, subdivision 4, which is incorporated herein by
reference. Prior to approval of registered land survey, the Council reserves the right to require the dedication of streets, utility
easements or public park land or cash in lieu of land to the City, and payment of utility area charges.
C. Conveyance By Metes And Bounds: When a conveyance by metes and bounds description is made of a parcel to which this Title
is not applicable, a survey shall be submitted to the City staff before any building permits will be issued for those parcels. A copy
of the survey shall be attached to the deed when it is submitted to the County Recorder of Deeds for recording. (1971 Code § 23-
8; amd. 2000 Code)
10-2-2: SKETCH PLAN PREAPPLICATION MEETING:
A. Meeting Encouraged: In order to ensure that all applicants are informed of the procedural requirements and standards of this Title
and the requirements or limitations imposed by other City ordinances and the Comprehensive Plan, all applicants are encouraged
to meet with the applicable City staff and consultants with a prepared sketch plan prior to preparing a preliminary plat.
B. Information Required: Fifteen (15) copies of the sketch plan shall be submitted and drawn to an engineering scale and contain as
a minimum the following information:
1. Tract boundaries and dimensions.
2. Significant topographic and physical features.
3. Proposed general street and lot layout.
4. General location of proposed public and private open space areas.
5. General drainage and erosion control plan.
6. Relationship of the proposal to neighborhood facilities, local street interconnection, and the like.
7. The city may require the subdivider to provide an areawide concept platting plan at the time of public hearing for all neighboring
properties for coordinated planning.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 250/454
C. Advice And Assistance From City Suggested: The subdividers are urged to avail themselves of the advice and assistance of the
city staff or city consultants in order to facilitate the approval of the preliminary plat. However, such advice should not be
construed to predict final action by the planning commission or city council. (1971 Code § 23-9)
10-2-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURES:
A. Preparation And Filing: An application for a preliminary plat shall conform to all of the requirements enumerated in section 10-2-7
of this chapter, accompanied by a completed subdivision application form or other application forms as may be required, and the
required filing fee and escrow amounts. At least fifteen (15) copies of the application shall be filed with the director of community
development. Exhibits shall be submitted with the application and conform to the requirements set forth in section 10-2-7 of this
chapter. An application will not be accepted until all of these requirements have been met. (1971 Code § 23-10; amd. 2000 Code)
B. Fees And Escrows:
1. At the time of submission of the preliminary plat, all fees and escrows as established by ordinance of the city council shall be
paid in cash to the finance director. Once the project is advertised for public hearing, this application fee is nonrefundable.
Unused escrow amounts shall be refunded upon written request of the subdivider. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
2. Where the city staff or consultants incur costs in excess of the fee or escrow submitted, the applicant shall be required to
reimburse the city for the incurred costs. Such reimbursement shall be made prior to signing of the final plat by the mayor and
city clerk. Reimbursable costs shall include charges incurred for written recommendations, printing, mailing, reproduction and
graphic illustration, as well as professional charges for engineering, land surveying, planning, architectural, legal and other
services related to the application.
C. Referrals And Comments:
1. Upon receipt of a complete application for a preliminary plat, the director of community development shall refer copies of the
plat map to the following individuals or bodies:
a. The city engineer;
b. School District 833;
c. The Minnesota department of transportation district engineer, if the proposed subdivision includes land abutting an
established or proposed trunk highway;
d. The county engineer, if the proposed subdivision includes land abutting a county or county state aid highway;
e. The state commissioner of natural resources, if the proposed subdivision adjoins a public body of water;
f. The applicable watershed management district board, and soil and water conservation district, if applicable;
g. All applicable utility companies;
h. The city's historical preservation officer; and
i. Other city personnel, at the discretion of the director of community development.
2. If appropriate, individuals or bodies to which the preliminary plat has been referred may submit their written comments to the
director of community development one week prior to the public hearing. If no report is received within this time period, it may
be assumed that there are no objections to the subdivision as submitted.
D. Hearing By Planning Commission:
1. Time For Hearing: Within forty five (45) days after the completed application is filed, the planning commission shall hold a
public hearing on the preliminary plat.
2. Notice Of Hearing:
a. Notice of the purpose, time and place of the public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days
prior to the day of the hearing.
b. All property owners within five hundred feet (500') of the proposed subdivision shall be notified of the public hearing by mail,
in writing. Failure of the Planning Commission to mail the notice or failure of the property owners to receive the notice shall
not invalidate the proceedings.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 251/454
3. Appearances And Presentations: The subdivider or his/her representatives shall appear before the Planning Commission to
answer questions concerning the plan. All persons interested shall be given an opportunity to make presentations.
4. Facts Considered: The Planning Commission shall study the practicality of the preliminary plat, taking into consideration the
requirements of the City. The Planning Commission shall study and shall make recommendations on, and the City Council shall
consider, the following:
a. The arrangement, location, and width of streets, their relation to the topography of the land, flood plain regulations, water
supply, sewage disposal, surface drainage and lot sizes and arrangement.
b. The present and future development of and access to adjoining lands.
c. The requirements of this Title and the Zoning Ordinance.
d. Whether the proposed subdivision is consistent with applicable specific area plans or the Comprehensive Plan.
e. Whether the design is consistent with applicable development plans or policies and regulations.
f. Whether the physical characteristics of the site, including, but not limited to, topography, vegetation, susceptibility to erosion,
flooding and water storage or retention and flood plain regulations, are suitable for this type and/or density of development or
use contemplated.
g. The environmental impact of the subdivision design or proposed improvements.
h. Whether the design of the subdivision or the type of improvement is consistent with easements of record.
i. Traffic considerations.
j. Any other aspect affecting the public health, safety or welfare.
5. Conditions Imposed: Reasonable conditions may be imposed on the plat approval to negate any problem areas.
E. Report To City Council: The report of the Planning Commission shall be submitted to the governing body not later than sixty (60)
days after the public hearing. If the Planning Commission fails to make a report, the governing body may proceed without such
report. Failure to receive a report from the Planning Commission shall not invalidate the proceedings or actions of the governing
body.
F. Action By City Council:
1. The City Council shall approve or deny the preliminary plat in whole or in part, within one hundred twenty (120) days of receipt
of the preliminary plat, unless an extension of the review period has been agreed to in writing by the applicant or required by
Minnesota Statutes or other administrative procedures. If the governing body fails to act within the review period, the
application shall be deemed to be preliminarily approved.
2. Approval of a preliminary plat shall be approved in the form of a resolution by majority vote of the entire governing body. The
governing body may require modifications, changes and revisions, or add conditions to the plan as it deems necessary to carry
out the purpose and intent of this Title, the Zoning Ordinance or the Comprehensive Plan. Approval of the plan is an
acceptance of the general layout and authorizes the subdivider to complete the steps necessary for final plat approval in
accordance with the terms of preliminary approval. Such preliminary approval does not constitute final acceptance of the
subdivision.
3. If the governing body denies approval of the preliminary plat, the reasons for such action shall be recorded and transmitted to
the applicant unless otherwise stated in the resolution approving the preliminary plat. Said preliminary approval shall be for one
year from the date of preliminary plat approval by the governing body unless otherwise stated in the resolutions approving the
preliminary or final plats where development of the project is in phases. (1971 Code § 23-10; amd. 2000 Code)
G. Qualifications Governing Approval Of Preliminary Plat:
1. The approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council shall only constitute acceptance of the design as a basis for the
preparation of the final plat by the owners or subdividers. Subsequent approval by appropriate officials having jurisdiction will
be required of proposals pertaining to water supplies, storm drainage, sewage disposal, sidewalks, grading, gradients and
roadway widths, and the surfacing of streets, flooding issues, restrictive covenants and similar items, prior to the approval of
the final plat by the City. Organizations with appropriate review and approval authority may include, but are not limited to:
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, U.S. Department of the Interior, Federal
Emergency Management Agency, Minnesota Environmental Quality Board and the Metropolitan Council, and the appropriate
watershed management organization.
2. No plan will be approved for a subdivision which includes any area subject to periodic flooding or which contains extremely
poor drainage facilities which would make adequate drainage of the streets and lots impossible. The subdivider must agree to
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 252/454
make improvements which will, in the opinion of the Building Official, Public Works Director and City Engineer or other
approving agencies, make the area completely safe for occupancy while providing adequate street and lot drainage. These
improvements shall not be in conflict with the City's flood plain regulations. (1971 Code § 23-14A; amd. 2000 Code)
H. Amendments To Approved Preliminary Plat: Should the applicant desire to amend an approved preliminary plat, an amended plan
shall be reviewed in the same manner as a new preliminary plat, except for the public hearing and fee. If an increase in lots is
proposed or, in the opinion of the Director of Community Development, the amendment is of such scope as to constitute a new
plat, a complete application shall be refiled and fees repaid.
I. Time Extensions: At least forty five (45) days prior to the expiration of the preliminary plat approval, the subdivider may request a
one year time extension. The request shall be reviewed by the City staff and a recommendation forwarded to the City Council
addressing such items as potential conflicts with the Comprehensive Plan or specific area plans; proposed conflicts with policy
changes; changing transportation conditions, sidewalk policies, or applicable changes to any City ordinances. (1971 Code § 23-
10)
10-2-4: ACCELERATED PREPARATION OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Request For Initiation Of Plans And Specifications: After the City has approved the preliminary plat, the subdivider may request
the City to initiate the preparation of plans and specifications for street, utility, park, etc., improvements before the subdivision
agreement and final plat are approved by the City. In doing so, the subdivider shall make such a request in writing, and attach
four (4) copies of the proposed grading plan and final plat, to the City.
B. Conditions Of Accelerating Preparation: The City's consideration in accelerating the preparation of plans and specifications for the
public improvements will depend on the workload of other projects that already have City approval. If it is determined that the City
can accommodate this work, the City may authorize the Engineer to commence work on the plat; provided, that the subdivider
deposits cash with the City to pay costs incurred for consulting engineering and legal services. In the event the consulting
services exceed the deposited amount, the City shall have the option of requiring an additional cash deposit or may invoice the
subdivider for said services. Payment shall be made by the subdivider within thirty (30) days of the date of the invoice from the
City. If the subdivider proceeds forward with the development, the deposited amount shall be credited toward the cash deposit
required under the terms of the City's subdivision agreement. If the development of the plat is abandoned, and the City fees for
consulting services are less than the deposited amount, the City shall refund with interest the difference between the deposited
amount and the actual cost incurred for consulting services and administrative charges. The amount required to be deposited will
be determined by the City and will be based on scope and size of the project. (1971 Code § 23-10A)
10-2-5: FINAL PLAT PROCEDURES:
A. Preparation And Filing: A final plat and application for approval shall conform to all of the requirements enumerated in section 10-
2-8 of this chapter. Fifteen (15) copies of the plat and application shall be submitted, along with the required filing fee and escrow.
The subdivider shall also submit, at the same time, an up to date certified abstract of title or registered property abstract or title
insurance policy or commitment and such other evidence as the city attorney may require showing title or control of the land by
the subdivider. A final plat application will not be accepted until all of these requirements have been met. (1971 Code § 23-11)
B. Application Fee And Escrows: The subdivider shall pay an application fee and an escrow in an amount established from time to
time by city council ordinance. For the consideration of the final plat, the escrow fee shall provide for payment of reimbursable
costs incurred by the city related to the application. "Reimbursable costs" shall include charges for printing, mailing, reproduction,
and graphic illustration, as well as professional charges for engineering, land surveying, planning, architectural, legal and other
related reports and services. Where the city incurs reimbursable costs in excess of the escrow, the applicant shall be required to
reimburse the city for said costs. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
C. Inconsistency Of Final Plat: The subdivider shall incorporate all changes or modifications required by the preliminary plat
approval, but in all other respects, the final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat. If a report from the director of community
development indicates there is a substantial deviation in the final plat from the approved preliminary plat, the city council may
determine if the submission shall represent a new plat. If the submission does represent a new plat, the city council shall deny the
final plat and direct the subdivider to resubmit the proposal following preliminary plat requirements.
D. Referrals And Comments: Upon receipt of the complete application for final plat approval, the director of community development
shall refer one copy of the plat map to the school district, the city engineer, applicable utility companies and the finance director,
who shall submit their comments and recommendations to the director of community development one week prior to the
applicable city council meeting.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 253/454
E. Action By City Council: The governing body shall take action on the final plat within sixty (60) days after receipt of the complete
application. The plat shall be approved by a resolution of the governing body. If the plat is not approved, the reasons for such
action shall be recorded in the official proceedings and transmitted to the subdivider. If the governing body fails to act within sixty
(60) days, and if the applicant has complied with all conditions and requirements of applicable regulations and all conditions and
requirements upon which preliminary plat approval was expressly conditioned, the application shall be deemed finally approved.
F. Signing And Recordation:
1. The city council shall, by resolution, authorize a member of the governing body and city clerk to sign the final plat.
2. After approval of the final plat, the applicant shall submit the plat to the county surveyor, the designated member of the
governing body and city clerk may sign the plat, and the subdivider shall then record it with the county recorder of deeds or
register of titles.
3. The subdivider shall, immediately upon recording, furnish the community development director with a reproducible copy, either
cronaflex or its equivalent, of the recorded plat and four (4) prints. Failure to furnish such copies will be grounds for refusal to
issue building permits for lots within the plat.
G. Subdivisions Developed In Stages: In subdivisions to be developed in stages, the subdivider may be granted permission to
prepare a final plat for only a portion of the approved plan; provided, that such portion conforms with all the requirements of these
regulations. The subdivider may be required, as a condition of approval, to submit an estimated time schedule for completion of
the platting and recording of the future phases of the subdivision. Each phase shall be considered a separate final plat. (1971
Code § 23-11)
10-2-6: EFFECT OF SUBDIVISION APPROVAL:
A. For one year following preliminary approval and for two (2) years following final approval, unless the subdivider and the council
agree otherwise, no amendment to the use, development, density, lot size, lot layout or dedication or platting required or
permitted by the approved application shall be allowed. Thereafter, the Council may extend the period by agreement with the
subdivider, subject to all applicable performance conditions and requirements; or the Council may require submission of a new
application unless substantial physical activity and investment has occurred in reasonable reliance on the approved application,
and the subdivider will suffer substantial financial damage as a consequence of a requirement to submit a new application.
B. In connection with a subdivision involving planned and staged development, the governing body may by resolution grant the rights
referred to herein for such periods of time longer than two (2) years which is determined to be reasonable and appropriate.
Failure of the subdivider to submit the final plat or the time extension request within the time lines set forth in this Title or
resolution related to the project shall cause said final plat to be as modified by City Council resolutions to become null and void.
(1971 Code § 23-13)
10-2-7: CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION:
An application for preliminary plat approval shall contain the following data. Individual items may be waived only with the approval of
the Director of Community Development:
A. Identification And Description:
1. Proposed subdivision name, which name shall not duplicate, in spelling or pronunciation, the name of any plat theretofore
recorded in the County.
2. Legal description of property.
3. Names and addresses of the record owner, any agent having control of the land, the subdivider, the land surveyor, the
engineer and the designer of the plan and their phone numbers.
4. Graphic scale not less than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100').
5. North point and key map of area showing well-known geographical points for orientation within a one-half (1/2) mile radius.
6. Date of preparation.
7. Drawing size shall be a maximum of thirty inches by forty inches (30" x 40"). The applicant shall also supply the City with a
reduction transparency of the drawing to a size no larger than eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17"), if the original
drawing is larger than the maximum size. A one to eight hundred (1:800) scale shall also be submitted.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 254/454
8. A certified list of all property owners within five hundred feet (500') of all boundaries of the affected properties shall be
purchased from the County Surveyor's office or from a title company.
B. Existing Conditions:
1. Boundary lines shall be shown clearly and to such a degree of accuracy that no major changes are necessary in preparing the
final plat, including measured distances and angles.
2. Existing zoning classification of site and adjacent properties.
3. Total acreage.
4. Locations, right-of-way widths and names of existing or platted streets or other public ways, parks and public lands, permanent
buildings and structures, vegetation masses, easements and section lines, corporate and School District lines within the plat
and to a distance one hundred fifty feet (150') beyond.
5. Locations and sizes of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, permanent buildings and structures or other underground
facilities within the plat area and to a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') beyond. Such data as grades and locations of
catch basins, manholes with tentative invert elevations, hydrants and cross-section street pavement width and type shall also
be shown.
6. Boundary lines of adjoining land, within one hundred fifty feet (150'), identified by name and ownership, including all contiguous
land owned or controlled by the subdivider.
7. Existing and proposed grades at two foot (2') contour intervals. For topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals of
not more than two feet (2'); except, that where the horizontal contour interval is one hundred feet (100') or more, a one foot (1')
vertical interval shall be shown. Watercourses, marshes, wooded areas, rock outcrops, power transmission poles and lines,
pipelines and other significant features shall also be shown. USGS datum may be used for all topographic mapping.
8. Lowland, water areas, flood plain, floodway and flood fringe limits, if applicable.
9. Percolation tests and soil borings are required if the area being subdivided does not have a City sanitary sewer available to it.
At least one boring and one percolation test for each lot shall be performed. A map showing the locations of the tests shall be
submitted with the test results.
10. If severe soil limitations for the intended use are noted in the soils handbook on file in the County Soil and Water
Conservation District office, a plan or statement indicating the soil conservation practice or practices to be used to overcome
such limitation shall be made part of the permit applications.
11. If the proposed subdivision is a rearrangement or replat of any former plat, the lot and block arrangement of the original plat
along with its original name shall be indicated by dotted or dash lines. Also, any roadway of the original plat to be revised or
proposed to be vacated shall be so indicated.
12. Property identification numbers for underlying properties.
13. Amount of pending or levied special assessments.
14. City sewer, water and storm sewer area charges that have been or will be levied against the property should be provided.
(These charges should be researched well in advance of the application.)
C. Design Features:
1. Layout of proposed streets, showing right-of-way widths and proposed names of streets. The name of any street shall conform
to the County street naming and property numbering system2, as applicable.
2. Locations and widths of proposed alleys, pedestrianways, hard- and soft-surfaced trails, bikeways and utility easements.
3. Layout numbers and preliminary dimensions of lots and blocks, including the area in square feet of each lot.
4. Proposed front, side, and rear building setback lines as required in the zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is
located.
5. Proposed gradients of streets, sewer lines and sewer mains, if requested.
6. Areas, other than streets, alleys, pedestrianways, trails, bikeways, and utility easements, intended to be dedicated or reserved
for public use, including the size of each area.
7. A complete preliminary grading and development plan, showing grades and elevations at two foot (2') contour intervals of all
streets and lots, structure pads (with elevations) and surface drainage routes for the entire subdivision. Sewer line and water
main location, size and gradient may also be required at this time.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 255/454
8. A legend identifying what type of home can be constructed on each lot, i.e., walkout (wo), rambler (r), split foyer (sf), etc., with
building pad elevations.
D. Additional Information:
1. Statement of the proposed use of lots, stating type of residential buildings with number of proposed dwellings with type of
business or industry so as to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards and population densities.
2. Source of water supply.
3. Provisions for sewage disposal, surface water drainage and flood control within the flood plain districts shall contain a building
site one foot (1') above the regulatory flood protection elevation. Floodway and flood fringe boundaries, the regulatory flood
protection elevations and the required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawing
and platting documents.
4. If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan, including dimensions. Separate zoning applications are
required to be processed.
5. Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that which is being proposed for subdivision, the director of community
development may require the subdivider to submit a sketch plan of the remainder of the property to show the possible
relationships between the proposed subdivision and the future subdivision. All subdivisions must be shown to relate well with
existing or potential adjacent subdivisions and land use.
6. A statement of the zoning and development status of land parcels adjacent to the proposed plat. (1971 Code § 23-14; amd.
2000 Code)
7. A copy of all proposed private restrictions, covenants, and homeowners' association documents. The city has no authority or
obligation to enforce said documents. The private covenants must include the following:
a. The homeowners' association is responsible for all ownership and maintenance of common land area landscaping
improvements, common fencing, and out lots as depicted on the final plat. If the out lot is forfeited for nonpayment of property
taxes and the city obtains ownership, the city will bill annually each landowner within the subdivision a proportionate cost to
maintain these areas.
b. Entrance monument areas, including signs, must be maintained by the homeowners' association.
c. No barrier or planting should encroach upon or over any public walkway system. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
8. Where lots are platted in excess of twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet or one hundred sixty feet (160') in width at the
building setback line, a preliminary resubdivision plan may be required, showing a potential and feasible way in which the lot or
lots may be resubdivided in future years for more intensive use of the land and the placement of buildings or structures upon
such lots.
9. Certification by a registered land surveyor to the effect that the property preliminary plat was properly prepared and that
monuments and markers shown thereon exist and that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct where such certification
is required by the city.
10. Certification showing that all taxes and special assessments currently due on the property to be subdivided have been paid in
full.
11. An environmental assessment worksheet (EAW) prepared in a form approved by the director of community development, if
required by section 10-4-2 of this title and section 11-2-5 of this code.
12. Indicate whether said land is registered as torrens or as abstract property.
13. Indicate other information as requested by the department of community development or department of public works such as
sidewalks, walkways, bikeways, berming or landscaping, with a schedule of plantings or anticipated ground level building
elevation(s).
14. All plats within the designated Mississippi River critical area as defined by executive order no. 130 of the critical area act of
1973, Minnesota statutes chapter 116G, shall indicate setbacks and other items listed in the zoning ordinance.
15. A landscaping plan as requested by the director of community development to accomplish an incompatible land use
transition, improved erosion control, noise abatement or to improve the living environment.
16. An erosion and sedimentation control plan.
17. Calculate and graphically describe the amounts and location of cut and fill determined in cubic yards. Length of storage and
prevention measures for wind and water erosion shall also be indicated.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 256/454
18. Cross sectional profiles matching the scale of drawings and contour elevations showing elevations of proposed buildings and
existing structures. The number and location of the profiles and structures shall be determined by the director of community
development. (1971 Code § 23-14; amd. 2000 Code)
19. Other information as may be requested by the director of community development, city engineer, planning commission or city
council. (Ord. 648, 7-16-1997)
10-2-8: CONTENTS OF FINAL PLAT APPLICATION:
A complete application for final plat approval shall be submitted to the city with applicable fees and escrows and shall include the
following:
A. The plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered in the state and shall comply with state statutes, county requirements,
and the regulations of this title. It shall incorporate all required changes, modifications and revisions required as a condition of
preliminary plat approval. Otherwise, it shall conform to the approved preliminary plat. Unless not acceptable to the county
recorder, the plat shall contain the following information as applicable:
1. Accurate angular and linear dimensions for all lines, angles, and curvatures used to describe boundaries, streets, alleys,
easements, and areas to be reserved for public use. Dimensions of lot lines shall be shown in feet and hundredths; no ditto
marks will be permitted. When lot lines are not at right angles to the street right of way line, the width of the lot shall be
indicated.
2. A numbered identification system for all lots and blocks.
3. A boundary line survey including the measured distances and angles and the true distance and bearing between a known point
on the boundary and the nearest official monument which shall be accurately described on the plat.
4. City, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
5. Radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings and lengths of all acres.
6. Name and location of the subdivision.
7. Accurate location of all monuments.
8. Graphic scale and north arrow.
9. Names of all streets.
10. Location of water bodies.
11. If the subdivision is a replatting or rearrangement of a legal subdivision, the original platting shall be shown by dotted lines.
B. Easements or deeds as may be required by the city for ponding areas, park land dedication or trails, utilities or other similar public
purposes.
C. Cash, letter of credit or similar guarantees pursuant to section 10-3-4 of this title to the city related to performance and/or for
installation of all required public improvements shall be provided by the applicant. These performance guarantees outlined in this
title or by city council resolution shall be presented to the director of community development and approved by the city attorney
prior to the final plat being released for recording.
D. A subdivision agreement in conformance with section 10-3-3 of this title shall be prepared by the city attorney, for consideration by
the city council.
E. Copies of all proposed deed restrictions, restrictive covenants, articles of incorporation of homeowners' associations and any
other similar documents related to the subdivision.
F. A map showing the proposed street naming and lot addressing, conforming to the city's system3, which has been approved by the
director of public safety and the director of community development.
G. Any other information required by appropriate agencies or by the city council as a condition of the preliminary plat approval.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 257/454
H. A letter, certified by an engineer or surveyor, attesting to lot square footage.
I. A one to five hundred (1:500) scale, a one to eight hundred (1:800) scale, and a one to two hundred (1:200) scale Mylar of each
final plat shall be submitted to the director of community development prior to signing of the final plat for recording.
J. Certifications by attached information showing that all taxes and special assessments currently due on the property to be
subdivided have been paid in full.
K. The subdivider shall, immediately upon recording, furnish the city with a tracing or Mylar and four (4) prints of the final plat
showing evidence of the recording, prior to issuance of any building permits.
L. The form for approval by signature of county and city officials concerned with the recording of the plat is on file in the office of the
city clerk. (1971 Code § 23-15; amd. 2000 Code)
Footnote 1: This Title is derived from Ordinance 577.
Footnote 2: See Section 7-1-1 of this Code.
Footnote 3: See section 7-1-1 of this code.
Chapter 3
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS; DOCUMENTATION
10-3-1: GENERAL OVERVIEW:
Minnesota statutes section 462.358, subdivision 2A, authorizes the city to condition approval of the subdivision of property on the
construction and installation of certain utilities. The intent of this chapter is to specifically set out the required improvements which
promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare. The city reserves the right to require additional improvements if
deemed necessary by circumstances and conditions unique to these particular lands. No subdivision of land is allowed unless storm
sewer, sanitary sewer, a municipal water supply, streets and other public improvements are constructed to serve the area being
divided unless some other ordinance or statute specifically authorizes said division. (Ord. 918, 9-18-2013)
10-3-2: PAYMENT FOR FACILITIES BENEFITING ENTIRE COMMUNITY:
A. If the cost of an improvement would, by general policy, be assessed only in part to the improved property and the remaining cost
paid out of general tax levy, provision may be made for the payment of a portion of the cost of the improvement, representing the
benefit to such lands, to be assessed against such lands. In such a situation, the subdivider will be required to pay for only such
portion of the whole cost of such improvement as will represent the benefit to the property within the subdivision.
B. Where existing trunk facilities provide the subdivision with a lateral benefit, an amount equal to the estimated current value of the
lateral benefit, as determined by the city engineer, shall be paid to the city. (1971 Code § 23-17)
10-3-3: SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT:
A. Contents Of Agreement: The city shall enter into a contract, known as a subdivision agreement, with the subdivider/developer.
The agreement shall provide for the completion of the improvements required by this title. Prior to the subdivider or city initiating
the improvements, the final plat and resolution shall be recorded, the subdivision agreement and petition under Minnesota
statutes chapter 429 shall be signed, all cash deposits paid, the financial guarantees shall be posted and approved by the city
attorney, and land required to be dedicated is conveyed to the city. Until completion of the foregoing, only rough grading or other
minor forms of construction can begin.
B. Public Improvements:
1. The agreement shall require the subdivider/developer to furnish and construct at the sole expense of the subdivider and at no
expense to the city all the public improvements in accordance with the plans and specifications prepared by the city engineer or
require the subdivider/developer to petition the city to furnish and construct improvements in accordance with the plans and
specifications prepared by the city engineer. The city engineer shall prepare preliminary cost estimates for the public
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 258/454
improvements, together with the costs for engineering, legal, fiscal and administrative costs related to the project, which shall
be incorporated into the subdivision agreement.
2. The completion date for the public improvements shall be reasonable, considering the work to be done, the season of the year
and proper correlation of the improvements with construction activities in the subdivision and other projects which are included
within the city improvement contract(s).
3. No subdivider who has previously defaulted on work or commitments on the phases of the original preliminary plat or other
projects in the city less than five (5) years old shall be permitted to start work on any other subdivision until the defaults are
remedied.
4. The subdivision agreement shall contain provisions for park dedication as required in section 10-4-3 of this title.
C. Boulevard And Yard Improvements:
1. The subdivider/developer shall be required to assure the performance and/or installation of the following:
a. Rough grading of all public rights of way.
b. Grading and seeding of vacant lots.
c. Cutting of grass and weeds, in excess of eight inches (8") in height1, on vacant lots.
d. Street sweeping and cleaning of storm sewers and holding ponds.
e. Installation and maintenance of erosion control devices.
f. Boulevard sod, boulevard trees, and yard sod.
g. Replacement of trees removed from the right of way.
h. Monument replacement.
i. Surveyor's certification of individual lot grading compliance.
j. Drainage and erosion control plan compliance.
k. Final grading of each lot in subdivisions in compliance with the approved plan.
l. Driveways compliant with section 11-3-9, "Off Street Parking And Loading", requirements of this code.
2. The subdivider shall not transfer or assign its obligations to install and pay for boulevard trees, sod and hard surface driveways
to the home builder or purchaser of any lot.
D. Private Utilities:
1. New Lines To Be Underground: All electrical distribution systems (excluding main line feeders and high voltage distribution
lines), telephone service lines, gas lines, telecommunications lines, cable lines and services constructed within the confines of
and providing service to customers in a newly platted area, shall be buried underground; unless the city council, by resolution,
determines that:
a. Such requirement would result in unnecessary duplication of facilities where the property to be served abuts an existing
development already served by overhead facilities; or
b. That based upon engineering considerations, underground installation of such facilities is not feasible in a particular plat or
portion thereof; or
c. That the size of the subdivision is too small to justify the underground installation of such facilities. (Ord. 918, 9-18-2013)
10-3-4: FINANCIAL GUARANTEES:
10-3-4-1: SUBDIVIDER PETITIONED PROJECTS:
A. Financial Guarantees Required Generally: The subdivider shall be required to post financial guarantees to ensure completion of
all improvements required by this title, the preliminary and final plat resolutions, and the subdivision agreement. The financial
guarantees shall be in the form of cash deposit, irrevocable letter of credit, or other form of financial security found to be
acceptable by the city.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 259/454
B. Public Improvements: One hundred percent (100%) of improvements including, but not limited to, street lighting, sanitary sewer,
water, storm sewer, curb and gutter, street grading and street bituminous surfacing, shall be assessed against properties in the
subdivision. The developer shall provide the city with a letter of credit in an amount of forty percent (40%) of the estimated cost of
the improvements, which letter of credit shall guarantee payment to the city of the assessments.
C. Boulevard And Yard Improvements:
1. The subdivider shall be required to post financial guarantees in the amount of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the
estimated costs to assure completion of the items listed in subsection 10-3-3C1 of this chapter. The financial guarantees shall
be subject to approval by the city attorney before acceptance by the city. The subdivider shall deposit with the city, from a bank
or other reputable and financially sound institution subject to the approval of the finance director, a letter of credit guaranteeing
performance and completion of improvements/work required by the subdivision agreement.
2. If there is noncompliance with the requirements of this title, at any time, the city administrator can direct the performance of any
work required of the subdivider. Specifically, if on site improvements have not been installed or structures occupied for forty five
(45) days or longer, the city administrator shall direct an inventory for noncompliance on June 15 and September 15 of each
year and may direct the performance of any work heretofore required of the subdivider. The cost of the city's performance of
any such work, including labor, equipment and material, shall be paid from the posted financial guarantees. (Ord. 918, 9-18-
2013)
10-3-4-2: SUBDIVIDER FINANCED AND CONSTRUCTED PROJECTS:
A. Financial Securities: The development contract provided by section 10-3-3 of this chapter must require the subdivider to provide
financial securities to the city by a cash deposit, irrevocable letter of credit, or other form of financial security found to be
acceptable to the city as follows:
1. Public Improvement Financial Security:
a. A financial security must be provided to the city in a sum equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the total cost of
the improvements as estimated by the city engineer. Of the total amount, twelve percent (12%) or two thousand dollars
($2,000.00), whichever is the greater, must be posted as a nonrefundable cash deposit. The financial security and the cash
deposit must be filed with the city prior to release of the final plat for recording. If the financial security is a letter of credit, it
must contain a provision that prohibits the issuer or surety from terminating the letter of credit without first giving forty five
(45) days' written notice to the city of the proposed termination or expiration. Failure of the developer to post a substitute
security within five (5) days after notice by the city shall constitute a default that shall be grounds for drawing on the letter of
credit. The city council may grant a reduction in the financial security upon written request by the developer based upon the
value of the completed work at the time of the requested reduction. The financial security may not be reduced to less than
twenty percent (20%) of the original amount until all work required of the developer by this agreement has been completed
and accepted by the city. Upon failure of the developer to perform, the city may declare the agreement to be in default and
the amount of the financial security shall be paid over to the city. From the proceeds of the financial security, the city shall be
reimbursed for any attorney fees, engineering fees or other technical or professional assistance, including the work of the city
staff and employees, and the remainder thereof shall be used by the city to complete the work. The developer shall be liable
to the city to the extent that the financial security is inadequate to reimburse the city its costs and pay for the completion of
the work.
b. Items covered by these guarantees must include, but not be limited to, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
bituminous streets with concrete curb and gutter, streetlights, trails, sidewalks, and park features. These financial guarantees
are for all of the improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider, pursuant to the development contract, and
which have not been completed prior to filing of the final plat.
c. The city is entitled to require reimbursement for additional expenses if the engineering, inspection, testing, legal, or
administration exceeds the twelve percent (12%) cash deposit or require an additional cash deposit be made in order to
cover these expenses.
2. Site Grading, Erosion Control, And Landscaping Financial Security:
a. A financial security must be provided by the subdivider to the city in a sum equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the
amounts established for on site improvements by the department of community development. This financial security must be
automatically renewed and shall not expire until released by the city. This security must be filed with the city prior to release
of the final plat for recording.
b. Items covered by this security must include, but not be limited to, landscaping as required by resolution, mailboxes, utility
repair, adjustment, site grading, erosion control, boulevard trees, landscaping, irrigation, and lot grading, as well as costs for
any entryway sign. These financial guarantees are for all of the improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider,
pursuant to the development contract, and which have not been completed prior to filing of the final plat.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 260/454
c. The city is entitled to seek reimbursement from the financial security for any cost and expense incurred by the city for
completion of the work in case of default by the subdivider. Upon completion of the work and termination of any liabilities to
the city by the subdivider under the contract, the balance remaining of the financial security must be refunded to the
subdivider.
B. Engineering/Administrative Cash Deposit:
1. In addition to the above required financial securities, the developer must pay to the city an engineering/administrative cash
deposit in the amount of twelve percent (12%) of the one hundred twenty five percent (125%) construction cost for the public
improvements.
2. The city may use the cash deposit to reimburse itself for costs of city services, expenses, and materials provided in reviewing
and processing of the final plat including, but not limited to, staff time, legal expenses incurred in plat approval, office and field
checking, office and field grade verification, erosion control inspection, establishing elevations, and drainage requirements,
general supervision, staking, inspection, purchase and installation of street identification and traffic control signs, drafting as
built drawings, and all other city staff services performed in the processing of the improvements and plats, and administrative
and legal expenses in examining title to the property being developed.
3. If the amount of the deposit is sufficient to reimburse the city for its costs under this subsection, the balance of the deposit shall
be returned to developer without interest. If it appears that the actual costs incurred will exceed the amount of the deposit, the
developer and the city shall review the costs required to complete the project and the developer may be required to deposit
additional sums with the city.
4. If all, or a part, of a development has been completed, inspected and accepted, financial securities for that portion accepted by
the city, may be reduced by the city council and full or partial payment be returned to the subdivider (with the exception of the
nonrefundable public improvement cash deposit required by subsection A1a of this section). Any balance remaining in the
account upon completion of all platting conditions must be returned to the depositor by the finance department after all claims
and charges thereto have been paid and after approval by city council (with the exception of the nonrefundable public
improvement cash deposit required by subsection A1a of this section). (Ord. 918, 9-18-2013)
10-3-5: INSPECTIONS AND ACCEPTANCE:
A. Inspections: The city engineer shall regularly inspect for defects in the construction of required improvements on public lands or
easements and shall require the subdivider/developer to conform with the approved plans for the subdivision.
B. Statement To Engineer: Upon completion of grading or construction improvements, the subdivider shall file with the city engineer a
statement stipulating the following:
1. That all required grading or construction improvements are complete and in compliance with the standards specified;
2. That the subdivider knows of no defects or deviations from any cause in those improvements; and
3. That the grading or construction improvements are free and clear of any encumbrance or liens.
C. Acceptance Of Improvements: If the engineer has certified that the aforementioned improvements are complete and free from
defect, and upon receipt of other statements and agreements listed above, the governing body shall accept the construction of
those improvements. The governing body may, at its discretion, accept the construction of any portion of the required
improvements; provided, that all statements and agreements specified have been received for that portion of the improvements.
(1971 Code § 23-20)
10-3-6: REDUCTION OF IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES:
A. Public Improvements: After assessments for the public improvements have been paid in full on sixty percent (60%) of the lots
within the subdivision for which the letter of credit is posted, the letter of credit may be reduced as assessments are paid on the
remaining lots. Reduction shall be made two (2) times per year on February 15 and June 15 upon the request of the developer.
B. Other Improvements: Except for the financial guarantees posted to guarantee payment of the assessments provided for in section
10-3-4 of this chapter, the amount of the financial guarantees may be reduced upon completion of a portion of the improvements
required by section 10-3-3 of this chapter. The financial guarantee shall be reduced to the value of the work not completed. In no
case shall the financial guarantee be reduced to less than ten percent (10%) of the original amount of the financial guarantees for
off site improvements and erosion control.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 261/454
C. Release: Upon completion of all of the improvements required by section 10-3-3 of this chapter, the city council shall authorize the
release of the remaining portion of the financial guarantee. (1971 Code § 23-21)
10-3-7: CONSTRUCTION PLANS:
A. Construction plans and specifications for the required improvements conforming in all respects to the standards of the city
engineer and the ordinances of the city of Cottage Grove must be prepared at the subdivider's expense by the city engineer.
B. At the inspection, all required improvements on the site that are to be installed under the provisions of this chapter must be
inspected during the course of construction by the city engineer at the subdivider's expense, and acceptance must be subject to
the city engineer's certificate of compliance with the contract. (Ord. 918, 9-18-2013)
Chapter 4
GENERAL SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
10-4-1: SUITABILITY OF LAND FOR SUBDIVISION:
All land may be subdivided. No land will be subdivided into buildable lots when it is unsuitable for reason of flooding, inadequate
drainage, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography,
inadequate water supply or sewer disposal capabilities, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of
residents of the community or future residents of the proposed subdivision. In applying this section, the facts constituting the basis
upon which one concludes that the land is not suitable for a proposed use affords the subdivider an opportunity to present evidence
regarding suitability. (1971 Code § 23-24)
10-4-2: PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES:
A. A proposed subdivision shall not significantly affect or destroy natural features or environmentally sensitive areas. The Council
may deny approval of a subdivision if provision is not made for protection of these areas or the plat is not consistent with the
policies contained in the Comprehensive Plan or the subdivider has not shown that reasonable alternative subdivision or street
locations will not reduce impacts or intrusions into these areas.
B. Subdivision review shall be coordinated with the requirements and procedures for environmental assessment and impact
statements contained in section 11-2-5 of this Code. Any mandatory environmental assessment worksheet (EAW), as required by
the Minnesota Environmental Quality Board Regulations, shall be submitted as part of the application for preliminary plat
approval. At the direction of the Planning Commission, after review and comment by the Director of Community Development, an
optional EAW for local use only shall be prepared by the applicant and submitted as a part of the application for any subdivisions
which encompass any one or more of the following:
1. Areas of unique wildlife habitat;
2. Woodlands;
3. Historic sites;
4. Steep slopes;
5. Wetlands;
6. Soils unsuitable for development;
7. Surface water bodies or natural watercourses; or
8. Any other unique significant environmental features as noted in the Comprehensive Plan or revealed by a site inspection.
C. The optional EAW may be waived by the Director of Community Development in the case of minor subdivisions or simple lot
divisions which have been exempted from the platting process according to subsection 10-2-1B of this title. (1971 Code § 23-25)
10-4-3: PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 262/454
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide residents of the community with public recreation facilities. To accomplish this
purpose, the City requires that when land develops or is subdivided, land shall be dedicated to the City for public use, or in lieu of
dedicating land, cash shall be paid to the City for purposes of developing recreational facilities.
B. Land Dedication; Findings Of Fact: No land shall be dedicated to the City for public use until said land has been approved by the
City Council as being suitable and needed for serving the general public. Such dedicated lands shall be reserved for public use
as parks, playgrounds, public open space or any combination thereof. It shall be deemed to be in the public interest to require
park dedication from a particular subdivision when the City Council, after review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission and Parks, Recreation and Natural Resources Commission makes one or more of the following affirmative findings
of fact:
1. All or part of the land proposed to be subdivided or developed has been previously designated as open space, park land or a
trailway in the Comprehensive Plan.
2. A need for additional parks or recreational facilities will be generated by the development of the proposed subdivision.
3. The topography provides an opportunity for open space or protection of scenic views or vistas or separation of incompatible
uses.
4. The land proposed to be subdivided or developed adjoins existing park or school open space property, and the City Council
further finds that for the safety and convenience of the public using the parks or the school children attending the school, a
walkway or corridor or open space is a public necessity.
5. All or part of property located in a commercial district proposed to be subdivided is adjacent to a residentially zoned district,
and that an open space area is or will in the near future be necessary to protect the adjacent residents from safety or health
hazards which are reasonably foreseeable from any of the permitted or conditional uses which would exist on land to be
subdivided or developed.
6. The land proposed to be subdivided or developed contains or borders upon existing, unique topographical features, including,
but not limited to, ponds, lakes, streams, timber stands, water holding areas, hills or bluffs which should be preserved or
reserved for all the public in order to prevent foreseeable safety hazards or to provide unique recreational and aesthetic
enjoyment to the people or to maintain the public usefulness for the naturally created water holding areas.
C. Schedule Of Dedication Requirements:
1. Residential Subdivision And Development:
a. Land Dedication: As a general rule, land dedicated for public use shall be a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the buildable
land within the development. "Buildable land" means the gross acreage of all property in the proposed plat or subdivision
excluding public waters, State or County rights-of-way, and wetlands designated by Federal or State agencies and classified
by the Wetland Conservation Act, below the high water level of a stormwater basin.
b. Cash Amounts In Lieu Of Park Land: At the option of the City, the developer or subdivider shall be required to contribute
cash in lieu of land dedication according to table 1 of this section, or ten percent (10%) of the fair market value, whichever is
greater.
c. Combination Of Land And Cash: In the event there is land dedication of less than ten percent (10%), cash payments
required by this subsection shall be paid on a proportional basis.
2. Commercial Subdivisions:
a. Land Dedication: As a general rule, land dedicated for public use shall be a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the buildable
land within the development. "Buildable land" means the gross acreage of all property in the proposed plat or subdivision
excluding public waters, State or County rights-of-way, and wetlands designated by Federal or State agencies and classified
by the Wetland Conservation Act.
b. Cash Amounts In Lieu Of Park Land: At the option of the City, the developer or subdivider shall be required to contribute
cash in lieu of land dedication according to table 1 of this section, or four percent (4%) of the fair market value, whichever is
greater.
c. Combination Of Land And Cash: In the event there is land dedication of less than four percent (4%) cash payments required
by this subsection shall be paid on a proportional basis.
3. Industrial Subdivisions; Cash Amounts In Lieu Of Park Land: The City requires the developer or subdivider of industrial
property to contribute cash in lieu of land dedication according to table 1 of this section, or four percent (4%) of the fair market
value, whichever is greater. Industrial developers or subdividers are not required to dedicate land.
TABLE 1
CASH AMOUNTS IN LIEU OF PARK LAND
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 263/454
Type Of Use Cash Payment
Residential:
Single family $3,400.00 per unit
Quad buildings 2,550.00 per unit
Townhome 2,550.00 per unit
Multi-family (apartments, condos, independent senior living) 1,360.00 per unit
Multi-family, assisted living (skilled care, memory care) 6,000.00 per acre
Commercial 6,000.00 per acre
Industrial 6,000.00 per acre
D. Condition Of Areas To Be Dedicated: The dedicated land areas will consist of suitable land and will be located so as to best serve
the present and future needs of the neighborhood and community for recreation and park purposes. Lands below the 100-year
floodplain elevation and land required for stormwater holding ponds will receive no credit toward the park dedication
requirements. Land in the Northern States Power Company (DBA Xcel Energy) transmission easement corridor will receive a fifty
percent (50%) credit toward park dedication requirements. Area to be dedicated for public park, trail, open space or ponding shall
be brought to a suitable grade, seeded, fertilized, planted, or sodded condition by the subdivider. All dead trees, trash, junk,
unwanted structures or similar undesirable elements shall be removed by the owner or subdivider at the expense of said owner or
subdivider.
E. Use Of Cash Payments For Parks And Recreation Facilities: Cash payments received for public recreation space or facilities shall
be placed in a special fund by the City and used only for the acquisition and/or development of land for parks, playground sites,
trails and open space and debt retirement in connection with land previously acquired for such purposes.
F. Reduction Of Park Dedication Requirements:
1. The City staff shall reduce the amount of land to be dedicated or cash contributions in lieu of such dedication for certain land
dedications identified in table 2 of this section in the allocations noted:
TABLE 2
REDUCTION OF PARK DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS
Land Dedication
Dedication Credit
Percentage
Area
Calculation Information
Active play areas 100 Flat terrain and graded with no development obstacles
Encumbered properties 50 Area in utility or conservation easements
Open space - access link 100 Area of dedicated outlot
Steep slope areas 50 Area of dedicated outlot
Stormwater basin/pond 50 Accessible areas of dedicated outlot between property line and
HWL
Trail corridor - natural 100 Trail corridor width should provide necessary buffers to adjacent
areas
Trail corridor - paved 100 Trail corridor width should provide necessary buffers to adjacent
areas
Transportation trail 0 Trail constructed within right-of-way
Tree/natural preservation
area
50 Area of dedicated outlot
2. When there is an application for a subdivision plat that results in a maximum of two (2) lots and it requires City Council
approval, the City Council may reduce the amount of land to be dedicated and/or cash contributions. In such circumstances,
the City Council must adopt findings of fact that justify deviating from the standard dedication requirements.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 264/454
G. Common Open Space:
1. Townhouses and multi-family projects must have a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area that is devoted to open
space consisting of landscaping, lawn area, or noncommercial outdoor recreational facilities incidental to the residential
development such as, but not limited to private swimming pools, tennis courts, walkways, common space patio areas, play lots,
basketball courts, etc.
2. Common open space adjacent to open space of abutting developments must be of a size, shape, location, and usability for its
proposed purpose. Commercial agricultural uses do not constitute open space.
H. Fair Market Value: For purposes of this section, "fair market value" means the value of the land as determined by the City annually
based on tax valuation of the Washington County Assessor's Office. (Ord. 987, 11-15-2017)
10-4-4: SOLAR ACCESS PLANNING:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to encourage energy conservation and the use of solar energy in order to help alleviate
the growing energy shortage and lessen dependence on increasingly uncertain energy sources.
B. Development Objectives: All new subdivisions should be designed with the following objectives in mind:
1. All buildings should be oriented to take maximum advantage of passive solar energy.
2. Reasonable assurance should be given that some or all of the buildings will be able to incorporate active solar energy systems.
3. Roads should be oriented to maximize snow melt by passive solar energy.
4. Consideration should be given to easements and/or restrictive covenants to preserve solar access. (1971 Code § 23-27)
10-4-5: CLUSTER AND PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
A. Coordination With Zoning Ordinance: The platting of cluster and planned unit developments shall be coordinated with the site plan
review procedures of the zoning ordinance. Deviations from the minimum design and engineering standards of this title may be
allowed when consistent with the general intent and purpose of this title and the zoning ordinance and where necessary to meet
the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. All deviations from these standards shall be clearly shown on the preliminary
plat.
B. Private Streets And Utilities:
1. All streets and utilities shall be dedicated to the public unless otherwise approved by the City Council.
2. All private streets and utilities shall be built in conformance with the standards that would otherwise be required for public
facilities.
3. Any private facilities included in the subdivision agreement and financial guarantee required by chapter 3 of this title shall be
provided.
C. Homeowners' Associations: All private streets, utilities, open space, common area and recreational facilities shall be placed under
the control of a homeowners' association. A copy of all proposed private restrictions and covenants, and of the documents
creating the association, shall be submitted as a part of the application for a preliminary plat. These documents shall be reviewed
to assure that adequate provision has been made for the maintenance and eventual replacement as necessary of all common
facilities. (1971 Code § 23-28)
Chapter 5
MINIMUM DESIGN AND ENGINEERING STANDARDS
10-5-1: LOTS:
Unless modified herein, minimum lot area, dimensions and street frontage shall be determined by the city's zoning ordinance. Except
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 265/454
in the case of planned unit developments, when some strict requirements may be waived, the following general standards shall be
observed for all lots suitable for development:
A. Required Frontage On Public Way: Each lot shall front upon a public street. Each lot shall have direct public access or private
easement access to a public street unless restricted by city council resolution.
B. Boundary Prohibition: No lot shall extend over a political subdivision boundary.
C. Lot Grades: Where practical, each lot shall provide a building site at least eighteen inches (18") above the street grade. Lot
grades on lots and blocks of record shall be verified, prior to issuance of building permits, on a certificate of survey.
D. Remnants Of Lots: All remnants of lots below minimum standards in the applicable zoning district left over after subdividing a
larger tract must be added to adjacent lots rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
E. Lots Abutting Bodies Of Water:
1. Lots with river frontage shall be designed so that lot lines extended shall maintain the closest approximation to riparian right.
2. Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainage channel or stream shall have additional depth or width to ensure that building sites
are not subject to flooding. Road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites shall be no lower than two
feet (2') below the regulatory flood protection elevation.
F. Through Or Double-Frontage Lots: Through or double-frontage lots shall not be permitted, except where such lots abut a minor
arterial or principal arterial highway. Such lots shall have an additional depth of twenty five feet (25') for berming, screening and/or
plantings to negate noise and other potential adverse impacts from higher volume roadways. Vehicular access may be limited to
one street at the time of subdividing.
G. Cul-De-Sac Lots: Cul-de-sac lots shall not be narrower than sixty feet (60') in width at the right of way. An exception can be made
in unsewered areas by the city council in the case of severe topography where land would be underutilized without this exception
or when developed in a sewered area under a planned unit development zoning district.
H. Corner Lots: Corner lots shall be at least ten feet (10') wider than interior lots.
I. Large Lots: Where lots are platted in excess of twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet or one hundred sixty feet (160') in width
at the building setback line, a preliminary resubdivision plan shall be required, showing a potential and feasible way in which the
lot or lots may be resubdivided in future years for more intensive use of the land and the placement of buildings or structures
upon such lots.
J. Transition Lots: Where a proposed subdivision is adjacent to higher volume roadways, incompatible land uses, zoning districts, or
future land uses identified on the comprehensive plan or amendments thereto, depths of lots shall be increased by at least twenty
five feet (25') to allow for a combination of space berming or other landscaping techniques to buffer each incompatible land use.
K. Designation Of Lot Square Footage: Lot square footage shall be designated on the preliminary plat, boundary adjustments or rural
subdivisions or simple lot divisions. A letter shall accompany the final plat, certified by an engineer or surveyor, stating that all lot
sizes meet applicable zoning requirements and lot identification and final square footages are identified.
L. Building Sites: Lots shall be designated and building sites located so that sufficient lot width and depth are provided for reasonable
space for outdoor living and required parking space is available. Residential living units built on a slope shall have at least twenty
feet (20') of rear yard usable space at a minimum slope.
M. Minimum Rear Lot Line: Where practical, all lots should have a minimum of thirty feet (30') in width at the rear lot line.
N. Natural Features: Subdivision design shall be sensitive to such items as rock outcropping, tree growth, drainage and
watercourses, slopes and bluffs. The design and grading plan shall strive to preserve those that add attractiveness or
environmental sensitivity to the proposed development. (1971 Code § 23-29)
10-5-2: BLOCKS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 266/454
A. General Requirements: Block length and width or acreage within boundary streets shall accommodate the size of the residential
lots required in the area by title 11 of this code and provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street traffic.
B. Length: In residential areas, other than water frontage, blocks shall not be less than six hundred feet (600') nor more than one
thousand eight hundred feet (1,800') in length, measured along the greatest dimension of the enclosed block area, unless minor
variances are necessitated by topography or conformance with an adjoining plat.
C. Crosswalks: In blocks over nine hundred feet (900') long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required pursuant to section 10-5-5 of
this chapter.
D. Widths: Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots with the minimum depth required by title 11 of this code, except
where one tier lots are necessary because of topographical conditions.
E. Commercial And Industrial Areas: Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the elements of design contained in
this section if the nature of the use requires. (1971 Code § 23-30)
10-5-3: STREETS:
A. General Standards:
1. Proposed streets shall conform to the state road and county highway plans as have been prepared, adopted and/or filed as
prescribed by law, and to the city's comprehensive plan.
2. Streets shall be logically related to the topography to produce usable lots and reasonable grades.
3. Local streets shall be laid out to discourage their use by through traffic.
4. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided but may be subdivided, the arrangement of streets shall make provision for the
projection of streets into adjoining areas, by carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new subdivision at appropriate
locations. The street arrangement shall not cause hardship to owners of adjoining land in platting their own land and providing
convenient access to it.
5. Half or partial streets will not be permitted, except where reasonable subdivision of a tract is in conformance with other
requirements and standards of this title and where satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street right
of way can be secured. Wherever a tract to be subdivided adjoins an existing half or partial street, the part of the street within
such tract shall be platted.
6. Dead end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit future street extension in adjoining tracts or when designed as
cul-de-sac streets. Temporary turnarounds shall be provided.
7. Private streets shall be prohibited, unless approved by the city council as part of a planned unit development subdivision or
overlay district.
8. Subdivisions abutting arterial roads, as defined in the comprehensive plan and located in the East Ravine planning area, must
include a buffer strip averaging seventy five feet (75') wide lying outside and parallel to the road right of way. These buffer strips
must be landscaped by the developer with a combination of trees and shrubs to create a minimum of fifty percent (50%) year
round opacity at maturity. Fences are prohibited within the buffer strips.
9. All landscaped medians and cul-de-sac islands must be landscaped. A landscape plan must be submitted to the city for review
and approval.
10. A uniform landscape design, utilizing natural landscape plantings and materials, must be installed around the perimeter of all
ponds, infiltration basins, and similar drainage features.
11. A uniform mailbox design must be approved as part of the preliminary plat review and approval process. (Ord. 796, 6-21-
2006)
B. Minor Arterials And Collector Streets:
1. Access of minor streets onto state and county state aid highways, or to streets designated as collectors or minor arterials, shall
be prohibited at intervals of less than six hundred sixty feet (660').
2. Where a proposed plat is adjacent to a minor arterial street, there shall be no direct vehicular access from individual lots to
such streets and roads. In platting small tracts of land fronting on minor arterials where there is no other alternative, a
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 267/454
temporary entrance may be granted; as neighboring land is subdivided and more preferable access arrangements become
possible, such temporary access permits shall become void.
3. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or planned collector or minor arterial street or a railroad right of way, a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such thoroughfare and right of way may be required for adequate protection of
residential properties and separation of through and local traffic. Such service streets shall be located at a distance from the
major thoroughfare or railroad right of way suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in
residential districts or for commercial and industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined
with due regard for the requirements of approach grade and future grade preparations. (1971 Code § 23-31; amd. 2000 Code)
C. Street Widths:
1. Minimum right of way widths and pavement widths, face to face of curb, for each type of public street or road shall be as
follows:
Type Of Street Right Of Way Width Roadway Width
Minor arterial street 120 - 160 feet As determined by
traffic needs
Collector street/
residential
80 feet 48 feet
Commercial/industrial
collector service street
80 - 120 feet 52 feet
Local street 60 feet 32 feet
Local street - East
Ravine neighborhood
1 north
60 feet 28 feet
Cul-de-sac turnaround
radius
60 feet 47 feet
Cul-de-sac/rural other
than a collector roadway
60 feet 28 feet
2. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate right of way width, additional right of way width shall be
provided.
3. Additional right of way and roadway widths may be required to promote public safety and convenience when special conditions
require, or to provide parking space in areas of intensive use.
4. Extensions of existing streets with lesser right of way widths than prescribed above may be permitted only as a part of a
"planned unit development" as defined in the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
D. Cul-De-Sac Streets:
1. Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed six hundred feet (600') in length, except where, by reason
of unfavorable land form or the irregular shape of the land, a normal pattern cannot be established, or that land would be
underutilized.
2. Unless future extension is clearly impracticable or undesirable, the turnaround right of way shall be placed adjacent to a
subdivision property line, and a right of way of the same width as needed for the type of street shall be carried to such property
line in such a way as to permit future extension of the street into the adjoining tract. At such time as such a street is extended,
the acreage covered by the turnaround outside the boundaries of the extended street shall revert in ownership to the property
owner fronting on the temporary turnaround.
E. Street Grades:
1. Streets shall be graded in accordance with the plan approved by the engineer. The grading shall include the entire width of the
right of way and shall provide a boulevard section in addition to the minimum pavement width.
2. Centerline gradients shall be at least five-tenths percent (0.5%) and shall not exceed the following:
Classification Gradient
Minor arterials and collector streets 5 percent
Local streets 8 percent
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 268/454
3. Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical curves. Minimum length, in feet, of these curves shall be
twenty (20) times the algebraic difference in the percent of grade of the two (2) adjacent slopes.
F. Pavement: All streets and alleys shall be improved with concrete or bituminous surface and with concrete curb and gutter, except
as may otherwise be approved by the governing body for rural areas identified in subsection F2 of this section.
1. Urban Areas:
a. The design of street pavement for all streets covered by this title shall be in accordance with the state transportation
department "Road Design Manual No. 5-291" for flexible pavements. The design thickness of the surfacing elements shall be
in accordance with the flexible pavement design standard for road classifications as follows:
Classification Pavement Design: Axle Load
Minor arterial, collector
and commercial service
streets
As determined by projected
traffic needs
Local streets 7 ton minimum
b. To determine subgrade soil classifications, soil samples shall be collected and analyzed by a reputable testing laboratory.
The soil analysis shall be submitted to the engineer with the pavement plans. Soil samples shall be taken along the
centerline of the proposed road, at intervals not exceeding three hundred feet (300').
c. Concrete curbs and gutters shall be constructed on both sides of streets. The construction shall be in accordance with
"Standard Specification For Highway Construction", state highway design specification no. 2531. Concrete curb and gutter
cross sections shall be either design no. B618 or design D.
2. Rural Areas:
a. Unless otherwise approved by the council, new streets in rural areas shall be improved to urban standards. The council may
approve streets to be surfaced with gravel if there will be three (3) or fewer lots abutting the proposed street.
b. Streets which will have only a gravel surface shall be so designed that the base and subbase requirements of state
transportation department "Road Design Manual No. 5-291" for flexible pavement are met. At least the top six inches (6") of
the street surface shall be of class 5 gravel or a material approved by the engineer.
G. Intersections And Street Jogs:
1. The angle formed by intersecting streets shall not be less than sixty degrees (60°), with ninety degree (90°) intersections
preferred.
2. Intersections of more than four (4) corners shall be prohibited.
3. Roadways of street intersections shall be rounded by a radius of not less than fifteen feet (15'). Roadways of alley-street
intersections shall be rounded by a radius of not less than six feet (6'). Corners at the entrance to the turnaround portion of culde-
sacs shall be rounded by a radius of not less than fifteen feet (15').
4. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty feet (150') shall not be allowed.
5. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten degrees (10°), they shall be connected
by a curve with a radius of not less than two hundred seventy five feet (275') unless waived by the city council. (1971 Code
§ 23-31; amd. 2000 Code)
H. Boulevard And Yard Improvements:
1. In urban and rural areas, all boulevards and yards must have a minimum of four inches (4") of organic topsoil or black dirt
placed on them and then be sodded as specified in this title.
2. Driveways shall be constructed from the curb to minimum structural setback and the width of the proposed driveway in all the
R-3 and R-4 zoning districts. The driveway shall be constructed of four inch (4") thick asphalt or air intrained concrete three
thousand (3,000) psi, brick pavers or better. This provision is not required in rural zoning districts.
I. Street Trees:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 269/454
1. One tree must be planted in the front yard right of way of every subdivided lot in a manner determined by the city forester.
Street trees may be planted in the street boulevard or in the front yard of the lot as determined by the city. On corner or double
fronted lots, one street tree must be planted on each side of the lot adjacent to a street.
2. Each street tree, including those identified in the tree replacement plan for those trees removed from the city right of way, shall
be planted according to accepted standards of the American Association of Nurserymen. Tree pits shall be round, at least six
inches (6") wider than the diameter of the root spread, have vertical sides, and be at the same depth as it had been grown in
the nursery.
3. The location, size and type or species of trees planted shall be of mixed varieties and shall be approved by the city forester,
and shall include those with root structures unlikely to interfere with utility lines or sidewalks or otherwise cause nuisance or
damage, in conformance with title 7, chapter 4 of this code.
4. The minimum size of trees to be planted as street trees or right of way replacement trees shall be one and three-fourths inch
(13/4") caliper, as measured by the American Association of Nurserymen.
5. The city forester shall establish the location and plant each street tree in the spring and/or fall of each year. The costs of
materials and installation shall be charged to the developer.
6. On streets having sidewalks, street trees will generally be planted between the curb and the sidewalk.
7. In addition to one street tree, four (4) trees and ten (10) shrubs must be installed per dwelling unit. One of the four trees must
be a coniferous tree. The deciduous trees must be a minimum of one and one-half inches (11/2") trunk caliper, coniferous tree a
minimum of six feet (6') in height, and shrubs must be three (3) gallon potted or a minimum of eighteen inches (18") in height.
J. Sodding Of Residential And Commercial Lots:
1. The entire lot area, except for areas proposed for landscape beds and below the high water elevation for storm water basins
for all residential and commercial lots in new developing urban areas must be sodded.
2. All residential and commercial lots in rural areas shall be sodded from the street curb to the minimum front yard setback line of
the zoning district therein located. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
K. Street Names And Signs:
1. Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street names unless a new street is a continuation of, or in
alignment with, the existing or platted street, in which event, it shall bear the name of the existing or platted street. Street
names shall conform to the county uniform street naming and property numbering system1.
2. All street signs shall be provided and installed by the city at the expense of the subdivider. (1971 Code § 23-31; amd. 2000
Code)
10-5-4: ALLEYS:
A. Residential Areas: Alleys shall not be permitted in residential areas.
B. Industrial Or Commercial Areas: Alleys may be required in industrial or commercial areas if necessary, subject to the following
standards:
1. All alleys shall have a right of way at least twenty four feet (24') in width and a pavement width of at least twenty feet (20').
2. All alleys shall be improved with a concrete or bituminous surface and concrete curb and gutter. (1971 Code § 23-32)
10-5-5: SIDEWALKS, WALKWAYS, TRAILS, AND BIKEWAYS:
A. Where Required:
1. In residential districts developed at a density of ten (10) or more dwellings per acre, sidewalks shall be installed on both sides
of all public streets.
2. Sidewalks or trails shall be installed on both sides of all minor arterial and collector streets.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 270/454
3. In blocks over nine hundred feet (900') long, eight foot (8') wide paved pedestrian trails/crosswalks may be required through
the blocks in locations where such crosswalks are deemed necessary to public health, convenience and necessity. Suitable
paving, fencing or screening shall be provided by the subdivider. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
B. Design Standards:
1. All sidewalk widths shall be a minimum of five feet (5').
2. Sidewalks shall slope one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot away from the property line, and the profile grade shall not exceed eight
percent (8%).
3. All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete at least four inches (4") thick. At least three inches (3") of gravel shall be placed
under all sidewalks. Where sidewalks intersect at street intersections, the area between the property line and the curb shall be
filled in as additional sidewalk, and the apron shall be handicap accessible per design requirements of the city engineer.
4. Notwithstanding a waiver of the requirements for the immediate construction of sidewalks, all streets shall be graded within the
rights of way for future sidewalk construction.
5. Pedestrian crosswalks/walkways/bikeways between lots shall be required in locations deemed necessary to provide access to
public facilities. Sidewalks at least five feet (5') in width shall be required in all pedestrian crosswalks. (1971 Code § 23-33)
10-5-6: UTILITIES:
A. Trunk Facilities: Where a larger size water main, sanitary sewer, storm drain or similar facility is required to serve areas outside
the subdivision, the larger facility required must be constructed. Additional cost is to be borne by the benefiting properties, and the
assessments are to be determined by the governing body where existing trunk facilities provide the subdivision with a lateral
benefit. An amount equal to the estimated current value of the lateral benefit, as determined by the city engineer, shall be paid to
the city.
B. Sewer And Water:
1. Urban Areas:
a. Sewer Lines:
(1) No public sanitary sewer facilities shall be extended which are not in conformance with the utility staging plan of the city's
comprehensive plan.
(2) Where trunk line sanitary sewer facilities are available, the subdivider shall install sanitary sewers and connect such
sanitary sewers to such trunk line sewers. Extensions of the public sewer system shall be designed to provide public sewer
service to each lot.
(3) All sanitary sewers shall be inspected by the city by means of television, at the subdivision expense, prior to their
acceptance by the city. In the event that such facilities are not available but, in the opinion of the city council, can be made
available within a reasonable period of time, such sewers and all necessary laterals extending from the main sewer to the
street curb shall be installed and capped for future connection as service becomes available.
(4) Unless otherwise required, a minimum eight inch (8") sanitary sewer pipe shall be placed at grades approved by the
engineer. Mains over eight inches (8") in size may be required, and the additional cost may be borne by the city. Service
wyes shall be four inches (4"); rubber or plastic compression joints are required.
b. Water Mains:
(1) Where mains from public water system are available, the subdivider shall install water mains on the plat and connect
such mains to such public water system.
(2) Extensions of the public water supply system shall, when available, be designed to provide public water service to each
lot. Such extensions shall comply with the criteria, recommendations and policies of the comprehensive water system plan,
if applicable, or if not, as required by the city engineer.
(3) A minimum water main of six inch (6") ductile iron pipe or other approved pipe shall be required. Mains eight inches (8") in
size or larger may be required, and the additional cost may be borne by the community.
c. Building Services: Each applicable building service shall be run from the main to the property line where a cap or plug shall
be placed until the service is extended to the structure. A one inch (1") type K copper water service, corporation cock, curb
box and stop, and four inch (4") standard weight cast iron soil pipe sewer service shall be minimum requirements and may
be placed in a common trench.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 271/454
2. Rural Areas:
a. Sewage Disposal Systems:
(1) Where lots cannot be connected with a public sewerage system, provision must be made for sanitary sewerage facilities,
consisting of a central treatment plant or individual disposal devices for each lot. This does not mean that the installation of
individual disposal devices shall be at the expense of the subdivider.
(2) Any subdivision or lot not provided with off site sewer facilities shall be subject to soil and percolation tests to determine
whether the lot size proposed will meet minimum standards of health and sanitation due to limitations of soils as shown on
existing soils maps. The lot area and topography must be such that it will accommodate an adequate disposal system to
serve the residence for the estimated unsewered years, as determined by the governing body. Such test shall be made at
the expense of the subdivider, and a sketch map shall be submitted to identify the specific locations where tests were
made. At least two (2) soil borings and two (2) percolation tests shall be performed on each proposed lot for the purpose of
siting both a primary and secondary drainfield.
(3) All sewage disposal systems shall comply with the standard of WPC-40 as interpreted by state pollution control agency
rules 7080 and Minnesota rules 6120, the utilities element of the comprehensive plan, and any other regulations adopted
by the city for their installation and maintenance. All on site system designers and installers shall be certified by the
Minnesota pollution control agency.
(4) In any situation where the council approves the installation of on site disposal units, they shall be so located as to permit
the easiest and least expensive connection to the sewer when it becomes available and usable. Where such on site units
are installed, the builder shall provide underground plumbing ten feet (10') beyond the footing and plugged. The area
around the stack shall be so scored that the septic tank line can be disconnected and connection made with the public
sanitary sewer system.
(5) When an individual sewage system is used and the septic tank is placed on a side other than that from which the public
sewer line would connect, a capped sewage disposal line shall be extended from the point of ground entrance of the
basement or house to a point ten feet (10') beyond and to the side from which the future sewer connection will be made.
Inside the basement, the elbow shall be set up to be easily reversed for connection to the capped line.
b. Water; Individual Wells: An individual well shall produce at least ten (10) gallons per minute, have a well casing at least four
inches (4") in diameter and be grouted to provide a safe, potable water supply.
C. Storm Water Drainage: A drainage system design shall be required that conforms to the city's surface water plan, and may include
a storm sewer system or a system of open ditches, culverts, pipes, catchbasins and ponding areas, or both systems. Such
facilities and easements shall be installed as will adequately provide for the drainage of surface water; drainageway easements or
land dedication may be required when such easements or land is needed in the public interest for purposes of floodplain
management, proper drainage, prevention of erosion, pedestrian access to water bodies or other public purpose. If there is a
watershed district, that board must approve all surface water drainage. All such systems shall conform to all city drainage plans
and to the city's comprehensive plan.
D. Easements:
1. Easements at least ten feet (10') wide, centered on rear and other lot lines as required, shall be provided for utilities where
necessary. Where underground utilities are being installed, a front or side yard easement may be required. These easements
shall be shown on the plat.
2. Easements shall be provided along each side of the centerline of any watercourse or drainage channel, whether or not shown
on the comprehensive plan, to a width sufficient to allow for maintenance of storm sewers.
3. Utility and drainage easements shall be dedicated for the required use.
E. Utility Location:
1. When practicable and feasible, all utilities shall be placed underground. All underground work shall be completed prior to street
surfacing. All utility lines for telephone and electrical service shall be placed in rear line easements when carried on overhead
poles.
2. Unless otherwise approved by the city engineer and the public works director, all utilities shall be constructed out from the curb
line a distance of no more than eight feet (8'). (1971 Code § 23-34; amd. 2000 Code)
F. Street Lighting: All subdivisions shall contain street lighting if a new public street is constructed in a manner that conforms to city
policy. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 272/454
10-5-7: MONUMENTS:
A. Monuments Required: All subdivision boundary corners, block and lot corners, road intersection corners and points of tangency
and curvature shall be marked with survey monuments meeting the minimum requirements of state law. All federal, state, county
or other official benchmarks, monuments or triangulation stations adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise position
unless a relocation is approved by the controlling agency. These monuments shall be set within one year after recording of the
final plat, or sooner if specified in the subdivision agreement. Said placement shall be a part of the financial guarantees for the
subdivision.
B. Specifications: All lot corner pipes or iron rods shall be a minimum of half an inch (1/2") in diameter and eighteen inches (18") in
length, and shall be inscribed with the registration number of the land surveyor making the survey. All unmonumented quarter
corners and section corners will be set by the county surveyor. (1971 Code § 23-35)
10-5-8: EROSION CONTROL DURING CONSTRUCTION:
(Rep. by Ord. 701, 7-18-2001)
10-5-9: RESUBDIVIDING COMBINED PARCELS:
Any parcel of land, either platted or unplatted, that has been combined for tax purposes or for other reasons cannot be reseparated
without a simple lot division, rural subdivision or plat approved by the city council in a manner prescribed in this title. (1971 Code
§ 23-37)
10-5-10: BUILDING AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
A. Compliance With Provisions: No building permits will be issued by the city for the construction of any building or structure on any
lot in the "subdivision" as defined herein which has been approved for platting until all requirements of this title have been fully
complied with and until utility and street construction contracts have been awarded. No building permit shall be issued for a lot not
having the required right of way frontage on a public street in the zoning district in which it is located unless the lot complies with
provisions of section 11-3-2 of this code.
B. Utilities Required: No occupancy shall be granted until public and/or private utilities are available. Where building permits are
issued as provided in subsection A of this section, the building or units therein shall not be occupied (except model homes) until
said building(s) are provided with public sewer and water service, private services (gas, telephone, electricity, sewer and water)
and an improved public street to the extent that the street is graded and gravel surfaced.
C. Nonliability Of City: Where a building permit is issued under subsection B of this section, the person to whom the permit is issued
proceeds at his/her own risk and the city assumes no obligation to provide public services within a specified time limit. (1971
Code § 23-38)
Footnote 1: See also subsection 7-1-1B of this code.
Title 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS; DISTRICTS
11-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known, cited and referred to as the COTTAGE GROVE ZONING ORDINANCE, except as referred to herein,
where it shall be known as "this Title". (1971 Code § 28-1)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 273/454
11-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This Title is adopted for the purpose of:
A. Protecting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
B. Dividing the City into zones and districts and restricting and regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration
and use of structures and land.
C. Promoting orderly development of the residential, business, industrial, recreational and public areas.
D. Providing adequate light, air and convenience of access to property.
E. Limiting congestion in the public right of way.
F. Preventing overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures by regulating the use of land and buildings and the bulk of
buildings in relation to the land and buildings surrounding them.
G. Providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the most appropriate use of land throughout the City.
H. Providing for an orderly transition from a rural to an urban or suburban environment.
I. Establishing standards and procedures regulating land use. (1971 Code § 28-2)
11-1-3: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION; DEFINITIONS:
The language set forth in the text of this Title shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words used in the singular number shall include the plural number,
and the plural the singular.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive.
C. The word "lot" shall mean a buildable and properly zoned lot, unless otherwise defined herein and shall include the words "piece",
"plot", and "parcel".
D. The word "building" includes all other structures of every kind, regardless of similarity to buildings.
E. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for".
For the purposes of this Title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
Section:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT: A separate dwelling unit contained within an existing single-family structure, to be occupied by another
family as a separate, complete housekeeping unit, isolated from the original unit, subject to the permit procedures and criteria of
Section 11-9A-3 of this Title, entry #1, "Accessory apartments". The existence of separate cooking facilities shall distinguish an
accessory apartment from the renting of rooms for lodging purposes.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: An uninhabited subordinate building or structure that is detached from the principal structure on a lot of
record, the use of which is subordinate to the principal use on the property.
ACCESSORY USE: A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot therewith. In no
case shall such "accessory use" dominate in area, extent, or purpose of the principal lawful use or building.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 274/454
ADULT USES: Include adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors,
adult steam room/bathhouse/sauna facilities, adult companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sports
clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body
painting studios, and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses, or places open to some or all members of the public
at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction, or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" which are capable of being seen by members of the public. Activities classified as "obscene", as defined by
Minnesota Statutes section 617.241, are not lawful and are not included in the definition of "adult uses".
ADULT USES ACCESSORY: The offering of goods and/or services which are classified as adult uses on a limited scale and which
are incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services offered by the establishment. Examples of such items include adult
magazines, adult movies, adult novelties, and the like.
ADULT USES PRINCIPAL: The offering of goods and/or services which are classified as adult uses as a primary or sole activity of a
business establishment, and include, but are not limited, to the following:
Adult Body Painting Studio: An establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance,
whether transparent or nontransparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of
"specified anatomical areas".
Adult Bookstore: A business engaging in the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides,
records, audiotapes, videotapes, motion picture film, or any other similar materials, if such shop is not open to the public
generally but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age, or if a substantial or significant
portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Cabaret: An establishment which provides dancing or other live entertainment if such dancing or other live entertainment
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the performance, depiction, or description of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas".
Adult Companionship Establishment: A companionship establishment if such establishment excludes minors by reason of age,
or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the
establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Entertainment: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors,
adult saunas, adult companionship establishments, adult health clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion
picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels or motels, adult body painting studios, and other adult establishments.
Adult Establishment: A business engaging in any of the following activities or which utilizes any of the following business
procedures or practices; either:
A. Any business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded
from patronage thereat either by law or by the operators of such business; or
B. Any other business which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
exposing, describing, discussing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Specifically included in the term, but without limitation, are adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult minimotion
picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult saunas, adult companionship establishments, adult health clubs,
adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels or motels, and
adult body painting studios.
Adult Hotel Or Motel: A hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is
presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Massage Parlor, Health Club: A massage parlor or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, and which
provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater: A business premises within an enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50)
persons used for presenting visual media material if such business as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or
if said material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"
for observation by patrons therein.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 275/454
Adult Modeling Studio: An establishment whose major business is the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so
provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in specified
sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn,
sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers.
Adult Motion Picture Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas".
Adult Motion Picture Theater: A business premises within an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons
used for presenting visual media material if said business as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if said
material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons.
Adult Novelty Business: A business which has as a principal activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or
devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.
Adult Sauna: A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for
the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service
provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas".
Specified Anatomical Areas: Anatomical areas consisting of the following:
A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast(s) below a
point immediately above the top of the areola; and
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified Sexual Activities: Activities consisting of the following:
A. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical
stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory
functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus,
buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty;
or
B. Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
C. Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or
D. Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; or
E. Situations involving a person or persons, any of which are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually-revealing costumes,
and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such
persons; or
F. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or
G. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
AGRICULTURAL, RURAL: A commercial crop-producing use on ten (10) or more contiguous acres and as defined under Minnesota
Statutes section 273.111, subdivision 6. Real property shall be considered to be an agricultural use; provided, that annually: a) at
least thirty three and one-third percent (331/3%) of the total family income of the owner is derived therefrom, or the total family
income, including rental income from the property, is three hundred dollars ($300.00) plus ten dollars ($10.00) per tillable acre; and
b) it is devoted to the production for sale of livestock, dairy animals, dairy products, poultry and poultry products, fur-bearing animals,
horticultural and nursery stock, fruit of all kinds, vegetables, forage, grain, bees and apiary products.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 276/454
AGRICULTURAL, URBAN: An area of less than ten (10) contiguous acres which is used for the purpose of growing produce,
including crops, fruits, trees, shrubs, plants, flowers, vegetables and the like; provided, that such produce is intended solely for the
use of residents on the property or sale away from the property. It shall not include roadside stands for the sale of products,
processing or packaging operations, or similar uses. It shall not include the raising of farm animals on parcels of less than five (5)
acres.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to
short term care incidental to the hospital use.
ANIMAL UNIT: A unit of measure, as adopted by the Minnesota pollution control agency, used to compare the differences in the
production of animal manures.
ANTENNA: Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or radiating electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited
to, directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, satellite dishes, and omnidirectional antennas such as whips.
ARCHITECTURAL DRAWINGS: Scaled or dimensioned drawings of the general layout of floor plans and elevations of a building or
structure. In the case of multi-story buildings, the drawings shall also include sections or cutaway view of the elevations.
AUCTION ESTABLISHMENTS: Any property or structure devoted to public auction or sales, two (2) or more times a year, for selling
of private property or consigned goods.
AUTO BODY REPAIR: An establishment engaged in the rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles' body, frame or fender
straightening, painting, rust proofing, or other similar activity.
AUTO REDUCTION YARD: A lot or yard where one or more vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof, are kept for the
purpose of dismantling, sale of parts, crushing, sale or processing as scrap, storage or abandonment.
AUTO WRECKING YARD: A lot or yard where one or more unlicensed motor vehicles or the remains thereof are kept for the
purpose of dismantling, sale of parts, sale as scrap, storage or abandonment.
BARGE FLEETING AREA: A portion of the riverfront where barges are temporarily secured while awaiting loading, unloading or
shipment.
BARGE LOADING FACILITY: A facility located on the riverfront for the loading or unloading of a barge, either as part of
transshipment of goods or related specifically to a product manufactured, stored, excavated or utilized at the site.
BASELINE PEAK PERIOD TRIP CONTRIBUTION: Equal to the peak period trips that would have been generated based on the city
comprehensive plan prior to December 21, 1994, plus capacity benefits derived from improvements planned for construction and
traffic demand strategies that are implemented after the enactment of chapter 7, "Adequate Public Facilities", of this title.
BASEMENT: Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four (4)
sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN: A house, or portion thereof, where short term lodging rooms and meals are provided. The operator of
the inn shall live on the premises.
BERM: A landscaped linear mound of earth to protect or aesthetically enhance land uses and varying in height from two (2) to eight
feet (8').
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a motel or hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods,
meals or lodgings are provided for three (3) or more unrelated persons, but not to exceed eight (8) persons; but where no provision is
made for cooking in any guestroom.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. When such structure
is divided by party walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average elevation of the adjoining ground level, or the established grade adjacent
to the building, whichever is lower, to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, to a point of the roof
directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, the uppermost point on a round or other arch type roof, to the highest gable on a
pitched or hip roof.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which the primary use of the lot on which the building is located is conducted.
CANOPY: The width and/or height of the overall leafy portion of a deciduous tree.
CARPORT: An open sided, roofed automobile shelter, usually formed by extension of the roof from the side of a building.
CEMETERY: A parcel or tract of land used or intended to be used as the final resting place of the dead, including burial grounds, and
mausoleums.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 277/454
CHURCH: A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship; and
which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain
public worship.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Cottage Grove, Minnesota.
CLUB OR LODGE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members, paying annual dues. The use of the premises is
restricted to members and their guests. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises; provided, that adequate
dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. Serving of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed;
provided, that such serving is secondary and incidental to the operation of the dining room for the purpose of serving food and meals;
and provided further, that such serving of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable federal, state and municipal laws.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the
remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, or preservation of environmentally sensitive areas.
COLLOCATION: The location of two (2) or more electromagnetic communication facilities on a structure that is designed structurally
and electronically to support multiple electromagnetic communication facilities.
COLUMBARIUM: A place such as a vault for the respectful and usually public storage of cremated human remains within cinerary
urns. Columbaria are accessory to places of assembly for worship, cemeteries or mausoleums.
COMMERCIAL HORTICULTURE: The growing of fruits, vegetables, flowers or plants for sale.
COMMERCIAL OR ANIMAL FEEDLOT: The place of confined feeding of livestock or other animals, where the principal use of the
facility is for short term feeding for market purposes, or other areas not normally used for pasture or crops and in which substantial
amounts of manure or related other wastes may originate by reason of such feeding of animals. No place shall be considered a
"commercial feedlot" unless it exceeds ten (10) animal units and would require an animal feedlot permit from the Minnesota pollution
control agency.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION: Bowling alley, cart track, jump center, miniature golf, pool hall, golf driving range, vehicle racing or
amusement, dance hall, skating, tavern, theater, firearms range and similar uses.
COMMERCIAL STABLE: A stable where horses are kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE, CLASS I: Vehicles including, but not limited to, the following: semitrailers, garbage trucks, tank trucks,
dump trucks, flatbed trucks, cattle trucks, trucks carrying or designed to carry explosive or flammable materials, well drilling
equipment, earthmoving equipment, school buses designed to carry sixty six (66) or more persons or other large vehicles similar
either by use or size, except the tractor portion of semitrucks.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE, CLASS II: Commercial pickup trucks and vans, the tractor portion of semitrucks, tow trucks, recreational
vehicles which are used for commercial purposes and other commercial vehicles not defined in "class I".
COMMERCIAL WASTE INCINERATION FACILITY: Any facility that sells services of burning solid waste or hazardous waste
materials for generators other than the owner and operator of the facility.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a combination of land and water within a residential
development site which is designated and intended for the use and enjoyment of the development's residents.
CONDITIONAL USE: A specific type of structure or land use listed in the official control that may be allowed but only after an in
depth review procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the official zoning controls or building codes
and upon a finding that: a) certain conditions as detailed in this title exist, and b) the structure and/or land use conforms to the
comprehensive land use plan, if one exists, and is compatible with the existing neighborhood.
CONVEYOR CAR AND LIGHT DUTY TRUCK WASH: A full service business where all activities take place fully within the structure,
including vacuuming and drying operations. The facility is staffed during all business hours, and work is performed by staff, not by
customers, and services performed must include conveyerized machine or hand washing/drying.
COUNTY: Washington County, Minnesota.
CRITICAL AREA: The area known as the Mississippi River corridor critical area, designated by the governor in executive order 130,
dated November 1976.
CURRENCY EXCHANGE: Any person, except a bank, trust company, savings bank, savings association, credit union, or industrial
loan and thrift company, engaged in the business of cashing checks, drafts, money orders, or traveler's checks for a fee. Currency
exchange does not include a person who provides these services incidental to the person's primary business if the charge for
cashing a check or draft does not exceed one dollar ($1.00) or one percent (1%) of the value of the check or draft, whichever is
greater.
DECIDUOUS: Plants which lose foliage and become dormant during winter months.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 278/454
DEMONSTRATED PARKING: A parking plan which demonstrates that the number, size, and location of parking spaces required by
city ordinance can be provided on the site in compliance with all required parking setbacks.
DEVELOPER: Any individual commencing proceedings under chapter 7, "Adequate Public Facilities", of this title, to secure approval
of a new development.
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT: The person appointed by the city council as the director of community development,
as provided by this title.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY: An establishment that, by design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures,
encourages or permits customers to receive a service or obtain a product that may be used or consumed in a motor vehicle during
such business transactions.
DWELLING: A building or one or more portions thereof occupied or intended to be occupied exclusively for residence purposes; but
not including rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes, or boarding houses; nor trailers, tents, cabins or trailer coaches. A "dwelling"
shall not be interpreted to include lodging rooms.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building used for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other and
containing three (3) or more dwelling units, but not including group, row, quad homes, and townhouses up to a maximum of eight (8)
units attached.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A residential building containing two (2) or more dwelling units, each of which has
primary ground floor access to the outside and which are attached to each other by party walls without openings. The term is
intended primarily for such dwelling types as townhouses and duplexes. Each dwelling unit must be located on a separate lot of
record.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: A residential building containing not more than one dwelling unit entirely surrounded by
open space on the same lot of record.
EASEMENT: The right of a person, government agency, or public utility company to use public or private land owned by another for a
specific purpose.
ELECTROMAGNETIC COMMUNICATION FACILITY (EMCF): All antennas, towers, attachments, accessory mechanical and
electrical equipment designed and erected for transmission, receiving and relaying of commercial electromagnetic, radar and other
communication signals, including, but not limited to, radio, short wave, telecommunication, and television.
EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT: A method of determining the location of floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on
both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: Underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems; collection,
communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes,
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants or other similar equipment and accessories in conjunction therewith; but not including
buildings.
EVERGREEN: A plant which retains its green color year round and does not drop its fronds or needles in the winter.
EVERGREEN, SPREADING AND GLOBE: An evergreen shrub which maintains a natural global or spreading shape.
EVERGREENS, TREES: Large evergreens which reach mature heights of fifty feet (50') or more.
EVERGREENS, UPRIGHT: An evergreen shrub which maintains a natural columnar or upright shape.
FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons each related by blood, marriage, or adoption, including foster children, living
together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of not more than four (4) persons not so related, maintaining a common
household.
FARM ANIMALS: Horses, cows, sheep, bees, pigs, chickens, ducks and other commonly known animals normally associated with
farms, but excluding customary household pets.
FARMERS' MARKET: The area set aside for the use of persons selling food products and plant materials produced primarily by
themselves.
FENCE: Any partition, structure, wall or gate erected as a dividing marker, barrier or enclosure and located along the boundary, or
within the required yard.
FLOOD: A temporary rise in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 279/454
dry areas.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: The frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. "Flood fringe" is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe"
used in the flood insurance study for Washington County, Minnesota and incorporated areas.
FLOOD, REGIONAL: A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in the state and reasonably
characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval.
FLOODPLAIN: The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be
covered by the regional flood.
FLOODPROOFING: A combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding,
primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.
FLOODWATER: The water of any river, stream, drainage channel, low area lake or pond which is above and/or outside the channel
or banks of such river, lake, stream, drainage channel or pond.
FLOODWAY: The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are
reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.
FLOOR AREA, BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building or portion
thereof devoted to a particular use, including accessory storage areas located within selling or working space, such as counters,
racks or closets, and any basement floor area devoted to retailing activities, to the production of or processing of goods or to
business or professional offices; however, the "floor area" shall not include basement floor area other than area devoted to retailing
activities, the production or processing of goods, business or professional offices.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The numerical value obtained by dividing the floor area of a building or buildings by the lot area on which
such building or buildings are located.
FLOOR AREA, RESIDENTIAL: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several finished floors of a building or portion thereof,
devoted to residential use. The floor area of a residence shall not include any portion of attached garage, breezeways, porches or
basement area. A basement area is an area having more than one-half (1/2) of its wall area below grade.
GARAGE, ACCESSORY: An accessory building or portion of a principal building having walls and a roof which is used for the
storage of motor vehicles and other items owned by the occupants of the principal building.
GENERAL FLOOR PLANS: A graphic representation, with dimensions or scale indicated, of the anticipated utilization of the floor
area within a building or structure, but not necessarily as detailed as construction plans.
GROUND COVER: Plants which are used for accents and soil stabilization and are typically twenty four inches (24") or less in
height.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any refuse, sludge, or other waste material or combinations of refuse, sludge or other waste materials in
solid, semisolid, liquid, or contained gaseous form which because of its quantity, concentration, or chemical, physical, or infectious
characteristics may: a) cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or
incapacitating reversible illness; or b) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. Categories of hazardous waste materials include, but
are not limited to: explosives, flammables, oxidizers, poisons, irritants, and corrosives. Hazardous waste does not include source,
special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the atomic energy act of 1954, as amended.
HEALTH/RECREATION FACILITY: A nonmedical service establishment intended to maintain or improve the physical condition of
persons, including game courts, exercise equipment, locker rooms, jacuzzi, sauna and/or pro shop.
HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful employment involving the manufacture, provision or sale of
goods and/or services.
HOTEL: A building having provision for nine (9) or more guests, in which lodging is provided with or without meals, for compensation,
and which is open to transient or permanent guests or both, and where no provision is made for cooking in any guestroom, and in
which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge.
HOUSEHOLD PET: Animals that are customarily kept for personal use or enjoyment within the home. "Household pets" shall include,
but not be limited to, domestic dogs, domestic cats, domestic tropical birds, rabbits, or fish.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE: Any vehicle which cannot be driven or propelled under its own power in its existing condition, or which
cannot be driven or propelled under its own power in a safe manner because of its wrecked, junked, or partially dismantled condition,
or which cannot be driven because necessary licenses or authorizations have not been obtained and displayed on the vehicle.
INTERIM CONDITIONAL USE: A temporary use of a property until a particular date, until the occurrence of a particular event, or until
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 280/454
the zoning regulations no longer permit it.
JUNKYARD: An area where waste or discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed,
disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, papers, rags, rubber products, bottles and used
building materials. Storage of such material in conjunction with a permitted manufacturing process within an enclosed area or
building shall not be included. Such use shall not include the deposit or disposal of garbage and other organic material.
KENNEL: Any premises where four (4) or more dogs, cats or other customary household pets six (6) months or older at any one time
are kept or accepted for boarding, breeding, training or sale, except when located in a pet shop or veterinary clinic.
LIFT STATION: A facility, usually including pumping facilities, for the lifting of sewage or stormwater runoff to a higher sewage facility
or stormwater runoff facility.
LOADING BERTH: An unobstructed area provided and maintained for the temporary parking of trucks and other motor vehicles, for
the purpose of loading and unloading goods, wares, materials and merchandise.
LODGING HOUSE: A building containing lodging rooms accommodating, for compensation, three (3) or more persons, but not
exceeding twelve (12), who are not of the keeper's family. Lodging may be provided with or without meals.
LOT: A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide
such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street or on an
approved private street and may consist of:
A. A single lot of record.
B. A portion of a lot of record.
C. A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of
record.
D. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided, that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or
parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this title.
LOT AREA: The area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot lines, but not including any area which has been dedicated as
public thoroughfare or road.
LOT AREA PER UNIT: The number of square feet of lot area per dwelling unit.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection
in alignment of a continued street, the interior angle of which does not exceed one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot.
LOT LINE: The property line bounding a lot; except, that where any portion of a lot extends into the public right of way or a proposed
public right of way, the nearest line of such public right of way shall be the lot line for applying this title.
LOT LINE, FRONT: That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street and, in the case of a corner lot, it shall
be the shortest dimension on a public street.
LOT LINE, REAR: That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet (10') in length or if
the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot, connecting the side lot lines and
parallel to the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: Part of a subdivision the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds or registrar of titles;
or a parcel of land the deed to which was recorded in the office of the register of deeds or registrar of titles, in accordance with
subdivision regulations and zoning ordinances of the city in effect at the time of such conveyance.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two (2) streets, and which is not a corner lot.
LOT, WIDTH: The maximum distance between the side lot lines of any lot measured parallel to front lot lines at the minimum front
yard setback line.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure,
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 281/454
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's
lowest floor.
MAJOR ROADS: Principal arterials (TH 61/10) and other minor arterials.
MANUFACTURED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is
eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or
more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling for one family, with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
systems contained therein. No manufactured dwelling shall be moved into the city that does not meet the manufactured home
building code as defined in Minnesota statutes section 327.31, subdivision 3.
MANUFACTURING: All manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment or assembly of products and materials.
MARINA: Facilities which may include piers or systems of floating or fixed accessways providing moorings for motor boats and
yachts and offering supply, repair and other facilities for such use.
MAXIMUM ALLOCATED SEWER CAPACITY: The monthly average daily contribution of influent from the city of the Cottage Grove
sewage treatment plant of no more than 2.54 MGD on a monthly basis.
MEDICAL USES: Those uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment and care of human beings. These include hospitals, dental
services, medical services or clinics, nursing convalescent homes and sanatoriums.
METROPOLITAN URBAN SERVICE AREA: An area designed to achieve orderly, economic and contiguous growth by directing
development to areas where roads and sewers already exist or are planned to accommodate development.
MINIMUM NEEDS ASSESSMENT: Shall contain information necessary to determine whether existing or programmed roads and
sewers will be adequate to serve the demand generated by the new development.
MINING: The extraction of sand, gravel or other material from the land, in the amount of four hundred (400) cubic yards or more, and
removal of such materials from the site.
MOTOR COURT, MOTOR HOTEL OR MOTEL: A building or group of buildings other than a hotel, used primarily as a temporary
residence of a motorist.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is transferred and/or stored for movement
in intrastate or interstate shipment by motor truck.
MOTOR FUEL STATION: A retail place of business engaged primarily in the sale of motor fuels, but also may be engaged in
supplying goods and services generally required in the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles. These may include sale of
petroleum products, sale and servicing of tires, batteries, automobile accessories, and replacement items, washing and lubrication
services; and the performance of minor automotive maintenance and repair.
MOTOR FUEL STATION CONVENIENCE STORE: A store operated in conjunction with a major motor fuel station or truck stop, for
the purpose of offering for sale or rental of goods and services not essential to the motoring public.
MOTOR FUEL STATION, MAJOR: A motor fuel station located within five hundred feet (500') of the right of way of a designated
state trunk highway or a federally aided interstate highway and on a major city thoroughfare, city collector street, highway service
road or highway.
MOTOR FUEL STATION, MINOR: A motor fuel station located at the intersection of two (2) or more major city thoroughfares; two (2)
or more city collector streets; or one or more major city thoroughfares with one or more city collector streets; but not within five
hundred feet (500') of the right of way of a designated state trunk highway or a federally aided interstate highway. Such major city
thoroughfares and city collector streets shall be those designated by the city council, in accordance with the comprehensive guide
plan of the city.
NATURAL RATE OF ABSORPTION: The amount of stormwater absorbed in the soil during a storm of once in twenty (20) year
occurrence.
NEW DEVELOPMENT: Proposals for subdivision and site plans for new construction, except: a) minor subdivisions of three (3) lots
or less, and b) extension or enlargement of an existing building not exceeding fifty thousand (50,000) square feet which does not
generate more than two hundred (200) additional residential equivalent connections, the average daily wastewater flow from a
single-family dwelling (gallons per day).
NONCOMMERCIAL VEHICLES: Passenger automobiles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles not used for commercial purposes,
pickup trucks not used for commercial purposes and other vehicles designed for and used for passenger travel, except vehicles
defined as "commercial vehicles, Class I or II".
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: Any structure which is existing upon the effective date of this Title1, which would not conform to
the applicable regulations if the structure were to be erected under the provisions of this Title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 282/454
NONCONFORMING USE: Use of land, buildings or structures permitted and existing at the time of adoption of this Title, which does
not comply with all the regulations of this Title or any amendments hereto governing the zoning district in which such use is located.
NORMAL HIGH WATER MARK: A mark delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time
to leave evidence upon the landscape. The normal high water mark is commonly that point where the natural landscape changes
from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial.
NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIAL: Material which is capable of causing injury or is in any way harmful to living organisms, or is
capable of causing detrimental effects upon the health, physical, physiological, social or economic well-being of individuals.
NURSERY, DAY: A use where care is provided for pay for three (3) or more children under kindergarten age, for periods of four (4)
hours or more per day.
OBSTRUCTION: Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification,
culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse,
or regulatory flood plain which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or
collecting debris carried by such water.
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE: A space accessible from a street, alley or driveway, for the use of trucks while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials. Such space shall be of such size as to accommodate one truck of the type typically used in the particular
business.
OFFICES: Those commercial activities that take place in office buildings, where goods are not produced, sold or repaired, including
banks; general offices; governmental offices; insurance offices; professional offices; real estate offices; taxicab offices, but not taxi
stands; travel agencies or transportation ticket offices; telephone exchanges; utility offices; radio broadcasting facilities and similar
uses.
OPEN SALES LOT: Land devoted to the display of goods for sale, rent, lease or trade, where such goods are not enclosed within a
building.
ORNAMENTAL TREE: A deciduous tree with a mature height under thirty feet (30') that is used for color accents where an overstory
tree is not practical.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment, not necessarily
conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
OVERSTORY TREES: Large, deciduous, shade-producing trees with a mature height over thirty feet (30').
PARTY WALL: A wall which divides two (2) adjoining properties and in which each of the owners of the adjoining properties has
rights of enjoyment.
PEAK PERIOD TRIPS: Vehicular trips generated on Trunk Highway 61 during the weekday hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and from three o'clock (3:00) P.M. to five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: Criteria established to control noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive
hazards, or glare or heat generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PIPELINE: An underground line of pipe, including associated pumps, valves, control devices and other structures, utilized for
conveying liquids, gases, sewage or other finely divided solids from one point to another.
PLANNED FOR CONSTRUCTION: That an improvement is scheduled for construction within five (5) years in the city's capital
improvement program or a capital improvement plan or similar plan of the county, metropolitan council, or other implementing agency
including the transportation improvement program, or is included as part of an improvement to be constructed incident to a new
development.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: All multiple-family dwellings, involving one or more buildings, all developments having two (2) or
more principal uses or structures on a single parcel of land, multi-use structures such as a multiple-family dwelling with retail at
ground floor level, townhouses and similar projects.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The planning commission of the city.
PLEASURE CRAFT: A boat or yacht used primarily for recreational activity.
POULTRY FARM: A tract of land located in an agricultural area, being used exclusively for the purpose of raising poultry.
PUBLIC FACILITIES: Includes roads and sanitary sewer collection and treatment system.
PUBLIC PARK: A recreation area owned or operated by the city, county, state or other governmental unit.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 283/454
PUBLIC UTILITY: Transmission facilities of electric power, gas, water, telephone and railroad companies, including electric power
transmission lines and gas pipelines; but not substations; telephone facilities, water pumping, reservoir and distribution facilities and
railroad trackage; but not including storage and switching yards.
PUBLIC UTILITY POLE: Including, but not limited to, water towers, public safety antennas, lights and signals, power and telephone
poles, and poles supporting emergency warning devices.
PUMP ISLAND SETBACK: The distance from the street right of way line to the centerline of the motor fuel station pump island,
measured as a perpendicular distance from the right of way at the closest point to the pump island.
QUARTER/QUARTER SECTION: The northeast, northwest, southeast or southwest quarter section of land delineated by the United
States government system of land survey and which is exactly or nearly forty (40) acres in size.
REACH: A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or humanmade
obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two (2) consecutive bridge crossings would most typically
constitute a "reach".
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: For purposes of chapter 12 of this title, a vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is four hundred (400)
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the purposes of chapter 12 of this title, the term recreational vehicle shall be synonymous with
the term travel trailer/travel vehicle.
RECYCLING COLLECTION POINT: A collection point that serves as a community drop off point for temporary storage of items (e.g.,
paper, aluminum, cans, glass and plastic) that are to be recycled.
REGIONAL FLOOD: A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably
characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval.
Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood" used in a flood insurance study.
REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION: The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be seven hundred feet (700')
above mean sea level or at an elevation no lower than one foot (1') above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in
flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway, whichever is greater. It is the
elevation to which uses regulated by this title are required to be elevated or flood protected.
REQUIRED LANDSCAPED AREAS: The front, side and rear yards of a site that are to be landscaped in conformance with
subsection 11-6-5D2a of this title.
REQUIRED YARDS: The area of an existing parcel, excluding public right of way, buildings and impervious surface.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: A lot, building or a portion thereof used exclusively for a dwelling unit including concomitant uses
and other uses of a residential nature for individuals residing in said dwelling units.
REST HOME: A private home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such
a home does not contain equipment for surgical care or for the treatment of diseases or injury, nor does it include maternity care or
care for mental illnesses or infirmities.
RESTAURANT: "Restaurants" shall be classified as class 1, class 2 or class 3, as follows:
A. Traditional restaurants and cafeterias: Class 1.
B. Carryout and delivery restaurants: Class 2.
C. Drive-in and fast food restaurants: Class 3.
Cafeteria Food: Food which is selected by a customer while going through a serving line and taken to a table for
consumption.
Carryout And Delivery Restaurant Food: Food which is not intended to be consumed on the premises, but instead is
prepared and sold in the assumption that it will be consumed off the premises. Such restaurants do not provide sitting areas
for consumption on the premises.
Drive-In Restaurant: A restaurant where most customers consume their food in an automobile, regardless of how it is served.
Fast Food Restaurant: A restaurant where a majority of customers order and are served their food at a counter and then take
it to a table or counter where it is consumed; however, a significant number may take the food outside to eat it in an
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 284/454
automobile or off the premises.
Traditional Restaurant Food: Food which is served to a customer and consumed by the customer while seated at a counter
or table.
RETAIL SHOPPING STORES: Stores and shops selling personal services or goods over a counter, including the following
businesses, goods and services: antiques; art and school supplies; auto accessories; bakeries; barbershops; beauty parlors;
bicycles; books and stationery; candy; cameras and photographical supplies; carpets and rugs; catering establishments; china and
glassware; Christmas tree sales; clothes pressing; clothing and costume rental; custom dressmaking; department stores and junior
department stores; drugs; dry goods; electrical and household appliances; sales and repair; florists; food; furniture; furrier shops;
garden supplies (year round operation only); gifts; hardware; hats; hobby shops for retail of items to be assembled or used away
from the premises; household appliances; hotels and apartment hotels; interior decorating; jewelry, including watch repair;
laboratories, medical and dental research and testing; laundry and dry cleaning pick up processing to be done elsewhere;
laundromats; leather goods and luggage; locksmith shops; musical instruments; office supply equipment; optometrists; paint and
wallpaper; phonograph records; photography studios; restaurants, when no entertainment or dancing is provided; shoes; sporting
goods; tailoring; theaters, except open air, drive-in; tobacco; toys; variety stores; wearing apparel and similar uses.
RETAINING WALL: A structure utilized to hold a slope in a position in which it would not naturally remain.
RIVERFRONT: Every lot or parcel of land which is immediately adjacent to the Mississippi River.
ROAD: A public right of way, intended for vehicular traffic, including freeways, expressways, arterials, parkways, thoroughfares,
collector streets, local streets, cul-de-sacs, access streets, avenues, boulevards, lanes, and other public ways, as now or hereafter
designated.
SANITARY LANDFILL: An operation in which waste, including dry trash, incombustible rubbish and garbage, is deposited in
specified areas in open trenches, ditches or topographical depressions and is systematically compacted by mechanical forces and
then covered by a compacted layer of earth, ashes or suitable covering material.
SANITARY SEWER DISCHARGE USER, HIGH CAPACITY: Uses within the industrial park MUSA that have a discharge into the
sanitary sewer system averaging above seven hundred fifty (750) gallons per acre per day.
SANITARY SEWER DISCHARGE USER, LOW CAPACITY: Uses within the industrial park MUSA that have a discharge into the
sanitary sewer system averaging less than seven hundred fifty (750) gallons per acre per day.
SATELLITE RECEIVE ONLY ANTENNA (SROA): An accessory structure consisting of a device commonly parabolic in shape,
mounted at a fixed point and capable of receiving, for the benefit of the principal use, television signals from a transmitter or a
transmitter relay located in geostationary orbit, and serving the same or similar function as the common television antenna.
SEPTIC TANK: Any device for the treatment and disposal of human waste which utilizes the percolation of the liquid portion of the
waste into the soil, including all portions of such system which are not confined inside a building.
SEWAGE DESIGN CAPACITY: The total available sewage capacity in collectors and interceptors tributary to the new development.
SHELTER, FALLOUT OR BLAST: A structure or portion of a structure intended to provide protection to human life during periods of
danger to human life from nuclear fallout, blasts, air raids, storms or other emergencies.
SHRUBS, LARGE: Deciduous shrubs with mature natural growth over six feet (6') in height.
SHRUBS, MEDIUM: Deciduous shrubs with mature natural growth between four (4) to six feet (6') in height.
SHRUBS, SMALL: Deciduous shrubs with mature natural growth less than four feet (4') in height.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display, illustration, structure or device which is affixed to or represented directly or
indirectly upon a building or other surface not within a building and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity,
person, institution, organization or business.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: A structure or portion thereof that is intended for advertising purposes, on which letters, figures or pictorial
matters are intended to be displayed for advertising purposes, other than the name, occupation and/or nature of the enterprise
conducted on the premises. This definition will not be held to include a real estate sign advertising for sale or rent the property on
which it stands.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession or to the commodity, service or entertainment sold or
offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is attached.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: A sign giving travel directions to a use not located on the premises.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign and in
no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of such sign; however, such perimeter shall not include any structural
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 285/454
elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display. In computing square foot area, only one
side of a double face or V-type structure shall be considered.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: In a business or industrial district, a sign or nameplate which states the name or address or both of the
business, industry or occupant of the lot; or a directory, listing the names, addresses and business of occupants.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION, RESIDENTIAL: In a residential district, a nameplate sign identifying a resident (including address and
profession or occupation), school, church or other nonbusiness use.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, design or outline illuminated by electric lights or tubes.
SIGN, PEDESTAL: A ground sign erected on not more than three (3) shafts or posts solidly affixed to the ground.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A sign offering property, land and/or buildings for sale, lease or rent.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any sign not exceeding ten (10) square feet, placed in such a manner as not to be solidly affixed to any
building, structure or land, and advertising an event such as a bazaar, special sale, sporting event or similar activity; in no event,
however, shall such signs be placed on any lot or parcel of land for a period to exceed thirty (30) days out of any twelve (12) month
period.
SIGNIFICANT TREE: A healthy tree measuring a minimum of six inches (6") in diameter for deciduous trees, defined herein, or a
minimum of twelve inches (12") in diameter for softwood deciduous trees as defined herein; or a minimum of ten feet (10') in height
for coniferous/evergreen trees.
SIGNIFICANT WOODLAND: A grouping or cluster of coniferous and/or deciduous trees with contiguous crown cover, occupying five
hundred (500) or more square feet of property and having a minimum width of twenty feet (20'), which are comprised of deciduous
trees between four inches (4") and twelve inches (12") in diameter or coniferous trees between four feet (4') and twelve feet (12') in
height.
SLOPE: The inclination of the natural surface of the land from the horizontal.
SOLID WASTE: Garbage, refuse, sludge from a water supply treatment plant or air contaminant treatment facility, and other
discarded waste materials and sludges, in solid, semisolid, liquid, or contained gaseous form, resulting from industrial, commercial,
mining, and agricultural operations, and from community activities, but does not include hazardous waste; animal waste used as
fertilizer; earthen fill, boulders, rock; sewage sludge; solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage or other common pollutants in
water resources, such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial wastewater effluents or discharges which are point sources
subject to permits under section 402 of the federal water pollution control act, as amended, dissolved materials in irrigation return
flows; or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the atomic energy act of 1954, as amended.
SPECIMEN TREE: A healthy hardwood deciduous tree measuring equal to or greater than thirty inches (30") in diameter and/or a
coniferous tree measuring fifty feet (50') or greater in height.
STREET: A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court or otherwise designated.
STREET LINE: The land covered by a street or land dedicated for public use or for certain private use for vehicular traffic.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground or on site utilities, including, but not limited
to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles not meeting the exemption
criteria specified in section 11-12-9 of this title, travel trailers/vehicles, signs and other similar items.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL: A structure which determines the predominant use of the lot on which it is located.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: For purposes of chapter 12 of this title, damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: For purposes of chapter 12 of this title, within any consecutive three hundred sixty five (365) day
period, any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
"start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 286/454
B. Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure". For the purpose of chapter 12 of this title, "historic structure" shall be as defined in 44 code of federal
regulations, part 59.1.
SUBSTATION: Any utility structure other than lines, pipelines, holes or towers.
TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTHCARE DWELLINGS: Transitional housing on a relative's or caregiver's property for those with mental
or physical impairments and aging family members who need short term care.
TERRACE: A relatively level area bordered on one or more sides by a retaining wall.
TOWER: Any pole, spire, structure, structural support, or combination thereof, which is built specifically for the purpose of mounting
an antenna.
TOWNHOME: A residential building containing two (2) or more dwelling units with at least one common wall, each unit so oriented as
to have all exits open to the outside.
TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS OR STUDY: Analyzes the impacts of trips generated by new development on the traffic study area
and recommends solutions or strategies to reduce that impact.
TRAFFIC STUDY AREA: The travel shed and includes TH 61/10 and roads tributary to it.
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM): Measures which encourage drivers to use alternative modes to driving alone
during the peak period.
TRUCK STOP: A motor fuel station devoted principally to the needs of tractor trailer units and trucks and located within five hundred
feet (500') of the right of way of a designated state trunk highway and/or a federally aided interstate highway and on a major city
thoroughfare, city collector street, highway service road or highway.
USE: The purpose or activity for which land or a building thereon is designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied,
utilized or maintained, and shall include the performance standards of this title.
USE, ACCESSORY: A use or structure subordinate to and serving the principal use or structure on the same lot and customarily
incidental thereto.
USE, CONDITIONAL: Either a public or private use which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be accorded the status of a
permitted use in a particular district.
USE, PERMITTED: A public or private use which of itself conforms with the purposes and objectives of a particular district and
conforms with all requirements, regulations and performance standards, if any, of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land or buildings, as distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses. A "principal use" may be
either permitted or conditional.
USE, TEMPORARY: A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue the use upon a specified expiration
date.
UTILITY FACILITY: A physical facility of an electric, telephone, telegraph, cable television, water, sewer, solid waste, gas or similar
service operation.
VEHICLE: Any self-propelled device in, or upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported. A vehicle properly
loaded on a trailer shall constitute a single vehicle.
VEHICLE REPAIR: An establishment engaged in performing repairs and service to recreational vehicles and vehicles. Repair may
include all activities of repair or service, including major engine and transmission repair and replacement, exhaust system
replacement, fluid changes and lubrication, tire repair and changes, wheel alignment, brake repair, suspension repair, air conditioner
servicing, and similar minor repairs and service.
WAREHOUSING: The storage of materials or equipment within an enclosed building.
WATER BODY: Any lake, stream, pond, wetland or river.
WATER DEPENDENT USES: Uses which, in order to exist or function, require a location or use of the riverfront, including, but not
limited to, barge loading and barge fleeting areas, marinas, industries which receive or ship goods or materials by water as an
essential part of their operation, boat and barge construction, dismantling and repair, riverfront recreation, intakes and outfalls, and
water monitoring and measuring facilities.
WETLAND: Any land which is seasonably wet or flooded, including all marshes, bogs, swamps and floodplains.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 287/454
WHOLESALING: The selling of goods, equipment and materials by bulk to another business that in turn sells to the final customer.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS): Any device, such as a wind charger, windmill or wind turbine, which converts
wind energy to a form of usable energy.
YARD: A required open space on a lot, which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure from its lowest ground level to the sky,
except as expressly permitted in this title. A yard shall extend along a lot line and at right angles to such lot line, to a depth or width
specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines, and extending from the abutting front
street right of way line to a depth required in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line between the side lot lines and extending toward the front lot
line for a depth as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along the side lot line between the front and rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
ZONING DISTRICT: An area or areas within the limits of the city for which the regulations and requirements governing use, lot and
size of buildings and premises are uniform. (1971 Code § 28-3; amd. 1971 Code § 28-68; Ord. 600, 8-3-1994; Ord. 618, 8-2-1995;
Ord. 625, 3-20-1996; Ord. 635, 9-18-1996; Ord. 648, 7-16-1997; Ord. 659, 8-19-1998; Ord. 665, 6-16-1999; 2000 Code; Ord. 762, 5-
5-2004; Ord. 827, 10-17-2007; Ord. 841, 8-13-2008; Ord. 872, 2-3-2010; Ord. 873, 2-3-2010; Ord. 884, 10-20-2010; Ord. 888, 4-20-
2011; Ord. 893, 8-10-2011; Ord. 939, 2-4-2015; Ord. 966, 8-10-2016)
11-1-4: INTERPRETATION; COMPLIANCE:
A. Minimum Requirements: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
B. More Restrictive Conditions Apply: Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this title are either more restrictive or less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance, statute, resolution or regulation of any kind, the
regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail.
C. Compliance With Provisions: No structure shall be erected, moved, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no
structure or land shall be used for any purpose nor in any manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this title. (1971
Code § 28-4)
11-1-5: ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
For the purposes of this title, the city is hereby divided into the following use districts and groups of use districts:
A. Agricultural districts:
AG-1 Agricultural preservation district
AG-2 Agricultural district
B. Residential districts:
R-1 Rural residential district
R-2 Residential estate district
R-2.5 Residential district
R-3 Single-family residential district
R-4 Low density residential district
R-5 Medium density residential district
R-6 High density residential district
UR Urban reserve residential district
R-2A Residential single-family district
R-2B Detached single-family district
R-2C Detached single-family district
R-2D Twin home single-family district
R-2E Residential townhouse district
R-2F Residential multi-family district
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 288/454
C. Business districts:
B-1 Limited business district
B-2 Retail business district
B-3 General business district
P-B Planned business district
N-B Neighborhood business district
D. Industrial districts:
I-1 Limited industry district
I-2 General industrial district
I-3 Heavy industrial district
I-4 Commercial excavation district
I-5 Railroad access industrial district
E. Floodway and flood fringe districts.
F. CD Conservancy district.
G. PUD Planned unit development district.
H. Planned development overlay district.
I. Mississippi River corridor critical area overlay district.
All references in this title to R, B, I, CD, AG and PUD districts shall refer to all individual districts having the appropriate prefix.
Reference to a specific district shall be for that district only. (1971 Code § 28-5; amd. 1971 Code § 28-69; Ord. 623, 1-17-1996;
Ord. 632, 9-18-1996; Ord. 640, 12-4-1996; Ord. 732, 5-21-2003; Ord. 782, 12-21-2005; Ord. 796, 6-21-2006; Ord. 904, 5-16-
2012)
11-1-6: ZONING MAP:
The boundaries of the districts enumerated in section 11-1-5 of this chapter are hereby established as shown on that certain map
titled "official zoning districts of Cottage Grove, Minnesota", which map is properly approved and filed, hereinafter referred to as the
"zoning map". Such map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall have the same force and effect
as if fully set down herein and are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this title. (1971 Code § 28-6)
11-1-7: DETERMINATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where any uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a boundary line as shown on the zoning map, the location of such line shall
be determined by the council. (1971 Code § 28-7)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
11-2-1: DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:
A. Enforcement Official; Appointment: This title shall be administered and enforced by the director of community development, who
shall be appointed by the city council. (1971 Code § 28-9; amd. 2000 Code)
B. Duties: The director of community development shall enforce this title and, in addition thereto and in furtherance of such authority,
shall:
1. Determine that all building permits comply with the terms of this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 289/454
2. Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this title.
3. Maintain permanent and current records of this title, including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments and special uses,
variances, appeals and applications therefor.
4. Receive, file and forward all applications for appeals, variances, special uses or other matters to the designated official bodies.
5. Institute, in the name of the city, any appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator, as provided by law.
6. Serve as an ex officio, nonvoting member of the planning commission. (1971 Code § 28-10; amd. 2000 Code)
11-2-2: BUILDING PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: No structure shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered until a building permit has been issued indicating
that the existing or proposed structure and the use of the land comply with this title and all building codes. (1971 Code § 28-16;
amd. 2000 Code)
B. Application For Permit:
1. Every building permit application for construction or relocation of a new principal building on a lot in all zoning districts shall
include a certificate of survey signed by a registered land surveyor showing:
a. That permanent iron monuments have been placed at each lot corner. The iron monuments shall be visible at the time of the
footing form inspection.
b. All lot dimensions, easements of record, and elevations at the property corners, garage floor, and lowest floor.
c. Scale of drawing.
d. Legal description.
e. North arrow.
f. Indicate "buildable area". A "buildable area" is a continuous portion of a lot that is suitable for the location of the primary
structure and that excludes all existing and proposed easements, setback areas for principal structure, wetlands, floodplains,
the neck portion of any neck or flag lot, and other unbuildable areas. Certain easements may be included in the buildable
area at the discretion of the city if their inclusion is consistent with the intent of this code.
g. Dimension of the proposed driveway if lot is considered a neck or flag lot, or a lot without frontage.
h. Location of all existing buildings on the lot.
i. Grade elevation to mean sea level at the following points:
(1) Each lot corner.
(2) Crown of proposed street at each lot line extended.
(3) Proposed lawn and driveway elevations at the street side of the building.
(4) Proposed drainage patterns.
(5) Existing and proposed grades at all major corners of the structure, at walkouts, and top edge of egress window wells.
(6) The existing grade next to any existing buildings located on the adjacent lots.
(7) Outside dimensions and location of proposed building, including decks, porches, stairways, cants, fireplaces, bay and
bow windows and walkouts.
(8) Location of all existing manholes, hydrants, catch basins, power poles, utility pedestals, fences, curb and gutter or road
edge and/or gutter line, water service valves, and storm inlets.
j. Locate and depict all "significant tree(s)" to be removed or preserved on the property.
k. Indicate names of abutting streets and right of way widths.
l. Style of residential structure; split entry, rambler, full basement, partial, etc. (elevation provided at low opening of structure).
m. Location and water elevation of all existing wetlands, stormwater basins, streams, and lakes within one hundred feet (100')
of subject property.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 290/454
n. Garage must be noted along with driveway location and slope.
o. Emergency overflow elevation and location.
2. The proposed building on the lot shall be staked at the corners, and the survey shall reflect the location of the proposed
building and its distance from the property lines.
3. A certificate of survey from a registered land surveyor is required for only that area surrounding the construction site and all
other areas establishing the final grades and drainage swales for lots that are one and one-half (11/2) acres or larger in area.
The certificate of survey must include additional information as required by the director of community development or building
official if additional grade elevations are necessary to adequately determine drainage and topographic elevations. (Ord. 936,
11-19-2014)
C. Review Of Application; Denial:
1. Applications Generally: All building permit applications for permitted uses shall be reviewed and approved by the building
official for compliance with title 9 of this code; the director of community development shall review the application for
compliance with city ordinances. The building permit application shall include all information necessary to provide for the
enforcement of this title.
2. Conditional Uses: If the building permit application is for a conditional use in addition to the approvals previously requested
herein, the application shall be reviewed and approved by the city council.
3. Refusal For Noncompliance: The city may refuse to issue a building permit for noncompliance with the applicable building
codes and/or city ordinances or for other reasons, and refer the matter through the appropriate appeals process as determined
by the director of community development. (1971 Code § 28-16; amd. 2000 Code)
11-2-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A. Certificate Required: No building permit for any construction, alteration or moving shall be issued unless such building permit is for
the purpose of securing a certificate of occupancy for such existing or contemplated structure.
B. Application For Certificate; Issuance: The application for a certificate of occupancy shall accompany the application for a building
permit, and such certificate shall be issued within ten (10) days after the building official shall have found the building, structure,
site plan and use satisfactory. Until such certificate is issued, the property or addition shall not be occupied for intended use. In all
districts, when applying for a certificate for a new structure, the enlarging of a structure or a new or enlarged use of a lot, the
application shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to a scale with dimensions indicating the location of off street parking and
loading spaces in compliance with this title and other data as required.
C. Nonconforming Use; Issuance Of Certificate: A record of each nonconforming use in existence on the effective date of this title1
shall be made and maintained by the director of community development, and a certificate of occupancy issued by the building
official. (1971 Code § 28-17; amd. 2000 Code)
11-2-4: SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES:
A. Site Plan Required; Purpose; Exceptions:
1. A site plan shall be approved before a building permit for a new structure or major addition to an existing structure may be
issued.
2. The purpose of such approval is to assure that new developments conform to the city's development standards and ordinances
and provide the most appropriate and compatible site plan for the area.
3. No grading shall be performed on the site and no building permit shall be issued until the site plan has been approved.
4. The planning commission review, city council approval, and notice to surrounding property owners required by subsection E of
this section may be waived in the following cases:
a. The construction or alteration of a single-family detached dwelling and its associated accessory building on an individual lot.
b. Agricultural buildings.
c. Any other situation where the director of community development determines that the preparation, review and approval by
the planning commission and city council of a detailed site plan is unnecessary to meet the objectives of this section.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 291/454
5. Where planning commission review and council approval are waived, the applicant shall submit the site plan and supporting
documentation in compliance with subsections B through E of this section.
6. Uses permitted in each zoning district shall be reviewed by City staff for:
a. Traffic and pedestrian circulation;
b. Parking;
c. Drainage;
d. Landscaping; and
e. Compliance with other applicable ordinances.
B. Coordination With Other Regulations: It is the intent that site plan review under this Title be coordinated with subdivision review
under Title 10 of this Code and with any other permit reviews that may be necessary, including conditional use permits.
C. Preapplication Conference: The applicant shall meet with the City Planning Division or other designated staff, prior to the
presentation of plans, to relate his/her intent. Thereafter, an applicant, at his/her option, may confer with the Planning
Commission to obtain information and advice prior to entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial expense in the
preparation of plans, surveys and other data.
D. Application Requirements:
1. Request for site plan approval may be initiated by the owner, user or potential user of the subject property by making
application in writing to the Planning Division, on such forms as may be designated from time to time. Each applicant shall
reimburse the City for all costs incurred in processing the application.
2. The application shall include twelve (12) copies of a site plan, drawn at a common, legible scale. The scale used shall be no
smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100').
3. The maximum size of plans shall be thirty inches by forty inches (30" x 40"), and the minimum size shall be eleven inches by
seventeen inches (11" x 17").
4. The site plan shall contain the following minimum information and any other items which the Planning Division considers
necessary for the proper consideration of the application. The Planning Division may waive inclusion of one or more of the
items if not relevant to an individual application:
a. General Information:
(1) Name of project/development;
(2) Location of project/development;
(3) Location map, including area within one-half (1/2) mile of site;
(4) Name and mailing address of developer/owner;
(5) Name and mailing address of engineer/architect;
(6) Date of plan preparation;
(7) North point indicator; and
(8) Scale.
b. Site Information:
(1) Boundary line of property with dimensions;
(2) Location, identification and dimensions of existing and proposed:
(A) Topographic contours at a minimum interval of two feet (2'); fill quantities, dredging, filling, grading, channel
improvements and storage of materials;
(B) Adjacent streets and street rights of way;
(C) On-site streets and street rights of way;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 292/454
(D) Utilities and utility rights of way and easements, including electric, natural gas, telephone, water (domestic and fire) and
sewer (sanitary and storm);
(E) Existing and proposed buildings and structures;
(F) Parking facilities;
(G) Water bodies, flood fringe, flood plain and floodway, if applicable, and relationships and impacts in the flood plain;
(H) Sidewalks, walkways, driveways, loading areas and docks and bikeways;
(I) Fences and retaining walls;
(J) Exterior signs;
(K) Exterior refuse collection areas;
(L) Exterior lighting;
(M) Landscaping, including species, sizes and locations;
(N) Traffic flow on-site;
(O) Traffic flow off-site;
(P) Transit facilities and movements; and
(Q) Recreation facilities;
(3) Cross-sections of property as required by the Director of Community Development;
(4) Number of employee and nonemployee parking spaces existing and proposed and total square footage of each; and
(5) Site statistics, including site square footage, percent of site coverage, dwelling unit density and percent of park or open
space.
c. Building Information:
(1) Elevation drawings of all proposed structures and buildings, with dimensions;
(2) Preliminary floor plans for all stories of proposed structures and buildings, with room usage labeled and dimensions;
(3) Elevation and height above mean sea level of all floors and the roof, floodproofing measures, and construction materials;
(4) Gross square footage of existing and proposed structures and buildings;
(5) Exterior finish materials; and
(6) Type of construction.
E. Application Review Procedure:
1. Planning Commission Review:
a. The application for site plan approval shall be referred to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation and to
other commissions as directed by the Planning Division. In the case of flood plain applications, the City Engineer shall
evaluate the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the use, the
adequacy of the plans for protection and other technical matters.
b. The Planning Commission shall consider the application at its next regular meeting. Notice of the meeting shall be mailed to
all owners of abutting property at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting date. Failure of the property owners to receive this
notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
c. The Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council on the site plan within sixty (60) days of the date of
review, unless an extension of the review period has been agreed to by the applicant.
2. City Council Action:
a. The City Council, upon review of the application and recommendations submitted, and upon finding that the proposed site
plan is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and in conformity with the City's development standards and the intent of this
Title, may grant approval of the site plan or grant approval subject to conditions or changes.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 293/454
b. In the case of flood plain applications, the City Council shall also determine the specific flood hazard at the site and evaluate
the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood hazard. Such decisions shall be given within sixty (60) days of
receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation, unless an extension of the review period has been agreed to by the
applicant.
F. Expiration Of Approval: Site plan approval shall expire one year after it has been issued, unless construction of the use for which
the permit has been granted has begun. If construction is not started within one year, the developer may file a written request with
the Planning Division for a one year extension. The Director of Community Development may grant the extension of he/she
determines that construction will be commenced within the one year extension period. Only one such extension may be granted.
G. Amendments To Approved Site Plans: The Director of Community Development may approve minor changes in the location, siting
and heights for buildings and structures or in the landscape plan, if required for engineering or other circumstances not foreseen
at the time the final plan was approved. All other changes shall be reviewed and approved according to the procedures for the
original site plan approval.
H. Guarantees Of Performances:
1. Before a building permit is issued, the owner shall file a performance bond or an irrevocable letter of credit or place in escrow
an amount equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the estimate of the Director of Community Development or City
Engineer of the cost of installation of all landscaping, sidewalks, grading, screening, lighting, recreation facilities, streets and
utility extensions or any other improvements required to be furnished or installed by the owner.
2. Upon completion of the various work items, the owner shall apply to the City for a final inspection. If the City finds that all
installations meet the requirements of the approved plans and specifications, the security agreement shall be released. A
security agreement for landscaping, however, shall be effective and held for one year after completion of the work, in order to
ensure that such landscaping will survive. If the improvements are not completed as proposed within the established time limit,
the City may proceed to complete such installation and seek reimbursement of its costs from the security agreement.
I. Installation Of Landscaping, Open Space And Recreation Facilities:
1. All landscaping, screening, common open space or recreation facilities shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for any building. If seasonal weather conditions present practical difficulties in the installation or completion of the
landscaping, an extension of not more than six (6) months may be granted, in writing, by the Director of Community
Development.
2. For projects in which construction will be in phases, the installation and completion of all landscaping, screening, common
open space or recreation facilities must proceed at the same rate as the construction of dwelling units or other structures. At
least once every three (3) months during construction, the Director of Community Development shall review all of the building
permits issued for the project and examine the construction which has taken place on the site. A written report of these
inspections shall be placed on file at the City Hall. If it shall be found that the rate of construction of structures is greater than
the rate at which the landscaping and other facilities have been provided, the Director of Community Development shall forward
the report to the Council, which may suspend the issuance of additional building permits for the site until such additional
landscaping or other facilities have been provided. (1971 Code § 28-18.2; amd. 2000 Code)
11-2-5: ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT WORKSHEETS AND IMPACT STATEMENTS:
A. Requirements Generally:
1. No building permit, site plan approval, variance, conditional use permit or ordinance amendment shall be approved prior to
review by the Director of Community Development to determine the necessity for completion of an environmental assessment
worksheet (EAW) or environmental impact statement (EIS).
2. Procedures for EAWs and EISs are set forth in the Minnesota Environmental Quality Board (EQB) Regulations for the
Environmental Review Program, 1987 edition and amendments thereto (6 MCAR sections 3.021 through 3.056), which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk.
3. Environmental reviews (EAWs and EISs) shall be conducted as early as practicable in the development of a proposed project.
Time delays in the normal permit process caused by the filing and review of the EAW or EIS shall not be considered part of the
permit approval time requirements within this Title. Such delays shall be considered as additional required time for each
required permit. The permit process for the proposed project may be continued from the point it was interrupted by the
EAW/EIS process. No final decision on granting a permit or other approval required to commence the project may be issued
until the EAW/EIS process is completed.
B. Environmental Assessment Worksheets (EAW):
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 294/454
1. Purpose: The purpose of an environmental assessment worksheet (EAW) is to rapidly assess, in a worksheet format, whether
or not a proposed action has the potential for significant environmental effects.
2. Mandatory EAWs: The preparation of an EAW shall be mandatory for those projects that meet or exceed the thresholds
contained in the State Environmental Review Program Regulations (6 MCAR section 3.038).
3. Discretionary EAWs: A discretionary EAW may be required when it is determined that, because of the nature or location of a
proposed project, the project may have the potential for significant environmental effects. The Director of Community
Development may require the preparation of a discretionary EAW in the following situations; providing, that the project is not
specifically exempted by 6 MCAR section 3.041:
a. Where a project has the potential for significant impact on areas of unique wildlife habitat, woodlands, historic sites, steep
slopes, wetlands, soils unsuitable for development, surface water bodies, natural watercourses or any other unique or
significant environmental features as noted in the Comprehensive Plan or revealed by a site inspection;
b. When it is determined, pursuant to the petition process of 6 MCAR section 3.026, that a project may have the potential for
significant effects; or
c. When the proposer wishes to initiate environmental review to determine if a project has the potential for significant
environmental effects.
4. EAW Procedures:
a. Preparation And Distribution:
(1) If the Director of Community Development determines that an EAW shall be prepared, the proposer of the project shall
submit an application for environmental review along with the EAW prepared in draft form. The applicant shall agree in
writing, as a part of the application, to reimburse the City prior to the issuance of any permits for all reasonable costs,
including legal and consultant fees, incurred in preparation and review of the EAW.
(2) If sufficient detailed information is not made available from the project proposer, or if the Director of Community
Development cannot complete the EAW because of time or workforce constraints, the Director of Community Development
may utilize a professional consultant to gather necessary information and complete the worksheet.
(3) Within thirty (30) days of submission of the application for environmental review, the Director of Community Development
shall review the draft EAW for completeness and accuracy, add supplementary material if necessary and approve the EAW
for distribution.
(4) If the environmental assessment worksheet is ordered to be prepared pursuant to the petition process of 6 MCAR section
3.026F, the EAW must be prepared within twenty five (25) working days of the date of that decision, unless an extension of
time is agreed upon by the proposer of the project and the Director of Community Development.
(5) Within five (5) days of approving the EAW for distribution, the Director of Community Development shall distribute copies
of the EAW to the Environmental Quality Board (EQB) for publication of the notice of availability of the EAW in the EQB
Monitor. Copies shall be distributed at the same time to the official EAW distribution list maintained by the EQB staff. Within
five (5) days of submission of the EAW to the EQB, the Director of Community Development shall provide a press release
to the City's official newspaper, containing notice of availability of the EAW for public review.
b. Review By Planning Commission: During the thirty (30) day comment period that follows publication of the notice of
availability of the EAW in the EQB Monitor, the Planning Commission shall review the EAW. The Commission shall make
recommendations to the City Council regarding potential environmental impacts that may warrant further investigation before
the project is commenced and the need for an environmental impact statement (EIS) on the proposed project.
c. Decision By City Council:
(1) The City Council shall make its decision on the need for an environmental impact statement (EIS) for the proposed
project at its first meeting more than ten (10) days but not more than thirty (30) days after the close of the comment period.
The Council shall base its decision on the need for an EIS and the proposed scope of an EIS, on the information gathered
during the EAW process and on the comments received on the EAW. In deciding whether a project has the potential for
significant environmental effects, the following factors shall be considered:
(A) Type, extent and reversibility of environmental effects;
(B) Cumulative potential effects of related or anticipated future projects;
(C) The extent to which the environmental effects are subject to mitigation by ongoing public regulatory authority; and
(D) The extent to which environmental effects can be anticipated and controlled as a result of other environmental studies
undertaken by public agencies or the project proposer, or of EISs previously prepared on similar projects.
(2) Within the five (5) days of the Council's decision on the need for an EIS, notice shall be provided to all persons on the
EAW distribution list, to all persons who commented in writing during the thirty (30) day comment period, to the EQB staff
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 295/454
for publication of the decision in the EQB Monitor and to any person upon written request.
C. Environmental Impact Statements (EIS):
1. Purpose: The purpose of an environmental impact statement (EIS) is to provide information for governmental units, the
proposer of the project and other persons to evaluate proposed projects which have the potential for significant environmental
effects, to consider alternatives to the proposed projects and to explore methods for reducing adverse environmental effects.
2. Mandatory EISs: An EIS shall be prepared for any project that meets or exceeds the thresholds of any of the EIS categories
listed in 6 MCAR section 3.039.
3. Discretionary EISs: An EIS shall be prepared when the City Council determines that, based on the environmental assessment
worksheet (EAW) and any comments or additional information received during the EAW comment period, the proposed project
has the potential for significant environmental effects; or when the City Council or the proposer of the project agrees that an
EIS should be prepared.
4. EIS Procedures:
a. All projects requiring an EIS must have an environmental assessment worksheet (EAW) on file with the City, which will be
used to determine the scope of the EIS.
b. All EISs shall be prepared according to the procedures and requirements of the State Environmental Review Program Rules,
6 MCAR sections 3.029 through 3.033.
c. The costs of preparation of an EIS shall be assessed to the project proposer in accordance with 6 MCAR sections 3.049
through 3.054.
d. Any proposal, project or use on which an EIS is required shall be considered a "conditional use" as defined in this Title and
shall comply with the procedure for approval of a conditional use permit. Mitigating recommendations of the EIS shall be
incorporated as conditions of issuance on the conditional use permit. (1971 Code § 28-18.1; amd. 2000 Code)
11-2-6: APPEALS:
A. Planning Commission As Board Of Zoning Appeals; Authority: The planning commission is constituted of the board of zoning
appeals and shall determine, in harmony with the general purpose of this title and the comprehensive plan, by resolution, all
appeals from any order, requirement, permit or decision made by the director of community development under this title, and from
any interpretation of the text of this title, or any determination by the director of community development as to the location of the
boundary of a zoning district as shown on the zoning map. (1971 Code § 28-11)
B. Filing Of Appeal: At any time within ten (10) working days after a decision of the director of community development under the
provisions of this title, except in connection with prosecutions for violations thereof, the applicant or other person or officers of the
city affected thereby may appeal to the planning commission by filing a written notice, stating the specific grounds upon which the
appeal is made. (Ord. 746, 10-15-2003)
C. Board Hearing; Notice: The planning commission, as the board of appeals, may conduct such hearings as it may deem advisable
and shall prescribe what notice, if any, shall be given of such hearing.
D. Council Hearing:
1. The council may review and revise any decision of the board of zoning appeals. In reviewing such decisions, the council shall
set a date for hearing thereon, not earlier than seven (7) days after, nor more than thirty (30) days after the decision is made by
the board of zoning appeals.
2. Notice of the hearing before the council shall be mailed to all appellants. In all cases involving determination of district
boundary lines or interpretation of the text of this title, ten (10) days' published notice of hearing in the official newspaper shall
be given. (1971 Code § 28-11)
11-2-7: VARIANCES:
A. Authority And Purpose: The council may grant variances from the strict application of the provisions of this title and impose
conditions and safeguards in the variances so granted in cases where there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of this title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 296/454
B. Application For Variance: An application for a variance shall be filed with the city and shall state the exceptional conditions and the
peculiar and practical difficulties claimed as a basis for a variance. The information necessary for variances shall be:
1. A scaled plot plan, with north indicated, of the proposed site, showing all dimensions as contained in the description indicated
in the application and all the structure(s) setback details.
C. Public Hearing Notice Requirements: The city shall hold at least one public hearing, affording an opportunity for all parties
interested to be heard, and shall give not less than ten (10) days' nor more than thirty (30) days' notice of the time and place of
such hearing, published in the designated legal newspaper for the city. Such notice shall also contain a description of the land
and the requested variance. At least ten (10) days before the hearing, an identical notice shall be mailed to the owner and to
each of the property owners of record a minimum distance of five hundred feet (500') of the outside boundaries of the land in
question. Failure of the city to mail the notice or failure of the property owners to receive the notice shall not invalidate the
proceedings.
D. Consideration By Planning Commission; Recommendation: Before authorization of any variances, the request therefor shall be
referred to the planning commission, and for its recommendation to the city council for the granting of such variance from the
strict application of the provisions of this title so as to relieve such practical difficulties to the degree considered reasonable
without impairing the intent and purpose of this title and the comprehensive plan. The planning commission shall recommend
such conditions related to the variance, regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or
use, as it may deem advisable. The planning commission shall make its recommendation within sixty (60) days after the request
is referred to it, unless the applicant requests, in writing, that an extension of time for review be granted by the planning
commission.
The planning commission may recommend a variance from the strict application of the provision of this title, if they find that:
1. The variance is in harmony with the purposes and intent of this title.
2. The variance is consistent with the comprehensive plan.
3. The proposal puts the property to a reasonable use.
4. There are unique circumstances to the property not created by the landowner.
5. That the conditions upon which an application for a variance is based are unique to the parcel of land for which the variance is
sought and are not applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning classification.
6. That the purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a financial hardship.
7. That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other land or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the parcel of land is located.
8. That the proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the
congestion of the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety.
E. Consideration By Council; Issuance: In considering applications for variances under this title, the council shall consider the advice
and recommendations of the planning commission. If the council shall determine that the special conditions applying to the
structure or land in question are peculiar to such property or immediately adjoining property and do not apply generally to other
land or structures in the district in which such land is located, that the granting of the application is necessary for the applicant
and that granting the proposed variance will not in any way impair health, safety, comfort or morals or in any other respect be
contrary to the intent of this title and the comprehensive plan, and that the granting of such variance will not merely serve as a
convenience to the applicant, but is necessary to alleviate demonstrable practical difficulty, the council may grant such variances
and impose conditions and safeguards therein.
F. Denial Of Variances: Variances may be denied by motion of the council, and such motion shall constitute a finding and
determination that the conditions required for approval do not exist. No application for a variance which has been denied wholly or
in part shall be resubmitted for a period of six (6) months from the date of such order of denial, except on grounds of new
evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the planning commission or council.
G. Action Without Recommendation Of Planning Commission: If no recommendation is transmitted by the planning commission
within sixty (60) days after referral of the application for variance to the planning commission, the council may take action without
further awaiting such recommendation, unless the applicant requests in writing that an extension of time be granted.
H. Termination, Invalidity Of Variance: A violation of any condition set forth in granting a variance shall be a violation of this title and
shall automatically terminate the variance. A variance shall become invalid one year after it was granted, unless made use of
within the year or such longer period prescribed by the council. (Ord. 895, 9-7-2011)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 297/454
11-2-8: AMENDMENTS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to permit the city council to amend this title by changing zoning district boundaries and
regulations within any district.
B. Initiation: Proceedings for amendment of this title shall be initiated by:
1. A petition of the owner or owners of record of the actual property, the zoning of which is proposed to be changed;
2. A recommendation of the planning commission; or
3. By action of the council.
C. Application For Amendment: All applications for amendments which are initiated by the petition of the owners of property shall be
filed in the office of the director of community development and shall be accompanied by six (6) copies of a set of plans and
graphics. Such plans and graphics may contain the following information as available, and folded, where necessary, to the size of
eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11"). The information necessary for rezoning shall be:
1. A location map showing the location of the proposed site in relation to the city and also indicating the locations of buildings and
uses within five hundred feet (500') of the proposed site.
2. A scaled plot plan, with north indicated, of the proposed site, showing all site dimensions as contained in the description
indicated in the application.
3. All types of proposed uses.
4. An abstractor's certificate showing the names and addresses of all property owners within five hundred feet (500') of the outer
boundaries of the property in question.
5. Any plans for the modification of standards set by this title or any ordinance of the city.
6. Drainage plan of the proposed site.
7. For multiple-family district rezonings, the applicant shall also provide:
a. Complete details of the proposed site development, including the location of buildings, driveways, parking spaces,
dimensions of lots and proposed buildings; and
b. Preliminary drawings including perspective sketches of the structures in detail sufficient to determine exterior wall finishes
and design.
D. Public Hearing; Notice Requirements: The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing, affording an opportunity
for all parties interested to be heard, and shall give not less than ten (10) days' nor more than thirty (30) days' notice of the time
and place of such hearing, published in the designated legal newspaper for the City. Such notice shall also contain a description
of the land and the proposed changes in zoning. At least ten (10) days before the hearing, the Planning Commission shall mail an
identical notice to the owner and to each of the property owners of record within five hundred feet (500') of the outside boundaries
of the land proposed to be rezoned. Failure of the Planning Commission to mail the notice or failure of the property owners to
receive the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. The City Council may waive the mailed notice requirements above in
connection with a Citywide zoning initiated by the Planning Commission or the City Council.
E. Action By Planning Commission: Within sixty (60) days after the date of receipt of the petition by the Director of Community
Development, the Planning Commission shall make a written report to the City Council, stating its findings and recommendations,
unless the applicant requests in writing that an extension of time for review be granted by the Planning Commission.
F. Action By Council:
1. The Council may hold a hearing within thirty (30) days after the receipt of the report and recommendations from the Planning
Commission, if deemed necessary. If the Planning Commission fails to make a report within the time period as set forth in
subsection E of this Section, the Council shall hold a public hearing within thirty (30) days after the expiration of such period.
Failure to receive a report from the Planning Commission as herein provided shall not invalidate the proceedings or actions of
the Council. The Council shall give not less than ten (10) days' nor more than thirty (30) days' notice of the time and place of
such hearing, published in the designated legal newspaper, and such notice shall contain a description of the land and the
proposed change in zoning.
2. At least ten (10) days before the hearing, the Council shall order the Clerk to mail an identical notice to the owner and to each
of the property owners of record within five hundred feet (500') of the outside boundaries of the land proposed to be rezoned.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 298/454
Failure to mail the notice or failure of the property owners to receive the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
3. At the time of the hearing, the Council may take final action upon the application or it may continue the hearing from time to
time for further investigation and hearing. The Council may also request further information and reports from the Planning
Commission. (1971 Code § 28-13)
4. Amendments changing the boundaries of any district, changing the regulations of any existing district, or creating any new
zoning district, shall require a four-fifths (4/5) affirmative vote of the Council for adoption. (Ord. 680, 6-21-2000)
G. Referral To Planning Commission: The Council shall not rezone any land or area in any zoning district or make any other
proposed amendment to this Title without having first referred it to the Planning Commission for their consideration and
recommendation.
H. Denial Of Rezone: Rezoning applications may be denied by motion of the Council, and such motion shall constitute a finding and
determination that the proposed rezoning is not in the best interest of the physical development of the City. No application which
has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of six (6) months from the date of such order of denial, except
on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the Planning Commission. (1971 Code § 28-13)
11-2-9: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
A. Purpose And Interpretation: In order to give the district use regulations of this Title the flexibility necessary to achieve the
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, in certain districts conditional uses are permitted, subject to the granting of a use permit.
Conditional uses include those uses generally not suitable in a particular zoning district, but which may, under some
circumstances, be suitable. When such circumstances exist, a conditional use permit may be granted. The permit shall be issued
for a particular use and not for a particular person or firm.
B. Conditions Imposed; Performance Bond:
1. Conditions may be applied to issuance of the permit, and a periodic review of the permit may be required. Such conditions for
conditional use permits for land designated to be flood plain may include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities;
b. Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation;
c. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions;
d. Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective
measures;
e. Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code and this Title. The applicant shall submit a plan or
document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the
regulatory flood protection elevation and associate flood factors for the particular area.
2. A performance bond of sufficient duration and amount to complete any of the conditions set forth in a permit may be required
and, if so, shall be filed with the Director of Community Development prior to issuance of a building permit.
C. Application For Permit: An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the Director of Community Development and
shall be accompanied by twelve (12) copies of a site plan meeting all of the requirements of Section 11-2-4 of this Chapter.
D. Public Hearing By Planning Commission: The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing, giving the same public
notice and making its written report to the City Council as required for amendments in subsections 11-2-8D and E of this Chapter.
E. Action By Council: Action on conditional use permit applications shall be taken by the City Council by the same procedures as
required for amendments by subsection 11-2-8F of this Chapter; except, that the granting of a conditional use permit shall require
a majority vote of the City Council.
F. Criteria For Issuance Of Permit: In granting a conditional use permit, the City Council shall find that:
1. The use will be in conformity with the City's Comprehensive Plan and with the purpose, intent and applicable standards of this
Title.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 299/454
2. The use shall be located, designed, maintained and operated to be compatible with the existing or intended character of that
zoning district in which it is located.
3. The use shall not depreciate values of surrounding property.
4. The use shall not be hazardous, detrimental or disturbing to present and potential surrounding land uses due to noises, glare,
smoke, dust, odor, fumes, water pollution, vibration, general unsightliness or other nuisances.
5. The use shall generate only minimal vehicular traffic on local streets as defined by the transportation element of the
Comprehensive Plan. The use shall not create traffic congestion, unsafe access or parking needs that will cause
inconveniences to the adjoining properties.
6. The use shall be served adequately by essential public services, such as streets, police, fire protection and utilities.
7. The use shall not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services and shall not be
detrimental to the economic welfare of the City.
8. The use shall preserve and incorporate the site's important natural and scenic features into the development design.
9. The use shall cause minimal adverse environmental effects.
10. The use shall not adversely affect the potential development of adjacent vacant land.
11. In the case of flood plain applications, the following items shall be considered in addition to the aforementioned criteria:
a. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments;
b. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others or that they may block
bridges, culverts or other hydraulic structures;
c. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and
unsanitary conditions;
d. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage, and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
e. The requirements of the facility for a water front location;
f. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use;
g. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing flood plain development and flood plain development anticipated in the
foreseeable future;
h. The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and flood plain management program for the area;
i. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
k. Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of locating the proposed use in the flood plain.
G. Revocation Of Permit: A violation of any condition set forth in a conditional use permit shall be a violation of this Title and shall
constitute grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit by the City Council.
H. Expiration Of Permit: A conditional use permit shall become void one year after it was granted, unless made use of within the
year, or such longer period as the City Council may provide. (1971 Code § 28-14)
11-2-10: INTERIM CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
A. Procedures: Procedures for application for interim conditional use permits, the public hearing before the Planning Commission
and action by the City Council shall be the same as provided for other conditional use permits in Section 11-2-9 of this Chapter.
B. Criteria For Issuance: In addition to the criteria listed in subsection 11-2-9F of this Chapter, the criteria for granting interim
conditional use permits shall be as follows:
1. The period of time for which the interim conditional use permit is to be granted will terminate before any adverse effects are felt
upon adjacent property.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 300/454
2. There shall be adequate assurance that the property will be left in suitable condition after the use is terminated.
3. The use conforms to the zoning regulations.
4. The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty.
5. Permission of the use will not impose additional costs on the public if it is necessary for the public to take the property in the
future.
6. The user agrees to any conditions that the governing body deems appropriate for permission of the use. (Ord. 610, 2-15-1995)
C. Listing Of Temporary Uses: In all districts, interim conditional uses shall be as follows: (Ord. 610, 2-15-1995; amd. 2000 Code)
Any use, in the event there is a threatened involuntary conversion of a parcel of land within a certain time; provided, that all
owners, tenants and lessees waive all rights to relocation benefits and assistance or compensation for leasehold improvements
installed pursuant to the conditional use, by written agreement satisfactory to the condemning authority.
Blacktop or crushing plants for roadway materials.
Housing development promotional signs.
Stockpiling of materials.
Temporary structures. (Ord. 610, 2-15-1995)
11-2-11: FILING FEES; DEPOSITS:
In addition to the filing fees as established by the city council ordinance from time to time, the applicant shall deposit with the city an
amount of cash determined by the director of community development necessary to reimburse city staff and consultant costs for the
review of such application. If the cash deposited at the time of the filing of the application is not sufficient to cover review costs, the
city shall cease further processing of the application, and the applicant shall be required to deposit additional cash as determined by
the director of community development. Such cash shall be placed in an escrow account, and the city shall refund any money
deposited and not expended within ninety (90) days after final action on the application by the city council. The city shall not pay
interest on such escrow accounts. (Ord. 783, 2-15-2006)
11-2-12: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation or voluntary association which violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this title shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (1971 Code § 28-8; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 3
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
11-3-1: NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES:
A. Continuation Of Nonconformity: Any nonconformity, including the lawful use or occupation of land or premises existing at the time
of the adoption of an additional control under this chapter, may be continued, including through repair, replacement, restoration,
maintenance, or improvement, but not including expansion, unless:
1. The nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a period of more than one year; or
2. Any nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater than fifty percent (50%) of its market value,
and no building permit has been applied for within one hundred eighty (180) days of when the property is damaged. In this
case, a municipality may impose reasonable conditions upon a zoning or building permit in order to mitigate any newly created
impact on adjacent property or water body; or
3. A conditional use permit is issued by the city. (Ord. 920, 11-6-2013)
B. Subsequent Use Must Be Conforming: Any subsequent use or occupancy of the land or premises shall be a conforming use or
occupancy. A municipality may, by ordinance, permit an expansion or impose upon nonconformities reasonable regulations to
prevent and abate nuisances and to protect the public health, welfare, or safety. This subsection does not prohibit a municipality
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 301/454
from enforcing an ordinance that applies to adults only bookstores, adults only theaters, or similar adults only businesses, as
defined by ordinance. (Ord. 773, 6-15-2005)
C. Expansion Of Nonconforming Uses And Structures: The city may, by conditional use permit, allow for an expansion of a legal
nonconformity, including the lawful use or occupation of land or premises. The city may impose reasonable conditions in order to
protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community or adjacent properties. (Ord. 920, 11-6-2013)
11-3-2: LOTS:
A. Combining Lots; Restrictive Covenants: When it is necessary to combine two (2) or more lots of record or portions of lots of record
to create a buildable lot meeting the requirements of this title for lot area, and prior to the issuance of a building permit, the owner
of the property shall record a restrictive covenant prohibiting the separate conveyance of one or more of the lots or portions of
lots, until such time as the land may be rezoned to a classification in which the lot or portion of lot would meet the minimum lot
area requirement.
B. Existing Lots Of Record: An existing lot of record in an R residential district or AG agricultural district may be used for a singlefamily
detached dwelling; provided, that the following conditions are met:
1. The lot shall be a minimum of one-half (1/2) acre in size or seventy percent (70%) of the minimum lot size required by the
zoning district in which the lot is located, whichever is less.
2. It has been demonstrated that a proper and adequate sewage disposal system can be installed, with a minimum separation of
seventy five feet (75') between all private wells and sewage disposal systems.
3. All applicable setback requirements of the district within which the lot is located shall be met.
4. All applicable requirements of any overlay district within which the lot is located (including the floodway and flood fringe and
critical area overlay districts) shall be met.
5. The lot shall have a minimum of forty feet (40') of frontage on an improved public street or an approved private street. (1971
Code § 28-20)
C. Street Frontage: No lot shall contain any building used for residential, business or industrial use unless it abuts for at least forty
feet (40') on a public street. (1971 Code § 28-29)
11-3-3: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
In all zoning districts, accessory structures shall be subject to the following performance standards:
A. Construction:
1. Accessory structures are prohibited from being taller than or greater in footprint than the principal structure. Building permits
are required for all permanent accessory structures. Temporary accessory structures including tents that consist of metal or
fiberglass poles, metal hoops and PVC, cotton or nylon fabric covering materials are prohibited except as permitted in
conjunction with an approved conditional use, permitted camping area, or special event.
2. In all zoning districts the exterior finishes of accessory structures sized less than one hundred sixty (160) square feet shall be
constructed of quality weather resistant materials consisting of wood, metal, or engineered composite materials that are similar
to the color palette of the principal structure.
3. In all zoning districts the exterior finishes of accessory structures sized greater than one hundred sixty (160) square feet shall
be constructed of quality weather resistant materials in accordance with table 1 of this section:
TABLE 1
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE EXTERIOR MATERIAL STANDARDS
Property Classification Exterior Finish
AG-1 Wood, metal, split face block, vinyl lap, or engineered cementitious materials
AG-2 Wood, metal, split face block, vinyl lap, or engineered cementitious materials that are similar
to the color palette of the principal structure
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 302/454
R-1 Wood, metal, split face block, vinyl lap, or engineered cementitious materials that are similar
to the color palette of the principal structure
R-2 The same design, material, and color palette of the principal structure
UR The same design, material, and color of the principal structure
R-2.5 The same design, material, and color of the principal structure
R-2A The same design, material, and color of the principal structure
R-2B The same design, material, and color of the principal structure
R-2C The same design, material, and color of the principal structure
R-2D The same design, material, and color of the principal structure
R-2E The same design, material, and color of the principal structure
R-2F The same design, material, and color of the principal structure
R-3 The same design, material, and color of the principal structure
R-4 The same design, material, and color of the principal structure
R-3 and R-4 non-MUSA, 3
acres or greater
Wood, metal, split face block, vinyl lap, or engineered cementitious materials that are similar
to the color palette of the principal structure
R-5 The same design, material, and color of the principal structure
R-6 The same design, material, and color of the principal structure
PUD Site plan review
All properties meeting
agricultural definitions
Wood, metal, split face block, vinyl, or engineered cementitious materials
Commercial and industrial Site plan review
(Ord. 903, 5-16-2012)
B. Number And Size: The number and size of accessory structures permitted on any lot shall be determined by the following table
(table 2 of this section). In addition to the accessory structures listed in table 2 of this section, one accessory storage structure, up
to one hundred sixty (160) square feet in size, and swimming pools meeting the criteria established in title 9, chapter 11 of this
code shall be permitted on each lot.
TABLE 2
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE SIZE AND NUMBER STANDARDS
Property Classification Number Total Size
AG-1 2 2,500 sq . ft.
AG-2 2 2,500 sq . ft.
R-1 2 2,500 sq . ft.
R-2 2 2,000 sq . ft.
UR 1 1,200 sq . ft.
R-2.5 1 1,200 sq . ft.
R-2A 1 780 sq . ft.
R-2B 1 780 sq . ft.
R-2C 1 780 sq . ft.
R-2D 1 480 sq . ft.
R-2E n/a n/a
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 303/454
R-2F n/a n/a
R-3 1 1,000 sq . ft.
R-4 1 850 sq . ft.
R-3 and R-4 non-MUSA, 3 acres or greater 2 2,500 sq . ft.
R-5 Site plan review 576 sq . ft. per unit
R-6 Site plan review 576 sq . ft. per unit
PUD 1 1,000 sq . ft.
All properties meeting agricultural definitions Unlimited 300 sq . ft. per acre
Commercial and industrial Site plan review Site plan review
C. Setbacks: Setbacks for accessory structures shall be determined by the following table (table 3 of this section):
TABLE 3
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE SETBACK REGULATIONS
Property
Classification Side Yard Rear Yard Front Yard
AG-1 25 feet 50 feet Behind principal structure
AG-2 25 feet 50 feet Behind principal structure
R-1 20 feet 50 feet Behind principal structure
R-2 20 feet 20 feet Behind principal structure
UR 6 feet 15 feet Behind principal structure
R-2.5 6 feet 15 feet Behind principal structure
R-2A 10 feet 15 feet Behind principal structure
R-2B, R-2C, and R-2D 15 feet 15 feet Behind principal structure
R-2A, R-2B, R-2C, and R-2D adjoining an alley 20 feet 20 feet Behind principal structure
R-2E and R-2F 50 feet 50 feet Behind principal structure
R-3 6 feet 10 feet Behind principal structure
R-4 6 feet 10 feet Behind principal structure
R-5 Site plan review Site plan review Site plan review
R-6 Site plan review Site plan review Site plan review
PUD 6 feet 15 feet Behind principal structure
Commercial and industrial Not in required yards Not in required yards Behind principal structure
D. Height: Height of accessory structures shall be determined by the following table (table 4 of this section):
TABLE 4
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE HEIGHT STANDARDS
Property Classification Maximum
AG-1 20 feet
AG-2 20 feet
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 304/454
R-1 20 feet
R-2 20 feet
UR 18 feet
R-2.5 18 feet
R-2A, R-2B, R-2C, R-2D, R-2E, R-2F 18 feet
R-3 18 feet
R-4 18 feet
R-5 18 feet
R-6 18 feet
PUD 18 feet
All districts meeting agricultural definitions Unlimited
Commercial and industrial 20 feet
E. Miscellaneous Requirements:
1. Accessory structures greater than that permitted in subsections B and D of this section may be approved by conditional use
permit if in compliance with section 11-2-9 of this title and the following standards are met:
a. There is adequate setback, screening, or topography changes that buffer the proposed structure from adjacent public
roadways or adjacent properties.
b. The proposed building height or building square footage does not exceed the ordinance criteria as specified in subsection B
or D of this section by more than twenty percent (20%) within the metropolitan urban service area (MUSA) and forty percent
(40%) outside the MUSA.
c. Setback distances are increased five feet (5') for each one foot (1') of height or one hundred (100) square feet of size
increase or fraction thereof.
d. If future site development renders the structure nonconforming, the building must be brought into compliance or removed as
a condition of the development approval.
2. No accessory structures shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal structure to which it is
accessory unless the building is accessory to the ongoing agricultural land use.
3. No accessory structure shall be located nearer the front lot line than is the principal building on the lot, except where the lot
area of the site is five (5) acres or greater. If the lot area is five (5) acres or greater, the principal structure setbacks of the
applicable zoning district will apply.
4. No tent, trailer, camper, motor home or accessory building shall at any time be used as a habitable building. No tent, trailer,
camper, or motor home shall at any time be used as a storage building.
5. The required setback of accessory buildings or structures from the principal structure shall be determined by the building code
as adopted by the city.
6. When a property is developed and an existing accessory structure made nonconforming, the structure must be brought into
conformance as part of the development approval or removed from the property.
7. At-grade structures such as basketball courts, tennis courts, patios, and dog kennels shall meet the established accessory
structure setbacks for the appropriate districts. These structures are not included in the total allowable accessory structure
square footage as regulated in subsection B of this section, as long as the total impervious surface of the lot does not exceed
thirty five percent (35%) of the rear area of the lot measured from the rear building line of the house to the rear lot line.
8. Swimming pools and surrounding apron/decks shall meet the established accessory structure setbacks for the appropriate
districts. These structures are not included in the total allowable accessory structure square footage as regulated in subsection
B of this section, as long as the total impervious surface of the lot does not exceed thirty five percent (35%) of the total rear
area of the lot measured from the rear building line of the house to the rear lot line. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
9. Temporary family healthcare dwellings are prohibited in all zoning districts. (Ord. 966, 8-10-2016)
F. Garage Requirements In All Residential Districts:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 305/454
1. Four hundred forty (440) gross square feet of garage space per dwelling unit in the R-1, R-2, R-2.5, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-6
districts is required for single-family homes constructed or relocated after the adoption of this section, with the following
exception: A minimum of one hundred (100) square foot storage shed per dwelling unit is required and must be constructed for
licensed manufactured home parks in the Cottage Grove Estates subdivision and licensed manufactured homes in out lot A of
Cottage Grove Estates addition. This does not prohibit construction of a garage so long as the storage shed does not exceed
one hundred sixty (160) square feet.
2. Two hundred forty (240) gross square feet of garage space per dwelling unit in the R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-6 districts is required
for attached dwellings constructed or relocated after the adoption of this section.
3. A minimum of five hundred seventy six (576) gross square feet of garage space per detached single-family dwelling in the R-
2A, R-2B, and R-2C districts is required.
4. A minimum of four hundred eighty (480) gross square feet of garage space is required for each twin home unit and townhome
unit in the R-2D and R-2E districts.
5. A minimum of three hundred (300) gross square feet of garage space is required for each multi-family dwelling unit in the R-2F
district.
6. The garage floor area attached to the principal structure in any residential district must not exceed one thousand (1,000)
square feet in gross floor area. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
11-3-4: YARDS1 AND OPEN SPACES:
A. Minimum Yards And Open Spaces: No yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard
or other open spaces less than the minimum required by this title, and if the existing yard or other open space as existing is less
than the minimum required, it shall not be further reduced.
B. Satisfying Other Requirements Prohibited: No required yard or other open space allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be
used to satisfy yard, other open spaces or minimum lot area requirements for any other building. (1971 Code § 28-22; amd. 2000
Code)
C. Allowed Encroachments: The following shall not be considered encroachments on yard requirements:
1. All Yards:
a. Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, mechanical devices, cornices, eaves,
gutters, etc.; provided, that they do not extend more than two and one-half feet (21/2'); and off street parking, except as
hereinafter regulated.
b. Yard lights and nameplate signs for one- and two-family dwellings, lights for illuminating parking areas, loading areas or
yards for safety and security purposes may be located to within five feet (5') of the front lot line; provided, that the direct
source of light is not visible from the public right of way or adjacent residential property.
c. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, hedges may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any
yard; provided, that no hedge in any front yard obstructs safe view from the driveway or street. (Ord. 849, 11-19-2008)
2. Side Or Rear Yards Only: Bays not to exceed a depth of two feet (2'), nor to contain an area of more than twenty (20) square
feet; fire escapes not to exceed a width of three feet (3'); fences and walls not to exceed a height of six feet (6') above grade
and open, off street parking.
3. Rear Yards Only: Balconies, accessory structures; except, that no structure shall be closer than eight feet (8') to the rear lot
line; breezeways, detached outdoor picnic shelters and recreational equipment, except as regulated hereinafter.
4. Side Yards Only: Accessory structures; except, that no accessory structure shall be closer than five feet (5') to any side lot line.
(1971 Code § 28-22; amd. 2000 Code)
D. Visibility:
1. An accessory structure in the rear forty percent (40%) of a corner lot abutting a local street must set back a minimum of thirty
feet (30') from the property boundary line.
2. An accessory structure in the front sixty percent (60%) of a corner lot zoned R-2A and abutting a local street must set back a
minimum of twenty feet (20') from the property boundary line.
3. An accessory structure in the front sixty percent (60%) of a corner lot zoned R-2B, R-2C, and R-2D and abutting a local street
must set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the property boundary line.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 306/454
4. A deck without a roof or walls that is on the side of the principal structure that abuts a street must be set back a minimum of
fifteen feet (15') from the property boundary line. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
5. No structure shall be placed within twenty feet (20') of a public street right of way on a corner lot. (Ord. 827, 10-17-2007)
E. Encroachment Over Easements: In no case shall any structure encroach on or over any easement of record. For the purposes of
this subsection, a "structure" shall be defined as that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind or any piece
of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, excepting retaining walls, fences, swing
sets or the like or other minor intrusions as approved by the director of community development. (1971 Code § 28-22; amd. 2000
Code)
11-3-5: FENCES AND WALLS:
A. General Requirements For All Types Of Fences Or Walls:
1. All chainlink fences must have a top rail, barbed ends must be placed at the bottom of the fence, and vertical posts must be
spaced at intervals not to exceed ten feet (10').
2. All fences must be constructed in a substantial, workmanlike manner and of materials reasonably suited for the purpose for
which the fence is proposed to be used.
3. All fences must be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and must not remain in a condition of disrepair or constitute a
nuisance.
4. No fence or wall may be closer than one foot (1') from a public walkway.
5. Razor wire fences are prohibited in all districts. Electric fences are prohibited in all districts, unless the property is used to fence
livestock and has a minimum of five (5) acres of land. Barbed wire fences are prohibited in all districts, except for industrial
zoned properties or properties used to fence livestock and has five (5) or more acres.
6. For fence regulations governing swimming pools, spas and hot tubs, see subsection 9-11-4C of this code.
7. No fence may have boards, planks, or panels larger than one foot (1') in width.
8. All parts of a fence must be on the property of the owner of the fence. The owner of a fence is responsible to verify the location
of their property lines.
9. The finished side of any fence or wall must face abutting property or street rights of way.
10. Public buildings and structures, public and private parks, and essential service utilities are exempt from the fence and wall
requirements.
11. No fence or wall shall obstruct a motorist's or pedestrian's safe view from the driveway or street.
B. Residential Fence Or Wall: All fences or walls must comply with the following:
1. No fence or wall shall exceed six feet (6') above grade level along rear and side property lines or four feet (4') above grade
level in the required front yard.
2. Fences within fifteen feet (15') of the front property line must be less than thirty inches (30") above grade level and not less
than fifty percent (50%) transparent.
C. Business And Industrial Fence Or Wall: All fences or walls must comply with the following:
1. Fences in business and industrial districts must not exceed eight feet (8') above grade level and are prohibited in the required
front yard. Fences in excess of eight feet (8') above grade level and not located in a required front yard require a conditional
use permit.
2. Fences in business and industrial districts with barbed wire security extension posts must not exceed a height of six feet (6')
(measured without the security extension post) above grade level. The security extension posts must not exceed three feet (3')
in length and be angled in such a manner that it does not extend over the owner's property boundary line. Such security
fencing is prohibited within a required front yard or within fifty feet (50') of a residential district.
D. Agricultural Fences:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 307/454
1. Fences for agricultural uses must not be greater than six feet (6') above grade level and may be located along all property
boundary lines.
E. Clear View Triangle: On corner lots, no structure or planting in excess of thirty inches (30") above the curb line or less than ten
feet (10') above the curb line shall be permitted within a clear view triangle described as that area that begins at the intersection
of the front property line and corner side property line and is measured back ten feet (10') along both property lines. Those points
are then connected with a straight line.
(Ord. 849, 11-19-2008)
11-3-6: ESSENTIAL SERVICES:
Essential services shall be a permitted use, as authorized and regulated by state law and ordinances of the city, in all zoning districts;
except, that within any zoning district, no building, structure or land shall be used for the essential services listed below or for those
deemed similar by the city council, except by conditional use permit. Prior to granting such a permit, it shall be found that the
architectural design of the service structure or building is compatible to the neighborhood in which it is to be located. Services
requiring a conditional use permit shall include:
A. Those listed as conditional uses within the zoning district in which they are to be located.
B. Those in which seventy five percent (75%) of the services provided or produced are not provided for, used, consumed or required
within the city.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 308/454
C. Those higher than the maximum height, as set forth in the zoning districts in which they are to be located.
D. Those in which the architectural design or use would not normally be compatible to the neighborhood or zoning district in which
they are to be located. (1971 Code § 28-24)
11-3-7: FARMING OPERATIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
Agriculture is a permitted use in all residential districts, subject to the following:
A. Sales Of Agricultural Products: Limited sales of products produced on the owner's property may be conducted on the premises
from a roadside stand by conditional use permit. Such stand shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height or five hundred (500)
square feet in floor area, and no portion of any such stand shall be located or erected nearer than forty feet (40') to any street
line.
B. Farm Animals:
1. Parcels Less Than Forty Acres: The keeping of any farm animal on parcels of less than forty (40) acres in size shall be
permitted, subject to the following conditions:
a. The property must contain at least five (5) acres in contiguous ownership or leasehold.
b. The property must contain at least one and one-half (11/2) acres of land per animal unit. This number may be exceeded only
by conditional use permit.
c. All buildings intended to house animals shall be set back at least sixty feet (60') from all property lines and at least three
hundred feet (300') from a dwelling other than the dwelling on the property in question.
d. All pens, yards or other confinement areas, excluding pastures, where animals are kept shall be set back at least sixty feet
(60') from all property lines.
e. The Minnesota pollution control agency does not require that a feedlot permit be issued.
2. Keeping Fowl And/Or Poultry On Parcels Between Three And Less Than Five Acres: The keeping of any fowl and/or poultry on
parcels between three (3) and less than five (5) acres shall be permitted, subject to the regulations in section 5-4-13, "Keeping
Of Fowl Or Poultry", of this code.
3. Parcels Larger Than Forty Acres: The keeping of farm animals on parcels larger than forty (40) acres in size is permitted,
subject to the following conditions:
a. All buildings intended to house animals shall be set back at least sixty feet (60') from all property lines and at least three
hundred feet (300') from a dwelling other than the dwelling on the property in question.
b. All pens, yards or other confinement areas, excluding pastures, where animals are kept shall be set back at least sixty feet
(60') from all property lines.
c. The Minnesota pollution control agency does not require that a feedlot permit be issued. (Ord. 915, 7-17-2013)
11-3-8: WATER AND SEWERAGE:
A. Within Urban Service Area: Within the city's urban service area, as defined by the comprehensive plan, all structures designed for
human occupancy shall be connected to the public water and sewage disposal systems where feasible. On site sewage disposal
systems and private wells may be allowed within the urban service area on a temporary basis. Such facilities shall be designed
so as to be easily connected to the public systems. All private on site sewage disposal systems within the urban service area
shall conform with all other standards adopted by the city for their design, installation and maintenance.
B. Outside Urban Service Area: On site sewage disposal systems and private wells will be permitted outside of the city's urban
service area, as defined by the comprehensive plan, only when all of the following conditions are met:
1. All on site sewage disposal systems and private wells shall be designed, maintained and installed in accordance with
applicable regulations of the state department of health, the Minnesota pollution control agency standards WPC-40 and all
other city regulations.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 309/454
2. Where on site sewage disposal systems are to be utilized, the lot shall have a minimum area of one and one-half (11/2) acres
of land on a slope of less than thirteen percent (13%), regardless of more lenient zoning regulations.
3. No on site sewage disposal systems will be permitted in the following areas:
a. Areas where slopes are eighteen percent (18%) or greater;
b. Designated floodplains or wetlands;
c. Within one hundred fifty feet (150') from the normal high water mark of a body of water or designated bluff lines; or
d. Any other areas designated by the utilities element of the Comprehensive Plan as unsuitable.
4. Special engineering of on-site sewage disposal systems may be required in the following cases:
a. Areas where slopes are greater than twelve percent (12%) but less than eighteen percent (18%);
b. Where percolation rates are slower than sixty (60) minutes per inch or faster than five (5) minutes per inch;
c. Where the ground water table is less than five feet (5') deep;
d. Where bedrock is within five feet (5') of the bottom of the system; or
e. Where soil classifications require the use of alternative systems. (1971 Code § 28-28; amd. 2000 Code)
11-3-9: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING2:
A. Intent; Compliance Required: Regulation of off-street parking and loading spaces in this Title is to alleviate or prevent congestion
of the public right of way and to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for
off-street parking, loading and unloading from motor vehicles in accordance with the utilization of various parcels of land and
structures. The location of off-street parking and loading spaces shall be in compliance with the requirements of this Section.
B. Application Of Provisions: The regulations and requirements set forth in this Section shall apply to the required and nonrequired
off-street parking facilities in all use districts.
C. Reduction Of Existing Off-Street Parking And Loading Spaces: Off-street parking spaces and loading spaces existing upon the
effective date of this Section shall not be reduced in number unless such number exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a
similar new use.
D. General Parking Provisions:
1. Permits Prior To Effective Date: Structures or uses for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this
Title3, but for which work has not been completed, shall be exempt from the parking requirements of this Section if the structure
is completed within six (6) months after the effective date of this Title.
2. Floor Area: The term "floor area", for the purpose of calculating the number of off-street parking spaces, shall be the gross floor
area of the various floors devoted to retail sales, services, office spaces, processing and fabrication, utility space and storage
areas other than warehousing.
3. Benches In Places Of Public Assembly: In stadiums, churches and other places of public assembly in which patrons or
spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each such bench, pew or other similar seating facility shall
be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining required parking.
4. Parking Space Specifications: Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet (9') wide and twenty feet (20') in length, and
each space shall be served adequately by access drives. For the purposes of calculating parking space requirements, one
parking space for one vehicle shall equal three hundred (300) square feet of storage and maneuvering area, including access
drives.
5. Use Of Parking Facilities:
a. No Class I commercial vehicles shall be allowed to park in a residential district, except while making a pickup or delivery or
performing a service. One Class I commercial vehicle may be permitted to park on a residential lot by conditional use permit,
as required by Section 11-2-9 of this Title, subject to the following additional standards:
(1) The Class I commercial vehicle shall be kept within an accessory building at all times.
(2) The hours of operation of the vehicle shall not adversely affect adjoining property.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 310/454
(3) The lot shall be five (5) acres or more in size.
b. Off street parking accessory to dwelling units, either single- or multiple-family, shall be allowed as follows: one class II
commercial vehicle per dwelling unit on the premises; a second class II commercial vehicle shall be allowed only by
conditional use permit upon compliance with the criteria in subsection D5g of this section. (1971 Code § 28-30)
c. (Rep. by Ord. 709, 3-20-2002)
d. No auxiliary motors or engines on any commercial vehicle shall be allowed to operate in residential districts unless making a
pick up, delivery or performing a service.
e. School buses designed to carry sixty six (66) or more persons may be parked in a residential district during school hours
only.
f. Property complying with the definition of rural agricultural area under this code shall not be subject to the provisions of
subsections D5a, D5b and D5d of this section.
g. The applicant for a conditional use permit for a second class II commercial vehicle under subsection D5b of this section shall
be required to meet the following criteria, in addition to the criteria for issuance of a conditional use permit as required by
section 11-2-9 of this title, and prior to issuance of the permit the city council shall find that:
(1) The area for parking will be surfaced with a durable and dustless material.
(2) The proposed parking area will be sufficiently separated by a distance and screening from adjacent land so that existing
homes will not be materially depreciated in value and there will be no deterrents to development of vacant land.
(3) The hours of operation of such vehicles will not adversely affect adjoining property.
(4) The operation of such vehicles will not constitute a "public nuisance" as defined by section 4-1-1 of this code. (1971 Code
§ 28-30)
6. Location Of Parking Facilities: Required off street parking must be on the same lot as is the principal building and must meet
the following setback requirements:
a. Off street parking on a corner lot may not be located within any required yard area abutting a street.
b. Off street parking for all detached single-family lots must comply with minimum setback requirements for accessory
structures.
c. Except for the access point or where a joint drive serving more than one property will provide better and safer traffic
circulation; access drives, drive aisles, and parking spaces for religious institutions, schools, public parking lots, parks, and
municipal facilities must set back thirty feet (30') from the front, side, and rear property lines. (Ord. 807, 10-18-2006)
d. Within the B-1 and B-2 districts, parking spaces and/or garages shall be located in areas other than a required yard; except,
that parking may be located in a rear yard to within ten feet (10') of the rear or side lot line; except, that where a side or rear
lot line is abutting an R district, off street parking shall be not less than thirty feet (30') from such lot lines. (1971 Code § 28-
30; amd. Ord. 807, 10-18-2006)
e. Within the B-3 and P-B districts, off street parking spaces shall not be less than twenty feet (20') from a street right of way
line, nor less than ten feet (10') from any interior side lot line or rear lot; except, that where a side or rear lot line is abutting
an R district, off street parking shall be not less than thirty feet (30') from such lot lines. (1971 Code § 28-30; amd. Ord. 623,
1-17-1996; Ord. 807, 10-18-2006)
f. Within I-1, I-2 and I-5 districts, off street parking spaces, drive aisles, and truck staging areas must not be less than twenty
feet (20') from any street right of way line, nor less than ten feet (10') from any interior side or rear lot line; except, that when
a side or rear lot line abuts an R district, off street parking must not be less than one hundred feet (100') from such lot lines.
(Ord. 787, 3-15-2006; amd. Ord. 807, 10-18-2006)
g. Within any I-3 and I-4 districts, parking space for more than fifteen (15) automobiles shall not be allowed within the front yard
setback, nor within the side yard when abutting a street. Parking spaces shall be not less than thirty feet (30') from any
interior side or rear property line, nor forty feet (40') from any street right of way line. (1971 Code § 28-30; amd. Ord. 807, 10-
18-2006)
7. Off Site Parking Facilities: When required accessory off street parking facilities are provided elsewhere than on the lot on which
the principal use served is located, written authority for using such property for off street parking shall be filed with the city, so
as to maintain the required number of off street parking spaces during the existence of such principal use. No such parking
facility shall, at its closest point, be located more than one hundred feet (100') from the premises nor more than four hundred
feet (400') from the principal use or building served.
8. Use Of Parking Area For Other Than Parking: Required off street parking space in all districts shall not be utilized for open
storage of goods or for the storage of vehicles which are inoperable, for lease, rent or sale. (1971 Code § 28-30)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 311/454
E. Design And Maintenance Of Off Street Parking Areas:
1. General Requirements: Access and parking areas shall be designed so as to provide an adequate means of access to a public
alley or street. Such driveway access shall not exceed the driveway dimensions in section 7-2-4 of this code and shall be so
limited so as to cause the least interference with the traffic movement. Except for single-family, two-family, and townhouse
dwellings, head in parking, directly off of and adjacent to a public street, with each stall having its own direct access to the
public street shall be prohibited. All parking spaces shall have access from driveways and not directly on a public street.
2. Parking Spaces Striped: All parking spaces shall be striped with suitable paint in accordance with approved plans except for
single-family residences.
3. Calculating Space: When the determination of the number of required off street parking spaces results in a fraction, each
fraction up to and including of one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded; fractions over one-half (1/2) shall count as one additional
space.
4. Signs: Signs located in any parking area necessary for the orderly operation of traffic movement shall be in addition to
accessory signs permitted in other sections of this title. (Ord. 716, 5-15-2002)
5. Surfacing: All parking areas and driveways in the front yard of property in the MUSA must be paved with asphalt, paver bricks,
or concrete.
a. All development within the MUSA must have a paved driveway with asphalt or concrete. All parking surfaces in front of the
front plane of the principal structure must be in conformance with section 7-2-3 of this code and must not exceed forty
percent (40%) of the front yard area. A maximum width of two feet (2') of landscape rock or similar landscaping material may
additionally be permitted to border such parking or driveway area. The parking or driveway surface may not encroach on any
drainage and utility easement, except the front yard drainage and utility easement abutting the street.
b. Any parking or driveway surface behind the front plane of the dwelling must be one of the following: concrete, asphalt, class
V gravel (minimum 6 inches compacted), landscape rock (minimum 6 inches compacted), landscape paver blocks, or brick.
All parking surfaces must be contained within a solid edging or other border. The setback for parking surfaces behind the
front plane of the dwelling is the same as the setbacks for accessory structures in the zoning district. Such parking or
driveway surface cannot encroach on any drainage and utility easements.
c. All development in non-MUSA areas must have an asphalt or concrete driveway between the roadway edge and the
minimum front yard setback line. The city, at its discretion, can require the entire or greater portion of the driveway to be
paved if erosion or drainage problems are experienced on public or private land. This requirement also applies to open sales
lots. (Ord. 807, 10-18-2006)
6. Lighting: Exterior lighting shall not be directed upon adjacent land or the public right of way.
7. Curbing: All open off street parking areas and loading areas designed to have head in parking along the perimeter of the off
street parking area or loading area shall provide a concrete curb or equivalent approved by the city of adequate height. (Ord.
716, 5-15-2002)
8. Drive-Up Facilities: Business establishments containing drive-up facilities, including restaurants and financial institutions, shall
provide a motor vehicle stacking area for vehicles on the site. A minimum of six (6) vehicle spaces per lane shall be provided.
The vehicle stacking area shall not extend beyond the street right of way line and shall be delineated in such a manner that
vehicles waiting in line will not interfere with nor obstruct the primary driving, parking and pedestrian facilities on the site.
9. Bumper Overhang: The minimum parking space length may be decreased by up to two feet (2') for spaces which allow the
bumper of the vehicle to project the terminus of the parking space without obstructing other parking spaces or vehicle
circulation.
10. Turnarounds: All required parking spaces shall be accessed by adequate maneuvering space. All dead end parking rows
shall contain a turnaround area at least thirteen feet (13').
11. Parking Lot Design Standards: Parking areas shall be designed in conformance with the following:
Parking Angle
(A)
Stall Width
(B)
Curb Length
(C)
Stall Depth
(D)
Aisle Width
(E)
0° 9' 23' 9' 12'
20° 9' 26'4" 15' 11'
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 312/454
30° 9' 18' 17'4" 11'
40° 9' 14' 19'2" 12'
45° 9' 12'9" 19'10" 13'
50° 9' 11'9" 20'5" 12'
60° 9' 10'5" 21' 18'
70° 9' 9'8" 21' 19'
80° 9' 9'2" 20'4" 24'
90° 9' 9' 20' 24'
(Ord. 807, 10-18-2006)
F. Required Off Street Parking: The following minimum areas shall be provided and maintained by ownership, easement or lease, for
and during the life of the respective uses hereinafter set forth:
Auto repair,
(major), bus
At least 8 spaces, plus 1 additional space for each 800 square feet of floor area over 1,000 square feet
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 313/454
terminals,
taxi terminals,
bottling
companies,
shops
employing 6
people or
fewer
Auto repair
(minor)
At least 6 spaces, plus 1 space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area over 1,000 square feet
Banks and
financial
services
At least 1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area
Boarding and
rooming
houses
At least 2 spaces for each 3 persons for which accommoda-tions are provided for sleeping
Boat and
marine sales,
garden
stores,
carpenter
shops
4 spaces, plus 1 space for each 500 square feet of floor area over the first 1,000 square feet
Bowling alleys
At least 5 spaces for each alley, plus additional spaces as may be required herein for related uses, such as a
restaurant
Churches and
auditoriums
At least 1 space for each 31/2 seats, based on the design capacity of the main assembly hall
Community
centers, post
offices,
YMCAs,
YWCAs,
physical or
cultural
activities
centers,
studios,
pool halls,
libraries,
private clubs,
lodges,
museums
10 spaces, plus 1 space for each 300 square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet of floor area in
the principal structure, excluding courts, which require 2 parking spaces per court
Funeral homes
and mortuaries
1 space for each 5 seats or 35 square feet of seating area where there are no fixed seats, plus 1 space for
each 250 square feet of floor area not used for seating
Furniture
stores,
appliance
stores,
wholesalers
and
warehouses
up to
6,000 square
feet
At least 1 space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area
Hospitals At least 11/2 spaces for each patient bed
Hotel or
apartment
hotels
At least 1 space for each rental unit provided in the design of the building
Libraries,
museums, art
At least 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area in the principal structure
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 314/454
galleries
Licensed
daycare facility
At least 1 parking space for each 6 children based on the licensed capacity of the facility
Manufacturing,
fabricating or
processing of
a product or
material
4 spaces, plus 1 space for each 400 square feet of floor area
Medical or
dental clinics
At least 3 spaces for each staff doctor or dentist or 1 space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area,
whichever is greater
Motels, tourist
homes, motor
hotels
At least 1 space for each dwelling unit or lodging room, plus 1 additional space for each 8 units
Motor fuel
stations and
motor fuel
station
convenience
stores
A minimum of 4 outside spaces, plus 3 additional outside spaces for each enclosed service stall; 1
additional outside space shall be provided for each 150 square feet of floor space devoted to retail sales in a
motor fuel station convenience store
Multiple-family
dwellings
At least 2 spaces per dwelling unit in the multi-family residential districts. Additional spaces for visitor parking
shall be provided based on the development characteristics and anticipated demand for visitor spaces as
determined by the city, or additional parking spaces for visitor parking shall be provided based on 1.5 spaces
for every 10 units
Office
buildings and
professional
offices having
less than
6,000
square feet of
floor area
1 space per 150 square feet of floor area
Office
buildings and
professional
offices having
more than
6,000
square feet of
floor area
1 space for each 250 square feet of floor area
Open sales
lots,
lumberyards,
auto sales,
auto leasing
1 space for each 2,000 square feet of land up to the first 8,000 square feet, plus 1 space for each 4,000
square feet of land up to a parcel of 24,000 square feet, plus 1 space for each 6,000 square feet thereafter
Restaurants,
classes 1 and
2,
cafes,
cafeteria food,
traditional
restaurants
At least 1 space for each 3 seats, based on capacity design or, where there is no design layout, 1 space for
each 60 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater
Restaurants,
classes 1 and
2,
bars, taverns,
nightclubs
At least 1 space for each 3 seats, based on capacity design or where there is no design layout, 1 space for
each 50 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. Except that in cases in which there is a bar
area separate from the food service area, a dance area larger than 100 square feet, or other public areas,
additional parking will be required as necessary
Restaurants,
class 3, drive
in
establishments
At least 1 space for each 60 square feet of gross floor area in the building
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 315/454
and fast food
restaurants
Retail sales
and service
establishments
At least 1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area
Sanitariums,
convalescent
homes,
rest homes,
nursing homes
or
institutions
At least 1 space for each 6 beds for which accommodations are offered, plus 1 additional space for each 15
beds
Schools,
elementary
and junior
high
At least 1 space for each classroom, plus 1 additional space for each 100 student capacity
Schools, high
through
college
At least 1 space for each 10 students, based on design capacity, plus 1 additional space for each 2
classrooms
Self-service
passenger
vehicle
car wash
2 spaces per bay
Senior citizen
housing (multistory
attached
units)
At least 1.5 parking spaces for each unit. The city may require proof of parking of 2 spaces per unit if
conversion to general housing appears possible
Single-family
dwellings
At least 2 spaces for each dwelling unit. A garage may fulfill this requirement. However, a building permit
shall not be granted to convert a garage to living space unless other acceptable provisions are made to
provide the required parking space
Shopping
center
(regional)
At least 5.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. Parking demand for restaurants and theaters
located within the center will be added to the shopping center minimum parking requirements
Shopping
center
(neighborhood
or community)
At least 4.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. Parking demand for restaurants and theaters
located within the center will be added to the shopping center minimum parking requirements
Skating rinks,
dance halls,
miniature golf
ranges, private
clubs, ice
arenas
10 spaces, plus 1 additional space for each 200 square feet of floor area devoted to the principal use
Theaters, ball
fields,
stadiums
At least 1 space for each 3 seats of design capacity
Two-family
dwellings
At least 2 spaces per dwelling unit, but not more than one 2-car garage per dwelling unit
Wholesale
business,
storage, or
warehouse
establishment
At least 1 space for each 2,000 square feet of gross floor area for any building used solely in a storage
capacity. For mixed use building where storage and warehousing is an incidental use to other activity,
required parking spaces shall be based upon the specific requirements for each use appearing in this
section
Uses not
specifically
noted
Parking space requirements shall be determined by the city council, upon advice from the planning
commission
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 316/454
(Ord. 716, 5-15-2002)
G. Loading And Unloading Regulations: The regulations and requirements set forth in this section shall apply to the required and
nonrequired loading and unloading facilities in all the districts. If, in the application of the requirements of this section, a fractional
number is obtained, one loading space shall be provided for a fraction of one-half (1/2) or more, and no loading space shall be
required for a fraction of less than one-half (1/2).
1. Location: All loading berths shall be twenty five feet (25') or more from the intersection of two (2) street right of way lines.
Loading berths shall not occupy any yard requirement bordering a street.
2. Size: Unless otherwise specified, the first berth required shall not be less than twelve feet (12') in width and fifty feet (50') in
length. Additional berths shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in width and twenty five feet (25') in length; all loading berths
shall maintain a height of fourteen feet (14') or more.
3. Access: Each loading berth shall be located with approximate means of access to a public street or alley in a manner which will
least interfere with traffic. (1971 Code § 28-30; amd. 2000 Code)
4. Surfacing: All loading berths and accessways shall be paved with asphalt and/or concrete. (Ord. 716, 5-15-2002)
5. Accessory Uses: Any area allocated as a required loading berth or access drive so as to comply with the terms of this title shall
not be used for the storage of goods or inoperable vehicles, nor be included as a part of the area necessary to meet the off
street parking area. (1971 Code § 28-30; amd. 2000 Code)
6. Number Of Loading Berths: There shall be provided adequate off street loading space in connection with any structure which
requires receipt of a distribution of materials by vehicles. (1971 Code § 28-30; amd. 2000 Code; Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
11-3-10: DRIVEWAYS:
A. Purpose; Interpretation: The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for the design of safe ingress and egress
for uses oriented to serving the motoring public, but not including parking lots. A driveway is any area which allows vehicles
access from the street to the structure on the premises for purposes of storage or parking vehicles on the premises.
B. Specifications: Driveways in all districts must conform to driveway dimension specifications set forth in section 7-2-4 of this code.
The driveway width is measured along the property line between driveway edges. If the driveway width conflicts with existing or
future traffic flows on the public roadway, the driveway may have to be moved or resized, subject to city council approval.
C. Location: Driveways adjacent to the principal structure must not be less than the minimum side yard setback for accessory
structures in the zoning district. Driveway surfaces must not encroach on any drainage and utility easement, except for public or
private easements paralleling the street. (Ord. 807, 10-18-2006)
11-3-11: RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
A. Permit Requirements:
1. Permit Required: Every licensed house mover shall, in each and every instance, before raising, holding up or moving any
building, obtain a permit therefor from the building official.
2. Application For Permit; Contents: An application for such permit shall designate the origin and destination of such building, the
route over which it is to be moved and shall state the time in which the moving of such building shall be accomplished.
3. Conditions To Issuance Of Permit: No permit to move a building shall be issued unless and until the following conditions are
fully complied with and approved by the building official:
a. The building to be moved, after being moved, must be worth at least fifty percent (50%) of the cost of a similar new building,
as determined by the building official.
b. The finance director must certify that all the sewer charges and water bills payable against the property from which the
building is to be moved have been paid, and the director of public works shall affirm that all sewer and water connections
have been plugged or discontinued at the curb line or at the main; that all cesspools, septic tanks and cisterns have been
filled, all other hazards have been eliminated and all taxes against the property have been paid in full.
c. The building to be moved must comply in all respects with the city building code and other applicable ordinances; provided,
that the person proposing that a building be moved may present to the building official complete and detailed plans showing
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 317/454
changes which will be made in order to attain compliance with such ordinances. In the event that such changes are
proposed, a permit authorizing the moving of such building shall not be issued until the owner has agreed in writing to
complete the necessary changes within a period of one year, the building official has approved the plans, the building permit
fee has been paid and the building permit issued, and a performance bond, guaranteeing completion of such changes and
equal to at least one and one-half (11/2) times the cost of such proposed work as estimated by the building official, has been
posted with the city.
4. Action By Planning Commission: Upon compliance with this subsection and subsections B and C of this section, the building
official, licensee and applicant shall submit the application to the planning commission for review and recommendations to the
city council at the next stated meeting of the commission. The planning commission shall determine whether such application
shall conform to the immediate surrounding community. The planning commission, at its discretion, shall call a public meeting
of resident owners, within a radius of five hundred feet (500') from the subject property, to review the proposed application. The
planning commission will determine the application on its merits and make its recommendation to the council.
B. Utility Wires:
1. In every case in which a permit shall be issued, as herein provided, for the relocation of a building, the removal or displacement
of any overhead electrical or other wires, insofar as such removal or displacement may be necessary to effect the removal of
such building, shall be authorized by such permit.
2. The person to whom such permit shall have been issued shall notify the person owning, operating or controlling such wires to
remove or displace such wires to facilitate the removal of such building, and shall, at the same time, exhibit to such person the
properly issued permit, authorizing the removal of such wires sufficiently to allow the passage of such building along the street
over which such wires are suspended.
3. Any expenses incurred or to be incurred in the moving, removing or displacing of such wires shall be paid for by the person
who makes application for such permit.
C. Railroad And Bridge Requirements: No buildings shall be moved across any railroad or bridge unless the hour be specified and
approved by the company or governmental unit controlling such tracks or bridge.
D. Moving From Without To Within City Limits:
1. Any person desiring to move any building to within the limits of the city from outside such limits shall comply with the following
additional requirements:
a. The applicant shall notify the city building official during the process of the construction of such building, in sufficient time to
allow the building official to make all necessary inspections in order to determine whether such building complies with the
applicable ordinances of the city.
b. The applicant, at the time of application for a permit, shall pay to the finance director the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each house to be moved into the city. Such sum shall be retained by the city whether or not a permit is granted
to the applicant.
2. The building official is hereby authorized and required to make the inspections provided for herein, upon compliance with the
foregoing requirements. (1971 Code § 28-27; amd. 2000 Code)
11-3-12: ANNEXATIONS:
Annexed territory shall be placed in an R-1 zoning district, until such time as a detailed study determining its proper use district is
undertaken, unless the principal use of the annexed territory meets the requirements of any zoning district as provided in this title; in
which case, it shall be placed in such district or districts. (1971 Code § 28-25)
Chapter 4
SPECIAL ZONING PROVISIONS
11-4-1: MOTOR FUEL STATIONS:
Motor fuel stations in all districts shall be subject to the following standards:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 318/454
A. Minimum Yard And Setback Requirements: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in other sections of this title, the following
minimum requirements shall be observed for yards and setbacks for motor fuel stations:
Minor Motor
Fuel Station
Major Motor
Fuel Station Truck Stop
Lot width 150 feet 200 feet 200 feet
Front yard abutting a major thoroughfare 100 feet 100 feet 100 feet
Front yard 60 feet 60 feet 80 feet
Side yard adjacent to another lot 30 feet 30 feet 60 feet
Side yard adjacent to street 60 feet 60 feet 80 feet
Rear yard 30 feet 30 feet 60 feet
Pump setback 25 feet 30 feet 30 feet
B. Canopies:
1. The setback of any overhead canopy or weather protection, freestanding or projecting from the station structure, shall be not
less than ten feet (10') from the street right-of-way line, nor less than twenty feet (20') from an adjacent property line.
2. The total height of any overhead canopy or weather protection shall not exceed twenty feet (20').
C. Architectural Design:
1. Each motor fuel station shall be so architecturally designed as to be as compatible as possible with the general architectural
intent of the area in which it is located.
2. For the purpose of architectural appropriateness, each side of a motor fuel station shall be considered as a front face.
D. Landscaping: A minimum twenty foot (20') landscaped yard shall be planted and maintained behind all property lines adjacent to
public streets, except at driveway entrances.
E. Screening: Whenever a motor fuel station abuts an R District, a fence or compact evergreen hedge not less than fifty percent
(50%) opaque nor less than six feet (6') high shall be erected and maintained along the side and rear property line that abuts the
R District. Application of this provision shall not require a fence within fifteen feet (15') of any street right-of-way line.
F. Surfacing: The entire motor fuel station site, other than that part devoted to landscaping and structures, shall be surfaced with
concrete or bituminous surfacing to control dust and provide adequate drainage, and such surfaces shall be designed to meet the
requirements of a minimum four (4) ton axle load.
G. Curbing: All interior curbs shall be constructed within the property lines to separate driving and parking areas from landscaped
areas. Such curbing shall be constructed of concrete and shall be of six inch (6"), nonsurmountable design.
H. Parking Spaces: All outside parking spaces shall be located to the side and/or rear of the principal structure.
I. Outdoor Lighting: All outdoor illumination shall be provided with lenses, reflectors or shades which will concentrate the light upon
the premises so as to prevent any undue glare or rays of light therefrom being directly visible upon any adjacent street, roadway
or private property occupied for residential purposes.
J. Garbage, Refuse And Junk: All trash, waste materials and obsolete automobile parts shall be stored within a separate enclosure
behind the principal structure of the motor fuel station.
K. Storage Of Vehicles:
1. Open storage of motor vehicles shall not be permitted for a period of more than forty eight (48) hours.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 319/454
2. All rental campers, trailers or motor vehicles shall be stored within the rear and/or side yard not adjacent to the street. Such
rentals shall not be stored within the front yard setback nor the side yard adjacent to the street.
L. Vehicle Sales: No sales of motor vehicles, trailers, campers or boats shall be permitted without a conditional use permit.
M. Merchandise Sales: All goods for sale by a motor fuel station convenience store, other than those generally required for the
operation and maintenance of motor vehicles, shall be displayed within the principal motor fuel station structure. (1971 Code
§ 28-32; amd. 2000 Code)
11-4-2: DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS AND CLASS 3 RESTAURANTS:
Drive-in establishments and Class 3 restaurants in all districts shall be subject to the following performance standards:
A. Screening: A screening fence not over six feet (6') nor less than four feet (4') in height which is at least fifty percent (50%) opaque
throughout its height shall be constructed along the property line; or a planting strip, not less than fifteen feet (15') in width,
reserved and planted along the property line, shall be developed according to a submitted planting plan that meets approval of
the Planning Commission.
B. Traffic And Parking: Traffic and parking arrangements shall be so planned and arranged as not to cause a public nuisance.
C. Outside Lighting:
1. The outside lighting on the premises shall be in accord with a plan approved by the Council.
2. The outside lighting system shall have no light poles higher than the principal building.
3. The lighting system shall be so designed as not to cause excessive light beyond the lot line. (1971 Code § 28-33; amd. 2000
Code)
11-4-3: FALLOUT AND BLAST SHELTERS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to establish provisions to permit the construction and maintenance of fallout and blast
shelters.
B. Use Regulations:
1. Fallout or blast shelters are permitted as principal or accessory uses and structures in any district, subject to the yard
regulations of the district. Such shelters may contain or be contained in other structures or may be constructed separately and,
in addition to shelter use, may be used for any principal or accessory use permitted in the district, subject to the district
regulations on such use; but shall not be used for principal or accessory uses prohibited expressly or by implication in the
district.
2. The Council may permit a fallout or blast shelter to be used also for other purposes which are permitted, conditional or
accessory uses in the district in which the shelter is located, if the Council finds that all of the general requirements of this Title
concerning such uses are satisfied and, in addition, the following are established:
a. That the use other than as a shelter is compatible with the shelter proposed;
b. That the function as a shelter would not be materially impaired by the proposed use; and
c. That if a conditional use permit is required, this permit would have been granted regardless of whether the shelter was
involved. (1971 Code § 28-34)
11-4-4: YARDS1:
A. Side Yard Exemption: Buildings may be excluded from side yard requirements if party walls are utilized or if the adjacent buildings
are planned to be constructed as an integral structure and a conditional use permit is secured.
B. Additional Requirements: Required yards in the districts specified shall be subject to the following additional requirements:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 320/454
1. Through lots in any district shall have a required front yard on each street.
2. In the B and I districts, where the average depth of at least two (2) existing front yards for buildings abutting the same street
within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the lot in question are less or greater than the minimum front yard depth required for the
district, required front yards shall not be less than the average depth of such existing front yards; however, the depth of a front
yard shall not be less than twenty five feet (25'), nor be required to exceed the required setback in the respective B or I district,
except when abutting a major thoroughfare where the setback requirement for the respective district shall be observed.
3. In any R district, where the average depth of at least two (2) existing front yards for buildings within one hundred fifty feet (150')
of the lot in question and within the same block front is less or greater than the minimum front yard depth required for the
district, the required front yard shall not be less than the average depth of such existing yard; however, the depth of a front yard
shall not be less than twenty feet (20'), nor be required to exceed fifty feet (50'), except when abutting a major thoroughfare
where the setback requirement for the respective district shall be observed. (1971 Code § 28-35)
11-4-5: HEIGHT LIMIT MODIFICATIONS:
A. Scope: The requirements and regulations specified in this Title shall be subject to the provisions of this Section.
B. Increases In Height Limits:
1. Height limitations set forth elsewhere in this Title shall be increased fifty percent (50%) when applied to the following structures:
a. Church spires.
b. Belfries.
c. Cupolas and domes which do not contain usable space.
d. Monuments.
e. Water towers.
f. Fire and hose towers.
g. Observation towers.
h. Flagpoles.
i. Chimneys.
j. Smokestacks.
k. Parapet walls extending not more than three feet (3') above the limiting height of the building.
l. Cooling towers.
m. Elevator penthouses.
2. Heights in excess of those allowed under this Section and other sections shall be permitted only by a conditional use permit
granted by resolution of the Council, determining that such structure would not be dangerous and would not adversely affect
adjoining or adjacent property.
3. Additional Height For Sloped Lots: On any lot sloping downhill from the street which has an average ground slope on that
portion of the lot to be occupied by the main building of twenty five percent (25%) or more, measured in the general direction of
the side lot lines, an additional twelve feet (12') of height may be permitted in such main building; provided, that the lowest floor
shall not be less than ten feet (10') below the average established property line grades along the front of the lot. The floor of the
basement shall be considered the lowest floor, and a cellar floor shall not be counted. (1971 Code § 28-36)
4. Notification: Any sponsor who proposes any construction or alteration that would exceed a height of two hundred feet (200')
above ground level at the site or more than two hundred feet (200') above the established airport elevation, whichever is higher,
within three (3) nautical miles of the nearest runway of an airport, or increasing in height that extends upward and outward at a
slope of one hundred to one (100:1) from the nearest point of the nearest runway of a public airport shall notify the Minnesota
department of transportation commissioner at least thirty (30) days in advance. (Ord. 705, 1-16-2002)
11-4-6: WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS):
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the regulation of the construction and operation of wind energy conversion
systems in Cottage Grove, subject to reasonable conditions that will protect the environment, public health, safety, and welfare.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 321/454
B. Definitions:
FACILITY OPERATOR: The entity responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of the wind energy conversion
system.
FACILITY OWNER: The entity or entities having controlling or majority equity interest in the wind energy conversion system,
including their respective successors and assigns.
SUBSTATION: The apparatus that connects the electrical collection system of the WECS(s) and increases the voltage for
connection with the utility's transmission lines.
WECS, LARGE: A wind energy conversion system consisting of one or more wind turbines, a tower(s), and associated control or
conversion electronics, which has a total rated capacity of fifty (50) or more kilowatts.
WECS, SMALL: A single system designed to supplement other electricity sources as an accessory use to existing buildings or
facilities, wherein the power generated is used primarily for on site consumption. A small wind energy conversion system consists
of a single wind turbine, a tower or roof mounted system, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a total rated
capacity less than fifty (50) kilowatts.
WIND POWER: The conversion of wind energy into another form of energy.
WIND TURBINE HEIGHT: The distance measured from grade at the center of the tower to the highest point of the turbine rotor or
tip of the turbine blade when it reaches its highest elevation.
C. Conditional Use: Wind energy conversion systems shall be allowed as a conditional use in the zoning districts listed below: (Ord.
857, 4-15-2009)
District Roof Mounted Small WECS Large WECS
AG-1 and AG-2 CUP CUP CUP
R-1 and R-2 CUP CUP Not permitted
R-2.5, R-2A, R-2B, R-2C, R-2D, R-2E, R-2F, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-6 CUP Not permitted Not permitted
UR CUP Not permitted Not permitted
B-1, B-2, B-3, P-B, and N-B CUP CUP Not permitted
I-1 CUP CUP Not permitted
I-2, I-3 and I-5 CUP CUP CUP
I-4 CUP Not permitted Not permitted
PUD and PDO CUP Site plan review Not permitted
Mississippi River corridor critical area overlay district CUP CUP Not permitted
(Ord. 857, 4-15-2009; amd. Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
D. Permit Application: Application for a WECS permit shall be accompanied by drawings that show the following:
1. Location of the proposed WECS, including guywires and any other auxiliary equipment.
2. Property lines and physical dimensions of the lot.
3. A photograph or detailed drawing of the WECS, including the tower.
4. Specific information on the WECS, including type, size, rated power output, rotor material and performance, safety and noise
characteristics.
5. Specific information on the type, height and material of the tower.
6. Clearance distances between the farthest extension of the WECS blades to property lines.
7. Location, dimensions and types of existing structures and uses on the lot.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 322/454
8. Location of all aboveground utility lines within distance equivalent to the total height of the WECS.
9. Location and size of structures, trees and other objects within three hundred feet (300') which are taller than the lowest extent
of the blades of the proposed WECS.
E. Size Regulations; Compliance:
1. Rotors:
a. No WECS in a residential or commercial district shall have rotors that are longer than thirty five feet (35') in diameter.
b. No WECS in an industrial or agricultural district shall have rotors that are longer than fifty feet (50') in diameter.
c. The minimum height of the lowest extent of any WECS rotor shall be thirty feet (30') above the ground.
2. Height:
a. Freestanding wind turbine height limits: (Ord. 857, 4-15-2009)
District Small WECS Large WECS
AG-1 and AG-2 150 feet 250 feet
R-1 and R-2 150 feet n/a
R-2.5, R-2A, R-2B, R-2C, R-2D, R-2E, R-2F, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-6 n/a n/a
UR n/a n/a
B-1, B-2, B-3, P-B, and N-B 150 feet n/a
I-1 150 feet n/a
I-2, I-3 and I-5 150 feet 250 feet
I-4 n/a n/a
PUD and PDO Site plan review n/a
Mississippi River corridor critical area overlay district 150 feet n/a
(Ord. 857, 4-15-2009; amd. Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
b. Roof mounted wind turbines must not exceed fifteen feet (15') above the height limit established for the principal or
accessory structure.
3. Compliance With Regulations: All WECS shall comply with federal aviation administration notification requirements and any
other applicable regulations.
F. Installation And Design:
1. Towers:
a. All WECS tower structures shall be designed and constructed to be in compliance with pertinent provisions of the Minnesota
state building code. Indication of compliance may be obtained from the manufacturer's engineering staff or a state
professional engineer.
b. The compatibility of the tower structure with the rotors and other components of the WECS shall be certified by the
manufacturer's engineering staff or by a state professional engineer.
c. WECS towers shall either have tower climbing apparatus located not closer than twelve feet (12') to the ground or be
unclimbable by design for the first twelve feet (12').
2. Safety Wires: Safety wires shall be installed on the turnbuckles on guywires of guyed WECS towers.
3. Overspeed Controls: Every WECS shall be equipped with manual and automatic overspeed controls. The conformance of rotor
and overspeed control design and fabrication with good engineering practices shall be certified by the manufacturer's
engineering staff or by a state professional engineer.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 323/454
4. Electrical Requirements:
a. All electrical components of the WECS shall be in compliance with the applicable requirements of the national electrical code
as currently adopted by the Minnesota state building code division and shall be inspected by a qualified electrical inspector.
The interconnection between the WECS and the electric utility shall be in compliance with the most recent edition of the
national electrical code. Certification will be supplied in writing that the WECS will automatically disconnect from the utility
when there is no power input from the utility. This certification can be supplied by the manufacturer of the WECS.
b. The interconnection of the WECS with the local electrical utility shall comply with all applicable federal and state regulations.
Every applicant for a WECS permit should notify his/her electrical utility in advance of his/her installation plans.
c. Every battery storage unit associated with a WECS shall be in compliance with the national electrical code as currently
adopted by the Minnesota state building code division and shall be inspected by a qualified electrical inspector.
d. The WECS, including the blades, shall be grounded and shielded to protect against natural lightning strikes in conformance
with the national electrical code.
e. No WECS shall have affixed or attached lights, reflectors, flashers or any other illumination, except for those devices
required by the federal aviation administration.
5. Structural Components:
a. The safety of structural components of every WECS and the compatibility of the rotors with the towers of WECS shall be
certified by a state engineer. The safety of electrical components of every WECS shall be certified by a state registered
electrical engineer or individual with technical training on WECS.
b. The safety of all modifications to any WECS shall be certified by a state registered professional engineer. Certification of
safety is required before the building permit is granted for modifications made prior to installation. Certification of the safety of
modifications made after the WECS is installed and the permit is granted is also required. Failure to have the safety of
modifications certified after the permit has been granted shall result in revocation of the permit until certification has been
obtained.
6. Signs Required: At least one sign shall be posted at the base of the WECS tower and shall contain the following information:
a. Notice of no trespassing; and
b. Warning of high voltage.
c. The visual appearance of WECS shall at a minimum:
(1) Be a nonobtrusive color such as white, off white or gray; and
(2) Not display advertising (including flags, streamers or decorative items), except for identification of the turbine
manufacturer, facility owner and operator.
G. Siting:
1. Setbacks: The base of the tower of any WECS shall be set back from any property line a minimum of: (Ord. 857, 4-15-2009)
District Small WECS Large WECS
AG-1 and AG-2 1.1 times the WECS's height 1,000 feet
R-1 and R-2 1.1 times the WECS's height n/a
R-2.5, R-2A, R-2B, R-2C, R-2D, R-2E, R-2F, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-6 n/a n/a
UR n/a n/a
B-1, B-2, B-3, P-B, and N-B 1.1 times the WECS's height n/a
I-1 1.1 times the WECS's height n/a
I-2, I-3 and I-5 1.1 times the WECS's height 1,000 feet
I-4 n/a n/a
PUD and PDO 1.1 times the WECS's height n/a
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 324/454
(Ord. 857, 4-15-2009; amd. Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
2. Easements: No part of a WECS shall be located within or over drainage, utility or other established easements.
3. Property Lines: No part of a WECS shall be located on or over property lines.
4. Yards: The base of a WECS or the guywire anchors of a guyed WECS tower shall not be on any required minimum front, side
or rear yards.
5. Mississippi River Corridor Critical Area Overlay District: No large WECS shall be located within the Mississippi River corridor
critical area overlay district.
6. Vehicular Areas: Efforts should be made when siting a WECS and any related equipment to avoid locations that may be
vulnerable to vehicular accidents.
7. Clearance From Electrical Lines: Clearance between a WECS and electrical lines shall be in compliance with the requirements
outlined in the most recent edition of the national electrical code.
8. Wind Turbines: A wind turbine must not be within one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') from any conservation
easements or public parks.
9. Siting On Top Of Buildings: Every WECS sited on top of a building shall comply with applicable provisions of the Minnesota
state building code. Certification of compliance by a state professional engineer is required. The WECS must be less than ten
(10) kilowatts and not extend higher than fifteen feet (15') above the maximum height allowed for the structure the WECS is
mounted on.
H. Nuisance Concerns:
1. Noise Control: Noise area classification (NAC1, NAC2, etc.), established by the Minnesota pollution control agency shall be
used to evaluate and regulate noise from every WECS. The audible sound from a WECS will be measured at the property
boundary line. Every owner of a WECS that is found to be in violation of Minnesota pollution control agency's noise standards
shall cooperate in taking reasonable mitigating measures.
2. Electrical Or Radio Frequency Interference: Efforts should be taken by the proposed WECS owner to purchase, build or
recondition an electrical generator that will not create electrical or radio frequency interference to reception of communication
signals. Complaints about electrical or radio frequency interference shall be directed to the federal communications
commission.
3. Communication Interference: Efforts should be made to site each WECS to reduce the likelihood of blocking or reflecting
television or other communication signals. If signal interference occurs, both the WECS owner and the individual receiving
interference shall make reasonable efforts to resolve the problem. If the problem cannot be eliminated or reduced to a
reasonable level, the WECS can be shut down.
I. Other Regulations:
1. Supplying More Than One Structure: A WECS that supplies energy to two (2) or more structures shall be allowed as long as
the proposed WECS complies with all applicable zoning regulations.
2. Wind Access: Adequate wind access is essential to the safe and efficient operation of a WECS, and the city encourages the
use of private and restrictive covenants to protect wind access.
3. Maintenance Requirements; Abandonment; Nuisance:
a. It shall be a public nuisance if any of the following conditions exist:
(1) A WECS is not maintained in operational condition and poses a potential safety hazard; or
(2) A WECS is not maintained and operated in compliance with applicable zoning provisions and state and federal laws; or
(3) A WECS has not generated electricity for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months and the wind energy facility owner
has failed to remove the WECS or make it operational within thirty (30) days after the city has given written notice to
remove the WECS.
b. The city has the right to abate a public nuisance under the procedures set forth at section 4-1-6 of this code, provided that
the maximum notice period set forth at subsection 4-1-6B of this code shall be sixty (60) days and not thirty (30) days for any
abatement under this section.
4. Exemptions From Provisions: Any WECS that is by nature ornamental, rather than functional, shall be exempt from this section
if total height is less than twenty five feet (25').
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 325/454
5. Inspections: Each WECS shall be inspected yearly by the building official, to verify that the WECS is operational and that all
requirements of installation continue to be met.
6. Wind Turbines: All wind turbines shall comply with all applicable state and federal regulatory standards, including the uniform
building code as adopted by the state of Minnesota; national electrical code as adopted by the state of Minnesota; federal
aviation administration (FAA) requirements; and Minnesota pollution control agency (MPCA)/environmental protection agency
(EPA) regulations (hazardous waste, construction, stormwater, etc.).
7. Violation; Revocation Of Permit: Violation of any provision of this section is grounds for revocation of a conditional use permit
for a WECS. (Ord. 857, 4-15-2009)
11-4-7: ELECTROMAGNETIC COMMUNICATION FACILITIES (EMCF):
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish regulations for the siting, construction and maintenance of electromagnetic
communication facilities within Cottage Grove that protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community.
B. Objectives: The regulations and requirements of this section are intended to:
1. Provide for the appropriate location and development of antennas and towers within the city.
2. Minimize adverse visual effects of EMCFs through uniform design and siting standards.
3. Utilize standard structural and setback requirements to avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from antenna and tower
failure.
4. Maximize the use of existing approved structures for siting new antennas in order to reduce the number of new towers needed
to serve the community. (Ord. 635, 9-18-1996)
C. Accessory Use: Within all zoning districts, EMCFs which are accessory to the principal use are subject to the established height
and setback requirements for the principal structure. (Ord. 635, 9-18-1996; amd. 2000 Code)
D. Conditional Use: EMCFs are a conditional use within all zoning districts subject to the following performance standards:
1. Permit Required; Exemptions; Applications:
a. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct in place, place, replace, or structurally repair any
EMCF without first making application to the Building Inspection Division and securing permit approval.
b. Building permits are not required for adjustment or replacement of the elements of an antenna array affixed to a tower or
antenna, erection of temporary antennas or towers utilized for testing purposes, emergency communication, or for broadcast
remote pick-up operations.
c. The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a coverage/interference analysis and capacity analysis that the location of the
antenna as proposed is necessary to meet the frequency reuse and spacing needs of the proposed EMCF and to provide
adequate coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be adequately served by locating the antenna in a less restrictive
district.
d. All applications for the location of new EMCFs or service shall be accompanied by an intermodulation study which provides a
technical evaluation of existing and proposed transmissions and indicates all potential interference problems.
2. Permitted Locations:
a. Church sites when architecturally camouflaged as steeples, bell towers, or similar architectural features and attached to the
principal structure.
b. Parks and public open space sites when located on existing structures and designed to be compatible with the nature of the
site.
c. Government, school and public utility structures.
d. Principal structures in commercial, industrial and agricultural zoning districts.
e. Accessory structures within industrial districts.
f. Freestanding EMCFs in agricultural and industrial zoning districts.
3. Spacing: The minimum spacing between EMCFs is one-quarter (1/4) mile, except for co-location.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 326/454
4. Setbacks: Setback requirements for EMCFs are as follows:
a. An EMCF attached to a building shall comply with the setbacks of the zoning district.
b. Freestanding EMCFs shall not be placed in the front yard.
c. Freestanding EMCFs shall not be placed between the principal structure and any adjoining public right of way.
d. Freestanding EMCFs shall be set back three feet (3') from any property line for each one foot (1') of structure height.
5. Height: Height calculations are determined by measuring the vertical distance between the grade around supporting structures
for EMCFs, and the highest point on the freestanding or mounted facility. Individual EMCF height must comply as follows:
a. EMCFs attached to existing structures shall not exceed fifteen feet (15').
b. The maximum height of any freestanding EMCF is one hundred fifty feet (150').
c. The City Council may require a twenty five percent (25%) reduction in the maximum height limits of EMCFs in all zoning
districts if the topography of a proposed EMCF site is at a substantially higher elevation than the surrounding public
roadways or residential areas.
6. Architectural Design: All proposed EMCFs shall be designed to blend in to the surrounding environment through the use of
color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except where color is dictated by Federal or State regulations.
7. Structural Design: The structural design of EMCFs must comply with the following:
a. Any proposed EMCF over sixty feet (60') shall be designed for co-location of at least one additional EMCF.
b. Any proposed EMCF over one hundred feet (100') in height shall be designed for co-location of at least two (2) additional
EMCFs.
c. EMCFs must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of equipment upon the structure, and to accept attachments
mounted at varying heights.
d. All freestanding EMCFs must be self-supporting without the use of wires, cables, beams or other means. The design should
utilize an open framework or monopole configuration that is designed to collapse in on itself in the event of structural
damage. Permanent attachments, exclusive of antennas, that serve to increase off-site visibility, are prohibited.
8. Screening: EMCFs should be located in areas that provide the maximum amount of natural or existing structural screening for
off-site views of the facility. The ground level perimeter of all EMCFs shall be screened with a dense vegetative landscaping
barrier that consists of seventy five percent (75%) coniferous plantings.
9. Lighting: EMCFs shall not be illuminated by artificial means, and shall not display strobe lights unless such lighting is required
by Federal or State regulations. When incorporated into the design of the EMCF, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields,
parking lots or similar areas may be attached to the EMCF.
10. Signs: The use of any portion of an EMCF for signs other than warning or equipment information is prohibited.
11. Fencing: All facility fencing shall be six feet (6') in height or under, and shall not employ barbed wire, electricity or any other
similar security devices. Plastic, fabric, mesh or other opaque fencing insert materials are prohibited.
12. Enclosed Mechanical And Electrical Equipment: EMCF mechanical and electrical equipment that is sited within ten feet (10')
of the ground shall be enclosed in a structure.
13. Utility Structures: All utility buildings and structures accessory to an EMCF shall meet the minimum setbacks of the zoning
districts, and be architecturally designed, constructed and screened to blend in to the surrounding environment and
architectural character of the adjacent land use. Ground mounted structures shall utilize coniferous vegetation for required
landscape screening.
14. Commercial EMCFs: All commercial EMCFs erected, constructed, or located within the City shall not be approved unless the
City Council finds that the equipment planned for the proposed EMCF cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved
tower, building or structure within a one mile search radius of the proposed tower due to one or more of the following reasons:
a. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved structure, as documented by a
qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved structure cannot be reinforced, modified, or
replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
b. The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at
the tower or building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the interference cannot be
prevented at a reasonable cost.
c. Existing or approved EMCFs and buildings within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height
necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 327/454
d. Existing structures are not located within an area that meets the frequency reuse and spacing needs of the proposed EMCF.
e. Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned equipment upon an existing or approved structure.
15. Safety; Effects On Others: All construction, installation, wiring and maintenance of EMCFs shall not create a safety hazard or
damage to the property of others.
16. Encroachment Over Public Ways: With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service and connection lines
approved by the issuing authority, no part of any antenna or tower nor any lines, cable, equipment or wires or braces, in
connection with either, shall at any time extend across or over any part of the right of way, public street, highway, sidewalk, or
property line.
17. Signal And Remote Control Conductors: All signal and remote control conductors of low energy extending substantially
horizontally above the ground between a tower or antenna and a structure, or between towers shall be at least eight feet (8')
above the ground at all points, unless buried underground.
E. Change In Zoning: When the property is rezoned and the new zoning classification does not permit an EMCF in conformance with
provisions of this Code, any existing EMCF shall be removed prior to preliminary plat approval or building permit issuance,
whichever occurs first.
F. Abandoned, Unused EMCFs: Abandoned or unused EMCFs shall be removed within twelve (12) months of the cessation of
operations at the site, unless a time extension is granted by the Director of Community Development. Unused portions of EMCFs
above a manufactured connection shall be removed within six (6) months of the time of the antenna relocation. The replacement
of portions of a EMCF previously removed requires a conditional use permit amendment.
G. Interference: No new or existing EMCF service shall interfere with public safety communications. Before the introduction of new
services or changes in existing services, EMCF providers shall notify the City at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of such
changes and allow the City to monitor interference levels during the testing process.
H. Radiation: EMCFs placed within the City shall be subject to State and Federal regulations pertaining to nonionizing radiation and
other health hazards related to such facilities. If additional restrictive standards are adopted, the EMCFs shall be made to comply,
or continued operation of the conditionally permitted facility may be restricted by the City Council. The cost of verification of
compliance shall be borne by the owner and operator of the EMCF.
I. Existing EMCFs: All EMCFs that are in existence as of September 18, 1996, may continue in use for the purpose now used and as
now existing, but may not be replaced or structurally altered without complying in all respects with this Section.
J. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not the intention of this Section to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any covenant or
other agreement between parties, provided, however where this Section imposes a greater restriction upon the use or premises
for antennas or towers than are imposed or required by other sections, rules, regulations, or permits, or by covenants or
agreements, the provisions of this Section shall govern. (Ord. 635, 9-18-1996)
11-4-8: SATELLITE RECEIVE-ONLY ANTENNAS (SROA):
A. Permitted Accessory Use: Satellite receive-only antennas (SROA) shall be a permitted accessory use in all districts, subject to the
standards of this Section. (1971 Code § 28-36.2)
B. Freestanding SROAs:
1. In districts R-2.5, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6, no SROA shall be placed within any required front yard. (1971 Code § 28-36.2; amd.
Ord. 640, 12-4-1996; 2000 Code)
2. In all districts, SROAs shall be subject to the same setback requirements in rear or side yards which would apply to other
accessory structures within the district.
3. No antenna shall be placed less than twenty feet (20') from a public street right of way. All such antennas shall be securely
anchored.
C. Roof-Mounted SROAs: Every SROA mounted on a roof shall be subject to the normal height limits of the zoning district in which it
is located and shall comply with any applicable requirements of the Uniform Building Code.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 328/454
D. Additional Provisions:
1. In business and industrial districts, every exterior display of four (4) or more SROAs for sale shall be considered an open sales
lot and shall be subject to regulations for open sales lots applicable to that zoning district.
2. Advertising shall not be placed on satellite antennas. (1971 Code § 28-36.2)
11-4-9: MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AND LEASING:
Motor vehicle sales and leasing establishments, except for limited automotive sales in the I-2, general industrial district, must
conform to the following standards:
A. Lot Area And Dimensions:
1. Minimum lot size of eight (8) acres.
2. Maximum lot size of fifteen (15) acres.
3. Minimum lot width of three hundred feet (300').
4. Minimum lot depth of one hundred fifty feet (150').
B. Building Size And Setbacks:
1. Only one primary building is allowed with a minimum size of forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
2. Minimum front setback of seventy five feet (75').
3. Minimum side yard setback of fifty feet (50').
C. Landscaping And Screening:
1. All vehicle parking and inventory areas which are adjacent to public streets or side and rear property lines must be screened by
fencing constructed on top of a continuous brick wall, with a fence design approved by the city.
2. A minimum of thirty five percent (35%) of the site must be landscaped.
3. A minimum thirty foot (30') wide landscaped area must be established along the perimeter of the site. This area must include
landscaped berms no less than three feet (3') in height.
4. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the parking and display area must be landscaped and irrigated.
5. All other landscaping requirements must be met.
D. Other Requirements:
1. Motor vehicle display areas must be on one lot not separated by a public street or other land use.
2. No vehicle parking is allowed in landscaped areas.
3. Customer and employee parking areas must be clearly indicated on the plan. No parking or vehicle display is allowed in
driveways, entrances, or customer parking areas.
4. A maximum of two (2) vehicle elevated display areas are allowed. These display areas must be located outside of the thirty
foot (30') perimeter landscaped area and must not exceed three feet (3') in height. These display areas must be landscaped
and constructed of brick pavers, decorative stamped, colored concrete, or better. No metal ramps or similar devices are
allowed. No rooftop parking or display is allowed.
5. Pennants, balloons, streamers, pinwheels, or other attention attracting devices are not allowed. Open hoods of vehicles,
windshields, car windows, trunks, roofs, or the like must not be used for signage. A maximum of two (2) flags are allowed.
Flagpole locations must be shown on the site plan. Flagpoles may not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height. The length of any
flag may not exceed six feet (6').
6. Loading and unloading of vehicles from transport trucks may only take place on the site. No loading or unloading on public
streets is allowed.
7. All lighting must be downward directed with cutoff fixtures. No signs may be attached to light poles.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 329/454
8. No loudspeakers or music systems are allowed outside of the building.
E. Limited Automotive Sales: Limited automotive sales accessory to an automotive repair use (inside the principal structure) must
conform to the following standards:
1. Lot Area And Dimensions:
a. Minimum lot size of three (3) acres.
b. Maximum lot size of five (5) acres.
c. Minimum lot width of four hundred twenty five feet (425').
d. Minimum lot depth of one hundred fifty feet (150').
2. Building Size And Setbacks:
a. Minimum primary building of twenty thousand five hundred (20,500) square feet.
b. The minimum building and parking setbacks are the same minimum yard requirements as required in the I-2, general
industrial district.
3. Landscaping And Screening:
a. A minimum of thirty five percent (35%) of the site must be landscaped.
b. A minimum thirty foot (30') wide landscaped area must be established along the perimeter of the site. This area must include
landscaped berms no less than three feet (3') in height.
c. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the parking and display area must be landscaped and irrigated.
d. All other landscaping requirements must be met.
4. Other Requirements:
a. Motor vehicle display areas must be entirely inside the principal building.
b. The maximum floor area inside the principal building designated for motor vehicle display must not be greater than ten
percent (10%) of the principal building's gross floor area.
c. Customer and employee parking areas must be clearly indicated on the plan. No parking or vehicle display is allowed in
driveways or entrances.
d. Loading and unloading vehicles from a transport vehicle may only take place on the site. Loading or unloading on public
streets is prohibited.
e. Outdoor signage displaying automotive sales, leasing or rental is prohibited on the site. (Ord. 914, 5-15-2013)
11-4-10: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
A. Purpose: Cottage Grove supports the use of solar energy systems in appropriate zoning districts within the City. The development
of solar energy systems should be balanced with the protection of the public safety and the existing natural resources in Cottage
Grove. This section provides for the regulation of the construction and operation of solar energy systems in Cottage Grove,
subject to reasonable conditions to protect the environment, public health, safety, and welfare. The provisions of this section shall
apply within all zoning districts. In no case shall the provisions of this section guarantee rights to solar access.
B. Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings:
COMMUNITY SOLAR GARDEN: A solar electric (photovoltaic) array that provides retail electric power (or a financial proxy for
retail power) to multiple community members or businesses residing or located off site from the location of the solar energy
system, under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes 216B.1641 or a successor statute.
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM: An active solar energy system that converts solar energy directly into electricity.
SOLAR COLLECTOR: A device, structure, or a part of a device or structure for which the primary purpose is to capture sunlight
and transform it into thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy.
SOLAR DAYLIGHTING: A device specifically designed to capture and redirect the visible portion of the solar spectrum, while
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 330/454
controlling the infrared portion, for use in illuminating interior building spaces in lieu of artificial lighting.
SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
SOLAR ENERGY DEVICE: A system or series of mechanisms designed primarily to provide heating, cooling, electrical power,
mechanical power, or solar daylighting or to provide any combination of the foregoing by means of collecting and transferring
solar generated energy into such uses either by active or passive means. Such systems may also have the capability of storing
such energy for future utilization.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A device or structural design feature, a substantial purpose of which is to provide daylight for interior
lighting or provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling, electricity generation, or
water heating.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING INTEGRATED: A solar energy system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory
building, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural component of the building. Building integrated systems include,
but are not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water solar energy systems that are contained within or substitute for roofing materials,
windows, skylights, or awnings.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GRID INTERTIE: A photovoltaic solar energy system that is connected to an electric circuit served
by an electric utility company.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND MOUNTED: A freestanding solar energy system mounted directly to the ground using a
rack or pole rather than being mounted on a building.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, OFF GRID: A photovoltaic solar energy system in which the circuits energized by the solar energy
system are not electrically connected in any way to electric circuits that are served by an electric utility company.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ROOF MOUNTED: A solar energy system mounted onto the roof of a building.
SOLAR FARM: A commercial facility that converts sunlight into electricity, whether by photovoltaic (PV), concentrating solar
power devices (CSP), or other conversion technology, for the principal purpose of wholesale sales of generated electricity.
SOLAR HEAT EXCHANGER: A component of a solar energy device that is used to transfer heat from one substance to another,
either liquid or gas.
SOLAR HOT AIR SYSTEM: An active solar energy system that includes a solar collector to provide direct supplemental space
heating by heating and recirculating conditioned building air.
SOLAR HOT WATER SYSTEM: A system that includes a solar collector and a heat exchanger that heats or preheats water for
building heating systems or other hot water needs, including residential domestic hot water and hot water for commercial
processes.
SOLAR MOUNTING DEVICES: Racking, frames, or other devices that allow the mounting of a solar collector onto a roof surface
or the ground.
C. General Standards:
1. Building Integrated Solar Energy Systems: A building integrated solar energy system shall be allowed only on principal
structures in all zoning districts and shall be regulated as any other building element.
2. Wall Mounted Solar Energy Systems: Wall mounted solar energy systems are prohibited on the side of a principal structure
facing a public street. (Ord. 985, 7-19-2017)
3. Roof-Mounted Solar Energy Systems:
a. Roof mounting devices and roof mounted solar energy systems shall be flush mounted on pitched roofs, parallel to the
roofline.
b. Roof-mounted solar energy systems mounted on a flat roof of a building located in a nonresidential district may be mounted
at an angle to the roof to improve their efficiency; however, the highest point of a solar collector shall not be more than five
feet (5') from the surface of the roof, measured in a straight line above the roof upon which the solar collector is mounted.
c. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of the building on which the system is
mounted or built.
d. Exterior piping for solar hot water systems is prohibited to extend beyond the perimeter of the building.
e. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall comply with the maximum height requirements for the zoning district in which they
are located.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 331/454
f. Roof-mounted solar energy systems are permitted on certain accessory structures in residential zoning districts, subject to
the following performance standards:
(1) The accessory structure must have a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of floor area and must comply with all
accessory structure regulations for the zoning district in which the property is located.
(2) The roof-mounted solar energy system must not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of the roof and must not have a
pitch steeper than the roof pitch upon which the collector is mounted. (Ord. 990, 3-7-2018)
4. Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems:
a. Ground mounted solar energy systems may only be erected on properties consisting of five (5) or more acres, regardless of
the zoning district in which they are located.
b. Ground mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height when oriented at maximum tilt as
measured from the ground to the highest point of the solar collector or related appurtenance.
c. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall comply with the accessory structure setback standards for the applicable zoning
district in which they are located, except as otherwise required in this section. Solar energy systems shall not extend into the
minimum front, rear, or side yard setbacks when oriented at minimum or maximum design tilt.
d. Ground-mounted solar energy systems are prohibited in the front yard of properties located within the MUSA. Ground
mounted solar energy systems are permitted in the front yard of properties located outside the MUSA, but must comply with
the minimum front yard setback as required in the zoning district they are located in or such greater distance as may be
required in this section.
5. Heliostats: Heliostats are prohibited in all zoning districts.
D. Additional Requirements:
1. Public Easements: Solar energy systems shall not encroach on public drainage or utility easements.
2. Glare: Solar collectors shall be placed and arranged such that reflected solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto
adjacent buildings, properties, or roadways, and shall not emit unreasonable glare. Where necessary, screening may be
required to address glare created by or as a result of the solar energy systems.
3. Standards: Solar energy systems shall meet the minimum standards outlined by the International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC), the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE), ASTM International,
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), Underwriter's Laboratory (UL), the Solar Rating and Certification
Corporation (SRCC) or other standards acceptable to the Community Development Director.
4. Certification: Solar energy systems and components shall be certified by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL), the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory, and Solar Rating and Certification Corporation (SRCC), or other appropriate certification(s) as
accepted by the City. The City reserves the right to deny a building permit for proposed solar energy systems deemed to have
inadequate certification.
5. Building Permit Required: All solar energy systems require a building permit. A building permit application and plan submittal
must comply with the following requirements:
a. Applications For Solar Energy Systems: An application to the City for a building permit under this section shall contain
information, including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) A building permit application.
(2) A site plan of existing and proposed site conditions.
(3) Description and depiction of solar energy system.
(4) Number of solar collectors to be installed.
(5) Location and spacing of solar collectors and mounting devices.
(6) Applications for ground mounted solar energy systems shall identify existing vegetation on the installation site (list
vegetation type and percent of coverage; i.e., grassland, plowed field, wooded areas, etc.), and provide a maintenance
plan for controlling vegetative growth on site upon installation of the solar energy system.
(7) A description of the method of connecting the solar collectors to a building or substation and a signed copy of the
interconnection agreement with the local electric utility shall be included or a written explanation outlining why an
interconnection agreement is not required.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 332/454
(8) Planned location of underground or overhead electric lines connecting the solar energy system to the substation or
distribution line.
(9) New electrical equipment other than at the existing building or substation that is the connection point for the solar energy
system.
(10) Manufacturer's specifications and recommended installation methods for all major equipment, including solar collectors,
mounting systems and foundations for poles or racks.
(11) Existing and proposed (if existing grade will be altered) topography at two foot (2') contours.
(12) A completed glare study that demonstrates that there will be no unreasonable glare generated by the solar energy
system and that any glare generated shall not be directed onto adjacent buildings, properties, or roadways or otherwise
adversely impact neighboring properties.
6. Grid Interties: For all grid intertie solar energy systems, all power lines shall be placed underground within the interior of each
parcel and between the solar energy system and its connection to the electric grid. The collection system may be placed
overhead near substations or points of interconnection to the electric grid. All grid intertie systems shall have an agreement
with the local utility prior to the issuance of a building permit. A visible external disconnect must be provided if required by the
utility. Off grid systems are exempt from this requirement. (Ord. 985, 7-19-2017)
7. Special Exceptions: Solar collectors and solar energy systems with a cumulative area of six (6) square feet or less are
permitted in all zoning districts and are exempt from the provisions of this section. Examples of these systems include outdoor
accent lighting systems, power supply for traffic control systems, powering a water pump for water gardens, telecommunication
systems, backup power systems during power outages, and similar solar energy systems, as long as the system has a
cumulative area of six (6) square feet or less. (Ord. 990, 3-7-2018)
E. Community Solar Gardens And Solar Farms: Community solar gardens and solar farms are permitted with an interim conditional
use permit subject to the following requirements:
1. Ground Mounted Community Solar Gardens And Solar Farms: Ground mounted community solar gardens and solar farms are
permitted only in those areas shown on exhibit A on file in the City, and must comply with the following requirements:
a. A minimum of five (5) acres of land is required. All ground mounted solar energy systems and solar collection appurtenant
equipment must set back a minimum of three hundred feet (300') from all property boundary lines.
b. Vegetative screening or buffering of the ground-mounted solar energy systems may be required as part of the conditions of
approval. Screening or buffering shall be based on the proximity of the system to residential buildings and to abutting public
right-of-way. Screening may include walls or fences.
c. The electrical connection systems shall be placed underground within the interior of each parcel and between the solar
energy system and the point where the interconnection to the electric grid is made. Exemptions may be granted in instances
where shallow bedrock, water courses, or other elements of the natural landscape interfere with the ability to bury lines.
2. Roof Mounted Community Solar Gardens And Solar Farms: Roof mounted community solar gardens and solar farms are
permitted on flat roofs on principal structures in all zoning districts regardless of lot size, and must comply with the following
requirements:
a. All feeder lines and grid interties shall be placed underground between the solar energy system and the point where the
interconnection to the electric grid is made. The collection system may be placed overhead near substations or points of
interconnection to the electric grid.
b. Roof-mounted systems shall comply with all building setbacks in the applicable zoning district and shall not extend beyond
the exterior perimeter of the building on which the system is mounted.
c. Roof-mounted solar energy systems must abut an existing electric distribution system for purposes of making the
interconnection to the electric grid.
d. Solar energy systems are allowed on flat roofs on accessory structures only in non-residential zoning districts.
e. Solar collectors mounted on flat roofs on principal and accessory structures in non-residential zoning districts may be
mounted at an angle, but no portion of the solar collector may extend more than five feet (5') above the surface of the flat
roof.
F. Decommissioning: A decommissioning plan shall be submitted with all applications for community solar gardens or solar farm
systems.
1. Decommissioning plans shall outline the anticipated means and cost of removing the solar energy system at the end of its
serviceable life or upon the discontinuation of its use. The cost estimates shall be made by a competent party, such as
professional engineer, a contractor capable of decommissioning the system, or a person with suitable expertise or experience
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 333/454
with decommissioning. The plan shall also identify the financial resources that will be available to pay for the decommissioning
and removal of the system. Owners of solar energy systems may rely on manufacturer's data to submit estimates.
2. Decommissioning of the system must occur within ninety (90) days from either of the following:
a. The end of the system's service life; or
b. The system becomes a discontinued use.
3. A system shall be considered a discontinued use after one year without energy production, unless a plan is developed during
the year the system is discontinued and submitted to the Zoning Administrator outlining the steps and schedule for returning
the system back into service.
4. The City may, at its discretion, require the owner and/or operator of the solar energy system to provide financial security in the
form of a cash escrow, bond, or irrevocable letter of credit in an amount equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of a
cost estimate for decommissioning the system.
5. The owner of the property where a community solar garden or solar farm is located must notify the City in writing when feeder
lines and/or grid interties are disconnected from the local utility transmission line.
G. Abandonment: If a solar energy system remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous period of one year, the system shall
be deemed to be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall remove the abandoned system at its
expense after a demolition permit has been obtained. Removal shall include removal of the entire solar energy systems, including
all solar collectors, mounting structures, and related components. (Ord. 985, 7-19-2017)
Chapter 5
ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS
11-5-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the location of and to prescribe licensing requirements for adult
establishments in order to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city of Cottage Grove. This chapter
is not intended to limit or restrict the content of adult oriented materials nor is it intended to deny access to adult oriented
materials protected by the first amendment.
B. Findings Of The City Council: Studies conducted by the Minnesota attorney general, the American Planning Association, and
cities such as St. Paul, Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Hopkins, Minnesota; Ramsey, Minnesota; Minnetonka, Minnesota;
Rochester, Minnesota; Phoenix, Arizona; Los Angeles, California; and Seattle, Washington, have studied the impacts that adult
establishments have in those communities. These studies have concluded that adult establishments have adverse impacts on the
surrounding neighborhoods. These impacts include increased crime rates, lower property values, increased transiency,
neighborhood blight, and potential health risks. After studying the experiences of other cities where adult businesses have
located, the city council of the city of Cottage Grove concludes:
1. Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of the types set forth above.
2. The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend to diminish if adult establishments are governed by geographic,
licensing, and health requirements.
3. It is not the intent of the city council to prohibit adult establishments from having a reasonable opportunity to locate in the city.
4. Minnesota statutes, section 462.357, allows the city to adopt regulations to promote the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare.
5. The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be promoted by the city adopting regulations governing adult
establishments.
6. Adult establishments can contribute to an increase in criminal activity in the area in which such businesses are located, taxing
city crime prevention programs and law enforcement services.
7. Adult establishments can be used as fronts for prostitution and other criminal activity. The experience of other cities indicates
that the proper management and operation of such businesses can, however, minimize this risk, provided the owners and
operators of such facilities are regulated by licensing or other procedures.
8. Adult establishments can increase the risk of exposure to communicable diseases including, but not limited to, acquired
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) for which currently there is no cure. Experiences of other cities indicate that such
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 334/454
businesses can facilitate the spread of communicable diseases by virtue of the design and use of the premises, thereby
endangering not only the patrons of such establishments but also the general public.
9. Adult establishments can cause or contribute to public health problems by the presence of live adult entertainment in
conjunction with food and/or drink on the same premises.
10. The risk of criminal activity and public health problems can be minimized through a licensing and regulatory scheme as
prescribed herein. (Ord. 733, 5-21-2003)
11-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the meanings given them:
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT: A. Any business that devotes a substantial or significant portion of its inventory, stock in trade, or publicly
displayed merchandise, or devotes a substantial or significant portion of its floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas,
bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business not open to the public) to, or derives a substantial or significant portion of its
gross revenues from, items, merchandise, devices or other materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material
depicting, exposing, simulating, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
B. Any business that engages in any "adult use" as defined herein.
ADULT USE: Any of the following activities or businesses:
Adult Body Painting Studio: An establishment or business that provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether
transparent or nontransparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of "specified
anatomical areas".
Adult Bookstore: A business engaging in the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records,
audiotapes, videotapes, movies, motion picture film, or any other similar materials, if a substantial or significant portion of its
inventory, stock in trade, or publicly displayed merchandise consists of, or if a substantial or significant portion of its floor area (not
including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business not open to the public) is devoted to, or if a
substantial or significant portion of its gross revenues is derived from, items, merchandise, devices or materials that are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Cabaret: An establishment that provides dancing or other live entertainment that is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the performance, depiction, or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or seeks to
evoke, arouse, or excite sexual or erotic feelings or desire.
Adult Companionship Establishment: A business that provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or
discussion distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Conversation/Rap Parlor: A business or establishment that provides the services of engaging in or listening to conversation,
talk or discussion distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Hotel Or Motel: A hotel or motel that presents material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Massage Parlor, Sport/Health Club: A massage parlor or sport/health club that provides massage services distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater: A business or establishment with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons that as a prevailing
practice presents on premises viewing of movies, motion pictures or other visual media material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Modeling Studio: An establishment that provides live models who, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification, engage in "specified sexual activities" or display "specified anatomical areas" while being observed, painted, painted
upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted.
Adult Motion Picture Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are
maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Motion Picture Theater: A business with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons that as a prevailing practice presents visual
media material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas".
Adult Novelty Business: A business that devotes a substantial or significant portion of its inventory, stock in trade, or publicly
displayed merchandise or devotes a substantial or significant portion of its floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas,
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 335/454
bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business not open to the public) to, or derives a substantial or significant portion of its
gross revenues from items, merchandise, or devices that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis of material depicting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", or items, merchandise or devices that simulate "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", or are designed for sexual stimulation.
Adult Sauna: A sauna that excludes minors by reason of age, or that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided
by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility: A building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room
used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of
age and if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
BODY ART: Physical body adornment using, but not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, branding, body
modification, and cosmetic tattooing. This definition does not include practices that are considered part of a medical procedure
performed by state board certified medical and dental personnel, such as, but not limited to, implants under the skin. Such medical
procedures may not be performed in a body art establishment. This definition does not include piercing of the outer perimeter of the
lobe of the ear using presterilized single use stud and clasp ear piercing system.
NUDE OR SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation,
bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of
excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus,
buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or
B. Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
C. Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or
D. Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; or
E. Situations involving a person or persons, any of which are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and
who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such persons;
or
F. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or
G. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION: Twenty five percent (25%) or more. (Ord. 733, 5-21-2003; amd. Ord. 825, 10-3-2007)
11-5-3: LOCATION:
A. An adult establishment may be located within the B-3 general business zoning district as a permitted use.
B. An adult establishment shall not be allowed within five hundred feet (500') of another existing adult establishment.
C. An adult establishment shall not be allowed within five hundred feet (500') of a body art establishment.
D. An adult establishment shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of any residential building located in any residential or
agricultural zoning district in the city.
E. An adult establishment shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of an existing school, daycare, library, park, playground
or place of worship located in the city.
F. For purposes of this chapter, the five hundred foot (500') distance shall be a horizontal measurement from the closest point of the
nearest residential building, place of worship, school, daycare, library, another adult establishment, or from the closest point of the
nearest structure on a playground, or the nearest boundary of the site containing a park, to the nearest point of the proposed
adult establishment structure. If the proposed adult establishment is located in a multi-tenant building, the measurement shall be
taken to the nearest point of the portion of the building where the adult establishment is located. If a portion of a lot or existing
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 336/454
parcel of land is within the five hundred foot (500') buffer area, the portion of the parcel or lot outside of the five hundred foot
(500') buffer area shall be considered a permitted location if it is capable of being subdivided or split into a separate parcel or lot.
(Ord. 825, 10-3-2007)
11-5-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation wishing to operate an adult establishment must apply for and obtain a license from the
city as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 733, 5-21-2003)
11-5-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL:
A. Execution Of Application: The following individuals must sign the license application and will be considered an applicant for
purposes of this chapter:
1. The owner of the adult establishment business;
2. The operator of the business;
3. The manager of the business; and
4. In the case of an applicant that is not an individual, each person who has a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in the
business, and each officer, director, general partner or other person who will participate directly in decisions relating to the
management of the business.
B. Contents Of Application: The application for an adult establishment license shall be considered complete if it includes the
information required in this section.
1. The name, residence, phone number, and birth date of each individual applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name,
residence, phone number, and birth date of each general and limited partner. If the applicant is a corporation, the names,
residences, phone numbers, and birth dates of all persons holding more than ten percent (10%) of the issued and outstanding
stock of the corporation;
2. The address and legal description of the premises where the adult establishment is to be located;
3. A statement detailing any misdemeanor, gross misdemeanor, or felony convictions relating to sex offenses, obscenity, or the
operation of an adult establishment by each applicant, and whether the applicant has ever applied for or held a license to
operate a similar type of business in another community. In the case of a corporation, a statement detailing any felony
convictions by the owners of more than ten percent (10%) of the issued and outstanding stock of the corporation, and whether
or not those owners have ever applied for or held a license to operate a similar type of business in another community;
4. The activities and types of business to be conducted;
5. The hours of operation;
6. The provisions made to restrict access by minors;
7. A building plan of the premises detailing all internal operations and activities;
8. A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (.6");
9. A statement that the applicant is qualified according to the provisions of this chapter;
10. A statement that the premises have been or will be inspected and found to be in compliance with the appropriate state,
county, and local law and codes by the health official, fire marshal, and building inspector;
11. The names and addresses of all creditors of each applicant insofar as credit which has been extended for the purposes of
constructing, equipping, maintaining, operating, or furnishing or acquiring the premises, personal effects, equipment, or
anything incident to the establishment, maintenance and operation of the business;
12. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, joint business venture, partnership, or any legally constituted business
association, it shall submit along with its application, accurate and complete business records showing the names, addresses,
and dates of birth of all individuals having an interest in the business, including partners, officers, owners, and creditors
furnishing credit for the establishment, acquisition, maintenance, and furnishings of said business and, in the case of a
corporation, the names, addresses, and dates of birth of all officers, general managers, members of the board of directors as
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 337/454
well as any creditors who have extended credit for the acquisition, maintenance, operation, or furnishing of the establishment
including the purchase or acquisition of any items of personal property for use in said operation; and
13. Complete and accurate documentation establishing the interest of the applicant and any other person having an interest in
the premises upon which the building is proposed to be located or the furnishings thereof, personal property thereof, or the
operation or maintenance thereof. Documentation shall be in the form of a lease, deed, contract for deed, mortgage deed,
mortgage credit arrangement, loan agreements, security agreements, and any other documents establishing the interest of the
applicant or any other person in the operation, acquisition or maintenance of the enterprise.
C. Issuance Of License:
1. Disqualifications: The city will issue a license to an applicant within sixty (60) days of a complete application unless one or
more of the following conditions exist:
a. The applicant is under twenty one (21);
b. The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the license application;
c. The applicant gives false, fraudulent, or untruthful information on the license application;
d. The adult establishment is not in full compliance with this code and all provisions of state and federal law;
e. The applicant has not paid the required license and investigation fees;
f. The applicant has been denied a license by the city or any other Minnesota municipal corporation to operate an adult
establishment, or such license has been suspended or revoked, within the preceding twelve (12) months;
g. The adult establishment holds an intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor, wine license or any other license identified in
Minnesota statutes chapter 340A or title 3, chapter 12 of this code or is located in a building that holds such a license;
h. Less than one year has elapsed in the case of a previous license revocation;
i. The applicant has been convicted of a gross misdemeanor or felony or of violating any law of this state or local ordinance
relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or adult establishments for which:
(1) Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement in the case of a
misdemeanor offense;
(2) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is later, in the case of a felony offense; or
(3) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
last conviction, whichever is later, if the conviction is of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of
misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty four (24) month period.
2. Approval: If the city fails to act within sixty (60) days of a complete application, the application will be deemed approved.
D. Expiration And Renewal Of License:
1. An application for the renewal of an existing license must be submitted to the city clerk at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to
the expiration date of the existing license. Within twenty (20) days of receipt of the renewal application, the city will verify all of
the information in the renewal application and complete any necessary investigation. Within ten (10) days after the completed
investigation, the city will issue a renewal license unless one or more of the conditions in subsection C of this section exist. If
the city denies a renewal application, the city shall notify the applicant in writing and shall state the grounds for nonrenewal.
2. After the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. (Ord.
733, 5-21-2003)
11-5-6: LICENSE FEES; TERM:
A. Fee Required:
1. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a receipt from the city finance director for payment in full of the required
fee.
2. The annual fee for an adult establishment license and a nonrefundable investigation fee shall be established by city council
resolution from time to time. All fees shall be paid into the general fund of the city.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 338/454
B. Refund:
1. When an application for a license is rejected, the finance director shall refund the amount paid.
2. No part of the fee paid for any license issued under this chapter shall be refunded except in the following instances upon
application to the city administrator within thirty (30) days from the happening of the event. There shall be refunded a pro rata
portion of the fee for the unexpired period of the license, computed on a monthly basis, when operation of the licensed
business ceases not less than one month before expiration of the license because of:
a. Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or other catastrophe;
b. The licensee's illness;
c. The licensee's death; or
d. A change in the legal status making it unlawful for the licensed business to continue.
C. Term Of License: Each license shall be issued for a period of one year. All licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year.
D. Prorated Fee: If a portion of the license year has elapsed when the application is made, a license may be issued for the remainder
of the year for a pro rata fee. In computing such fee, any unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as one month. (Ord. 733,
5-21-2003)
11-5-7: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be transferable to another holder. Each license shall be issued only
for the premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to another holder or premises without the approval of the
city council. If the licensee is a partnership or a corporation, a change in the identity of any partner or holder of more than five
percent (5%) of the issued and outstanding stock of the corporation will be deemed a transfer of the license. (Ord. 733, 5-21-2003)
11-5-8: OPERATION OF BUSINESS:
A. Generally: Every adult establishment is subject to the following conditions:
1. Posting Of License: All licensed premises shall have the license posted in a conspicuous place at all times.
2. Access By Minors: No minor shall be permitted on the licensed premises. Adult items or merchandise distinguished by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas may not be offered, sold, transferred, conveyed, given or
bartered to a minor, or displayed in a fashion that allows them to be viewed by a minor, whether or not the minor is on the
licensed premises.
3. Conduct Of Business: Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of the place of business and shall maintain
conditions of order.
4. Inspections: Any designated inspection officer or law enforcement officer of the city shall have the right to enter, inspect, and
search the premises of a licensee at any time it is occupied or open for business. Refusal to permit an inspection may result in
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of the license as provided in section 11-5-10 of this chapter.
5. Liquor Sales: An adult establishment shall not sell or dispense any intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor, wine or any other
alcoholic beverage, nor shall it be located in a building that contains a business that is licensed to sell such products.
6. Signs: Each adult establishment shall prominently display a sign on its main entrance door which reads: "This business sells or
displays sexually explicit materials, items, and merchandise. Persons under the age of eighteen (18) shall not enter". All signs
must comply with the city's ordinance for signs in title 9, chapter 8 of this code.
7. Off Site Viewing: Any business operating as an adult establishment shall prevent off site viewing of its merchandise, which if
viewed by a minor, would be in violation of Minnesota statutes chapter 617 or other applicable federal or state statutes or local
ordinances.
8. Entrances: All entrances to the business, with the exception of emergency fire exits that are not usable by patrons to enter the
business, shall be visible from a public right of way.
9. Layout: The layout of any display areas shall be designed so that the management of the establishment and any law
enforcement personnel inside the store can observe all patrons while they have access to any merchandise offered for sale or
viewing including, but not limited to, books, magazines, photographs, videotapes, or any other material, or any live dancers or
entertainers.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 339/454
10. Illumination: Illumination of the premises' exterior shall be adequate to observe the location and activities of all persons on the
exterior premises.
11. Hours Of Operation: Adult establishments shall not be open between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. on the days of Monday through Saturday, nor between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on
Sunday.
B. Adult Cabarets: The following conditions apply to adult cabarets:
1. No owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret shall permit or allow any dancer or other live entertainer to perform nude.
2. No dancer, live entertainer, performer, patron or any other person shall be nude in an adult cabaret.
3. The owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret shall provide the following information to the city concerning any persons
who dance or perform live entertainment at the adult cabaret: the person's name, home address, home telephone number, date
of birth and any aliases.
4. No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall be under eighteen (18) years old.
5. All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose and which is raised at least two feet (2')
from the level of the floor.
6. No dancer or performer shall perform any dance or live entertainment closer than ten feet (10') to any patron.
7. No dancer or performer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer or performer.
8. No patron shall pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or performer.
9. No dancer or performer shall solicit or receive any pay or gratuity from any patron. (Ord. 733, 5-21-2003)
11-5-9: NONCONFORMING USES:
Any adult establishment existing on the effective date of this chapter:
A. Shall be required to apply for and receive a license.
B. May not expand or enlarge except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 733, 5-21-2003)
11-5-10: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF A LICENSE:
A. Suspension:
1. Reasons For Suspension: The city may suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it determines that the
licensee or an employee of the licensee has:
a. Failed to fully comply with any requirements of the ordinances of the city regarding sanitary and safety conditions, zoning
requirements, building code requirements or ordinances, or failure to comply fully with any requirements of this chapter;
b. Engaged in the sale or use of alcoholic beverages while on the adult establishment premises, other than at an adult hotel or
motel;
c. Refused to allow an inspection of the adult establishment as authorized by this chapter;
d. Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult establishment premises; or
e. Demonstrated an inability to operate or manage an adult establishment in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thus
necessitating action by law enforcement officers.
2. Notice Of Suspension: A suspension by the city shall be preceded by written notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The
notice shall give at least ten (10) days notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the charges
against the licensee. The notice may be served upon the licensee personally, or by leaving the same at the licensed business
premises with the person in charge thereof, or by mailing the notice by U.S. mail to the last known address of the owner or
agent authorized to receive legal notices for the business, as listed on its license application.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 340/454
B. Revocation: The city may revoke a license if the license is suspended for a reason listed in part A and the license has been
suspended at least once before within the preceding twelve (12) months. The city may revoke a license if the licensee or the
licensee's employee:
1. Gave fraudulent, false or misleading information in connection with the securing of the license;
2. Has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
3. Has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
4. Knowingly operated the adult establishment during a period when the license was suspended;
5. Was convicted of an offense listed in subsection 11-5-5C1i of this chapter, for which the time period in subsections 11-5-
5C1i(1) through C1i(3) of this chapter has not elapsed;
6. On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on
the licensed premises of a crime listed in subsection 11-5-5C1i of this chapter, for which a conviction has been obtained, and
the person or persons were employees of the adult establishment at the time the offenses were committed; or
7. Knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to occur on the licensed premises.
C. Appeal: The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
D. Exceptions: Subsection B7 of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee
or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in
a public place or within public view.
E. Granting A License After Revocation: When the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee
shall not be issued an adult establishment license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If the license is
revoked under subsection B5 of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of
years required under subsections 11-5-5 C1i(1) through C1i(3) of this chapter has elapsed.
F. Notice: A revocation by the city shall be preceded by written notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at
least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The
notice may be served upon the licensee personally, or by leaving the same at the licensed premises with the person in charge
thereof or by mailing the notice by U.S. mail to the last known address of the owner or agent authorized to receive legal notices
for the business, as listed on its license application. (Ord. 733, 5-21-2003)
11-5-11: PROCEDURES:
The following provisions govern the issuance, suspension, revocation and nonrenewal of an adult establishment license:
A. If the city council proposes to revoke, suspend or not renew the license, the licensee must be notified in writing of the basis for
such action. The council will hold a hearing for the purpose of determining whether to revoke a license within thirty (30) days after
the close of the hearing or within sixty (60) days of the date of the notice, whichever is sooner. The council must notify the
licensee of its decision within that period.
B. If the city council determines to suspend or revoke a license, the suspension or revocation is not effective until fifteen (15) days
after notification of the decision to the licensee. If, within that fifteen (15) days, the licensee files and serves an action in state or
federal court challenging the council's action, then the suspension or revocation is stayed until the conclusion of such action.
C. If the city council determines not to renew a license, the licensee may continue its business for fifteen (15) days after receiving
notice of such nonrenewal. If the licensee files and serves an action in state or federal court within that fifteen (15) days for the
purpose of determining whether the city acted properly, the licensee may continue in business until the conclusion of the action.
D. If the city council does not grant a license to an applicant, then the applicant may commence an action in state or federal court
within fifteen (15) days for the purpose of determining whether the city acted properly. The applicant may not commence doing
business unless the action is concluded in its favor. (Ord. 733, 5-21-2003)
11-5-12: SEVERABILITY:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 341/454
Every section, provision, or part of this chapter is declared severable from every other section, provision, or part thereof to the extent
that if any section, provision, or part of this chapter be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction it shall not invalidate any other
section, provision, or part thereof. The city council specifically declares that the licensing requirements in this chapter are severable
from any and all of the other requirements of this chapter. The city council further declares that it would have adopted the other
requirements in this chapter regardless of the validity or invalidity of the licensing requirements. (Ord. 733, 5-21-2003)
11-5-13: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to the
penalties for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate
misdemeanor offense punishable by a separate misdemeanor penalty. The city may also bring any available civil action to enforce
this chapter. (Ord. 733, 5-21-2003)
11-5-14: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be effective immediately upon its publication. (Ord. 733, 5-21-2003)
Chapter 6
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
11-6-1: PURPOSE; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. Guiding urban development so as to develop a compatible relationship of uses depends upon certain standards being maintained.
Uses permitted in the various districts and conditional and accessory uses shall conform to the standards of this chapter with
regard to waste materials, smoke and particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, odors, air pollution and noise. The various uses
in all districts, permitted, conditional and accessory, shall conform to the official standards adopted by the state pollution control
agency or the standards established in this chapter, whichever are higher.
B. Before any building permit is approved, the building official shall determine whether the proposed use will conform to the
performance standards. The developer shall supply additional data about the proposed use, such as equipment to be used, hours
of operation, method of refuse disposal, type and location of exterior storage, etc., where required to do so by the building official.
(1971 Code § 28-37; amd. 2000 Code)
11-6-2: EXTERIOR STORAGE:
A. The presence and accumulation of excessive amounts of material and equipment on real property is found to create an unsightly
condition tending to reduce the value of real property, to create fire and safety hazards, to promote blight and deterioration in the
community, to attract rodents and other vermin, and otherwise adversely affecting residential property values and neighborhood
maintenance and improvement. Therefore, accumulation and improper storage of personal property, material and equipment in
violation of this section is declared to constitute a public nuisance and may be abated as such, which remedy shall be in addition
to any other remedy provided in this code or by state law.
B. In residential districts, all personal property must be stored within a building except for the following:
1. Clothesline pole and wires;
2. Swings, slides and other nonmotorized recreational equipment;
3. Outdoor furniture, lawn decorations, nonmotorized lawn and garden equipment, and outdoor cooking equipment;
4. Construction and landscaping material and equipment that are used or intended for use on the premises within a twelve (12)
month period;
5. Off street parking or storage of vehicles and recreational vehicles as permitted by section 6-2-4 of this code. Vehicle parking
must comply with the setbacks for accessory structures in the zoning district;
6. Trash and garbage receptacles that comply with the standards set forth in section 11-6-3 of this chapter and section 4-2-15 of
this code;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 342/454
7. Firewood stacks in any residential district that comply with the standards set forth in subsection 4-1-3M of this code.
C. No exception listed in this section shall be construed to avoid other restrictions imposed by this chapter or title 4, chapter 1 of this
code or any conditions imposed on any conditional use permit. The exceptions listed in subsection B of this section are limited to
quantities of materials normally or usually associated with residential use. (Ord. 710, 3-20-2002)
11-6-3: SOLID WASTE STORAGE:
A. Storage In Closed Containers Required: In all districts, all waste material, debris, refuse, or garbage shall be kept in an approved
closed container designed for such purposes. (1971 Code § 28-39)
B. Specifications For Enclosure Structures: For all new construction or major alterations to existing structures, the following
standards apply to the placement and construction specifications of trash enclosure structures:
1. The trash enclosure structure must be setback ten feet (10') from all property lines. The enclosure shall not be located in the
front yard of the property.
2. Such structure shall be situated on a poured in place concrete base, which shall be extended a minimum of six feet (6') beyond
the door opening to the structure.
3. The walls shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height and shall be a masonry material consistent with the principal structure.
The interior wall and floor surface shall be completely surfaced with epoxy finish. No roof is required.
4. Bollards encased in concrete shall be placed at the entrance to the structure. Such bollards shall be a minimum of six inches
(6") in diameter, with the height to match the wall height.
5. The door opening shall be a minimum of nine feet (9') in width and constructed with opaque material to preclude views into the
enclosure. Use of chainlink with vinyl slats is not permitted. (Ord. 741, 8-20-2003)
11-6-4: SCREENING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Screening Required:
1. Screening shall be required in all zones where any off street parking area contains more than four (4) parking spaces and is
within thirty feet (30') of an adjoining residential use or zone, and where the driveway to a parking area of more than six (6)
parking spaces is within fifteen feet (15') of an adjoining residential use or zone.
2. Where any business or industrial use, structure, parking or storage is adjacent to property zoned or developed for residential
use, that business or industry shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential property. Screening shall also be
provided where a business or industry is across the street from a developed residential zone, but not on that side of a business
or industry considered to be the front or carrying out the theme of the front, as determined by the building official.
3. In all districts, except heavy industry districts, all exterior storage shall be screened. The exceptions are:
a. Retail merchandise being displayed in front of the structure.
b. Materials and equipment being used for construction on the premises.
c. Merchandise located on service station pump islands.
B. Specifications:
1. Generally:
a. The screening required in this section shall consist of a solid fence or wall not less than five feet (5') high but shall not extend
within fifteen feet (15') of any street right of way or driveway.
b. The screening shall be placed along property lines or, in the case of screening along a street, fifteen feet (15') from the street
right of way, with landscaping between the screening and the pavement.
c. A louvered fence shall be considered solid if it blocks direct vision.
d. Planting of a type approved by the city council may be used as screening. (1971 Code § 28-40; amd. 2000 Code)
2. Rooftop Mechanical Equipment: As viewed from ground levels at a variety of locations, all mechanical equipment located on
the roof of a structure must be screened by a raised parapet; or with comparable and compatible exterior building materials.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 343/454
a. A raised parapet or other architectural feature that is an integral part(s) of the building may be required as screening for
rooftop mechanical equipment or to soften rooftop views.
b. Screening for rooftop mechanical equipment must incorporate similar architectural features of the building and/or be
constructed of a material and color compatible with other elements of the building.
c. Incidental rooftop equipment deemed unnecessary to be screened by the director of community development or designee
must be of a color to match the roof or the sky, whichever is more effective.
d. Metal cabinets used to enclose and protect rooftop mechanical equipment must not substitute as screening. (Ord. 820, 6-20-
2007)
3. Ground Mounted Mechanical Equipment: All ground mounted mechanical equipment accessory to the principal structure over
thirty inches (30") or greater than twelve (12) cubic feet shall be screened from public views with landscaping, berming, or
screen wall, except single dwelling unit and double dwelling unit buildings. Acceptable screening materials must be similar to or
compatible in design and color with those used on the principal structure. Screening material may include properly maintained
wood, vinyl, or metal screens or fencing. (Ord. 745, 10-15-2003)
11-6-5: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Purpose: Landscaping promotes immediate and long term public health, safety, economic stability and general welfare of the city.
Landscaping improves the livability of residential neighborhoods, enhances the appearance and customer attraction of
commercial areas, increases property values, improves the compatibility of adjacent uses, screens undesirable views, and
reduces air and noise pollution. Uniform standards of development and maintenance of landscaping are established to promote a
reasonable balance between the right of individuals to develop and maintain their property in a manner they prefer, while creating
pleasant and attractive surroundings for residents to live, work, shop and recreate.
B. Objectives: Required landscaped areas serve the following objectives:
1. Protect against soil erosion.
2. Reduce hazards of flooding.
3. Absorb carbon dioxide and supply oxygen.
4. Reduce the effects of noise, glare, dust and other objectionable activities.
5. Safeguard and enhance property values.
6. Promote the pleasant appearance and character of neighborhoods and cities.
7. Shade of plants promotes cooling effects.
8. Facilitate the safe movement of traffic.
9. Promote quality development.
10. Promote orderly growth.
11. Provide buffering and screening between different intensities of land use.
12. Aid in water conservation and water quality protection by requiring the use of plant material native to this climate in
landscaping and retention of existing natural vegetation thereby reducing the need for irrigation, pesticides, herbicides and
fertilizers.
C. Landscape Plan Submittal Requirements:
1. Plan Required:
a. A detailed landscape plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the planning division with the application for a
building permit for a new structure, site plan approval, conditional use permit or subdivision approval. Each landscape plan
shall reflect the purpose statement of this section and shall be prepared to meet the objectives and requirements.
b. An applicant shall submit six (6) professionally designed, legible copies of the plan at the time of application.
c. Every landscape plan submitted for a site shall be prepared by a professional landscape company, an accredited landscape
technician or a landscape architect registered by the state.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 344/454
2. Exemptions: Individual single- and two-family residential homesites shall be exempt from the general landscaping criteria
unless it is otherwise specified in this section.
3. Design Emphasis: Design emphasis shall be placed on the following:
a. Screening parking areas from view from public roadways and adjoining properties.
b. Enhancing driveway entrance areas.
c. Promoting the maintenance of vital sightlines of the principal use on the site.
d. Mitigating the visual impacts of large areas of impervious surfaces.
e. Maintaining efficient traffic and parking control.
f. Reducing the amount of uninterrupted blank walls.
g. Reducing the amount of contiguous hard surface areas at building entrances, along sidewalks and around other highly
visible areas.
4. Plan Requirements: At the time of application, all of the following information shall be indicated graphically and labeled clearly
on a one dimension scaled drawing at a sheet size of twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"), and an eight and onehalf
by eleven inch (8.5 x 11") transparency reduction for all exhibits in the plan:
a. Property lines, easements and other pertinent boundary information.
b. Adjacent and intersecting street rights of way, widths and street names. (Ord. 618, 8-2-1995)
c. Existing and proposed structures, buildings, walks, drives, landscaping and parking areas (with number of spaces noted),
and any other humanmade structures. Existing items shall be differentiated from proposed. (Ord. 618, 8-2-1995; amd. 2000
Code)
d. Existing and proposed utilities and utility easements.
e. Existing and proposed two foot (2') contour lines.
f. Corner visibility triangle areas required under subsection 11-3-5E of this title.
g. Existing trees with common name, botanical name, size and whether they are to be saved, relocated or destroyed.
h. Proposed plantings by location, scientific name, common name, quantity, caliper and planting method.
i. Total square footage of parcel, buildings, parking lot interior, driveways, sidewalks, and required landscaped areas.
j. Location, height and material of proposed screening, fencing and berms.
k. Title block containing: date, name of project, name, address and phone numbers of owner, and the identity of the party who
prepared the plan.
l. Legal description.
m. North arrow.
n. Graphic scale of one inch equals forty feet (1" = 40') or larger.
o. Adjacent land uses.
p. Fringe information within a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') from the project.
q. Vegetation management plan for areas planted with native prairie grasses and wild flowers.
r. Property identification number.
D. General Landscape Requirements:
1. Minimum Landscape Requirements:
a. The following areas of a site are required landscaped areas:
(1) Required yards.
(2) Parking lot perimeters.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 345/454
(3) Parking lot interiors.
(4) Building perimeters.
(5) Boulevards and right-of-way easements.
(6) Storage, loading and mechanical areas of a building.
b. All required landscaped areas of a site shall contain landscaping.
c. All landscaping in required landscaped areas shall be proportionately balanced with other features on the site and shall
consist of a combination of three (3) or more of the following:
(1) Sod.
(2) Organic ground cover.
(3) Shrubs.
(4) Evergreen trees.
(5) Ornamental trees.
(6) Overstory trees.
(7) Decorative rock.
(8) Decorative site amenities.
(9) Any other decorative landscape treatment.
(10) Berms.
d. All designated lawn areas of a site shall be sodded.
e. Clustering of vegetation and landscaping materials is encouraged.
f. Required landscaping materials of an industrial site may be concentrated in the front yard and other areas of public view if the
side or rear yards abut a railroad right of way or a similar industrial use. Sod is required in all developed areas.
g. Rear and side yard areas of large industrial sites that are not visible from public view and are not disturbed or graded as a
part of the site development are exempt from the landscaping material placement requirements.
h. Native prairie grasses and wild flowers may be placed only in a rear or side yard that is not adjacent to a public roadway. On
sites of five (5) acres or more, the community development director may approve plantings of native prairie grasses and
wildflowers in front yards, or side and rear yards adjacent to a public roadway.
i. Vegetation that is planted on the site shall be designed to provide a variety of colors and screening during all seasons.
j. The use of hardy vegetation native to this climate is a priority of the landscape designer of a developing site. (Ord. 618, 8-2-
1995)
2. Minimum Vegetation Requirements:
a. Open Space: Each development must have at least the minimum percentage open space shown in the following table: (Ord.
834, 12-5-2007)
MINIMUM REQUIRED OPEN SPACE
All Nonresidential Uses In AG And
R Districts, N-B And B-1 Districts
B-2 And PB
Districts
B-3 And I-
1 Districts
I-2, I-3, I-4
And I-5
Districts
Total development site 30 percent 25 percent
20 percent
15 percent
Interior parking lot area that is included as
part of the total open space requirement 8 percent of interior parking lot area
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 346/454
(Ord. 834, 12-5-2007; amd. Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
The open space areas must not be covered by a building or other impervious surface, and must be planted with trees,
shrubs, flowers, native plant species or similar plantings and covered with sod, landscape rock or mulch. Areas used for
demonstrated parking cannot be used to fulfill the open space requirement. (Ord. 834, 12-5-2007)
b. Landscaping Vegetation: The following table lists the minimum size requirements for landscaping vegetation:
Vegetation Caliper/Gallons Height
Ornamental tree 1.5 inch
Overstory tree 2.5 inch
Evergreen tree 6 feet
Large shrubs 36 inches
Medium shrubs 24 inches
Small shrubs 12 inches
Evergreen shrubs 24 inch diameter
Vertical evergreen shrubs 3 feet
c. Caliper Measurements: Caliper measurements shall be taken six inches (6") above grade for trees under four inches (4") in
diameter and twelve inches (12") above grade for trees larger than four inches (4").
d. Tree Species: The tree species chosen for parking lot interior plantings shall require little maintenance and shall be able to
tolerate harsh growing conditions such as sun, wind, glare, reflected heat, drought, salt and other chemicals as defined by
the Minnesota department of transportation. (Ord. 618, 8-2-1995)
e. Residential Developments: The minimum required tree and shrub requirements for all residential developments zoned R-2A,
R-2B, R-2C, R-2D, R-2E, and R-2F districts are as follows:
Vegetation
Type
Minimum
Size
Single-Family
Dwellings
Townhouse Developments (May
Be Placed In Private Lots Or In
Common Areas)
Multiple-Family Dwellings And
Nonresidential Uses In Residential
Districts
Coniferous
trees
6 foot bb
May be substituted
for any of the
overstory deciduous
trees, except the
street tree
1 per unit, but may be substituted
on a 1 for 1 basis for the overstory
deciduous trees
Minimum of 30 percent of required
overstory trees must be coniferous
Ornamental
deciduous
trees
1.5 inch
bb
(caliper)
2 may be substituted
for 1 overstory tree
1 per unit required. 2 additional may
be substituted for 1 overstory
(maximum substitution equals 50
percent of required overstory trees)
2 may be substituted for 1 overstory
(maximum substitution equals 50
percent of required overstory trees)
Overstory
deciduous
trees
11/2 inch
bb
(caliper)
2 per lot 4 per unit or 1 per 40 linear feet of
site perimeter, whichever is greater
2 per dwelling or 1 per 1,000 gross
square feet of building area (grade
level floor) or 1 per 40 linear feet of
site perimeter, whichever is greater
Understory
shrubs
3 gallons
potted or
18 inch
height
10 per unit 5 per unit 1 per 300 gross square feet of
building footprint area or 1 per 30
linear feet of site perimeter, whichever
is greater
(Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
f. Tree And Shrub Requirements:
(1) The amount of trees required is based upon seventy percent (70%) of the required green space/open space. The
calculation takes into account the ground area occupied by the trees when fully grown, and requires that approximately
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 347/454
twenty percent (20%) of the green space area be planted with coniferous trees (using an average of 300 square feet of
ground area per tree), approximately fifty percent (50%) of the green space area should be planted with overstory
deciduous trees (using an average of 700 square feet of ground area per tree), and approximately five percent (5%) of the
required open space shall be filled with shrubs, half large and the other half smaller shrubs. Large shrubs shall be
calculated to occupy twenty five (25) square feet and smaller shrubs, ten (10) square feet.
(2) The number of trees and shrubs required shall be calculated by multiplying the site area by the coefficients in the
following table for each landscape material: (Ord. 834, 12-5-2007)
Zoning District
Overstory
Deciduous
Coniferous
Large
Shrubs
(5
Gallon)
Small
Shrubs
(3
Gallon)
All nonresidential uses in all AG and R districts, B-1 and N-B (site area
minus stormwater basins)
0.0002786 0.0002600
0.0006 0.0006
B-2 (site area minus stormwater basins) 0.0002321 0.0002167
0.0005 0.0005
B-3 and P-B (site area minus stormwater basins) 0.0001858 0.0001733
0.0004 0.0004
I (site area minus stormwater basins) 0.0001392 0.0001300
0.00039
0.00039
(Ord. 834, 12-5-2007; amd. Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
g. Additional Landscape Requirements:
(1) All properties adjacent to principal arterials, minor arterials, and major collectors as defined in the comprehensive plan,
must provide the following additional trees. These trees may not satisfy the minimum tree and shrub requirements as set
forth in this subsection.
Quantity
(Per 100 Linear
Feet Of Frontage) Minimum Size
Overstory deciduous trees 2 13/4" bb
Coniferous trees 2 6' bb
Ornamental trees 2 (for substitution of overstory deciduous only - not required) 2" bb
(2) All portions of a site that are not covered by a building, hard surface coverage or water on a permanent basis must be
planted with ground cover and landscaping materials.
h. Ground Cover: All site areas and areas that have been disturbed during construction must be covered with sod to property
lines and/or adjacent rights of way. Rock and mulch may be substituted for sod landscaping planting beds and along the
perimeter of buildings. Native plant communities may be reestablished in appropriate portions of the site.
i. Quantity Credits: Existing healthy trees that are not susceptible to disease, new larger or smaller sized trees, or decorative
landscaping may be credited toward the required trees detailed in this section, and the additional trees required for
screening. The following table establishes the landscaping credits.
Vegetation Type Size Exchange Credit
Existing trees 2" bb (caliper)
deciduous or
between 6' and 14'
coniferous
1 tree
4" bb (caliper)
deciduous or 14'
2 trees
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 348/454
coniferous or
larger
New larger trees 4" bb (caliper) or
14' coniferous
2 trees
Ornamental
deciduous trees or
smaller overstory
deciduous
minimum 1.5"
(caliper) bb
2 trees may be substituted for 1 overstory deciduous tree (maximum substitution =
50% of required overstory trees)
Shrubs 10 shrubs for 1 tree (2" bb overstory or 6' coniferous). These trees may not be used to fulfill the tree
requirements in subsection 11-6-5D2a of this section or those required for screening
Decorative
landscape yard
Exterior sculptures, fountains, decorative walks, courtyards and/or additional ponds
beyond those required, shown on a landscape plan that meets the intent of this
section to the satisfaction of the community development director and/or city
council
(Ord. 834, 12-5-2007)
E. Landscaping Area Requirements:
1. Required Yards: All required yards and setback areas shall be landscaped with clustered landscape materials.
2. Parking Lot Perimeter: The area within fifteen feet (15') of a parking lot perimeter that lies outside of a required yard or setback
area shall be landscaped with clustered landscaped materials.
3. Parking Lot Interiors:
a. Parking lots with more than twenty five (25) parking stalls (7,500 square feet) shall contain interior landscaped islands or
other landscaped traffic control features, as follows:
(1) Islands adjacent to single vehicle perpendicular parking rows must be a minimum of five feet (5') wide and sixteen feet
(16') in length; islands adjacent to double vehicle perpendicular parking rows must be a minimum of five feet (5') wide and
thirty two feet (32') long.
(2) Islands adjacent to single vehicle diagonal parking rows must be a minimum of eighty (80) square feet; islands adjacent
to double vehicle diagonal parking rows must be a minimum of one hundred sixty (160) square feet.
(3) Islands must be defined by concrete curbing.
(4) In lieu of numerous small freestanding landscaped islands, internal landscape area requirements may be met by the
placement of large linear landscaped areas that define traffic lanes and break up large hard surface expanses.
4. Building Perimeter:
a. The region parallel with and adjacent to the sides of a building that faces a public street or parking lot shall be landscaped for
a length equal to one-half (1/2) of that building dimension, and have an average depth of four feet (4').
b. Sites that were improved before the adoption of this section that are required to submit a landscape plan, and have difficulty
providing building perimeter landscape areas because of existing site conditions, may substitute alternative landscape area
designs to satisfy the requirements of this section.
5. Boulevards And Right Of Way Easements:
a. All boulevard areas shall be sodded from the curb to the property line at the time of the completion of the site landscaping.
b. Plantings and locations of materials that are to be placed in boulevard areas shall have the approval of the city's director of
public works prior to installation. All maintenance, or replacement of landscape materials placed in the boulevards is the sole
responsibility of the property owner.
c. Boulevards or other areas abutting a site that are in a dedicated public right of way or right of way easement are not included
in the calculations of the total minimum required landscaping of a site.
6. Screening Of Storage, Loading And Mechanical Areas:
a. Landscaping must be provided around exterior storage, exterior loading, service and mechanical areas to screen the uses
from view by adjacent property or streets.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 349/454
b. Screening may consist of fences, walls, earth berms and landscape plantings.
c. If landscaping is used, twenty five percent (25%) must be evergreen plantings.
d. Walls must be compatible with the architectural treatment of the principal structure.
F. Required Screening/Buffers: Transitional buffers are required along common property lines of different land uses (residential to
business; business to industrial; or residential to industrial). The buffers shall be constructed in order to mitigate impacts that the
higher intensity land use may have upon the adjoining lower intensity land use.
G. Landscaping And Installation Standards:
1. Plant Materials: All plant material shall conform to and be installed in accordance with the most current edition of the American
Standard For Nursery Stock as published by the American Association of Nurserymen, and professional horticultural standards
as established by the most current edition of the Landscape Construction Reference Manual as published by the Minnesota
Nursery and Landscape Association.
2. Species: No required overstory trees shall include the species of the genus Ulmus (elm), the species of the genus Populous
(poplar), box elder or ginkgo (female only).
3. Berms: The slope of berms in sodded lawn areas shall not exceed thirty three percent (33%) (3:1). Berms planted with ground
covers and shrubs may be no steeper than a four to one (4:1) ratio. Berms shall be graded to appear as smooth, rounded,
naturalistic forms. Berms shall be entirely vegetated with lawn grass or ground cover.
4. Walls And Fences:
a. Walls or fences shall be constructed entirely on the project property and may not exceed the height limitations of subsection
11-3-4C1c of this Title.
b. Retaining wall materials shall be of industry accepted quality and standards so as to prevent unstable retaining walls.
c. Construction techniques shall be properly followed in order to prevent unstable retaining walls.
d. Retaining walls over four feet (4') in height must be designed by a registered architect or engineer and be reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer.
e. Retaining walls over thirty inches (30") in height that are located in pedestrian traffic areas or other areas of potential danger
shall be completely fenced along the top edge with a permanent fencing material.
H. Preservation Of Existing Trees And Natural Landscape:
1. Site plans shall make all feasible attempts to accommodate existing unique landscape features, trees and vegetation within
their design.
2. Grading plans for sites shall not alter the supply of water to existing stands of trees.
3. Trees which are to be preserved on-site shall be protected before, during and after the development process utilizing accepted
practices.
4. Trees selected for preservation shall be shown on the landscape plan and clearly marked in the field. In woodland areas,
groups of trees shall be selected for preservation rather than single trees wherever possible.
5. Where grade changes in excess of six inches (6") from the existing natural grade level are necessary, permanent protective
structures such as tree wells or walls shall be specified on the site plan and be properly installed.
6. Trees and groups of trees which are to be preserved shall be enclosed by a temporary fence or barrier to be located and
maintained five feet (5') outside of their drip line during construction. Such a fence or barrier shall be installed prior to clearing
or construction. In no case shall materials, vehicles or equipment be stored or stockpiled within the enclosure. Within the
fenced area, the topsoil layer shall not be disturbed except in accordance with accepted tree protection practices. Existing trees
damaged through the construction shall be immediately repaired and if damaged beyond repair, replaced per the mitigation
specifications outlined in this Section.
7. The developer shall be responsible for notifying all construction personnel of the presence and purpose of clearing limits and
protective fences or barriers and for ensuring that they are observed. (Ord. 618, 8-2-1995)
8. Relocation of trees must be done by a professional forester and nursery person. Mitigation plans for tree loss shall consist of
replacement with trees of a caliper equal to the combined caliper of the trees removed. No tree for mitigation shall be less than
two inches (2") in caliper and shall be of no less quality species than the tree removed. If on site replacement is not possible,
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 350/454
the replacement shall take place on an adjacent public site in a total equal to the caliper lost on the developing property. (Ord.
618, 8-2-1995; amd. 2000 Code)
I. Building Permits And Certificates Of Occupancy:
1. Financial Guarantees: No building permit shall be issued until the required landscaping plan has been submitted to and
approved by the Planning Division, and a performance bond, or irrevocable letter of credit from a banking institution, has been
posted and approved by the City. The required financial guarantee shall be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the cost of the
landscaping project, and shall be in effect for one year from the date of installation to ensure the installation, survival and
replacement of the landscaping improvements. The landscaping improvements must survive one year from the date of the
installation, and any plantings that do not survive shall be replaced.
2. Installation Of Landscaping: After a bond or irrevocable letter of credit has been posted, the landscaping material required in
the approved landscaping plan shall be installed within six (6) months after the date of posting the bond or irrevocable letter of
credit. A one month extension of the planting period may be granted by the Planning Division upon a demonstration by the
property owner or developer that such an extension is warranted because of adverse weather conditions or unavailability of
required plant materials. No more than three (3) such one month extensions may be granted. The City may draw upon any
posted financial guarantee, or make a claim upon any posted bond if the required landscaping improvements have not been
installed by the specified completion time or any plantings that have not survived a period of one year have not been replaced.
3. Inspections: The completed landscaping shall be reviewed for acceptance by an on-site inspection by the Planning Division
prior to the release of any financial guarantees. (Ord. 618, 8-2-1995)
J. Maintenance Of Landscaped Areas:
1. General Maintenance Requirements: The landscaping shall be kept free of refuse, debris and all plants not included on the
approved landscape plan. The owner and the owner's respective agents shall jointly and severally be responsible for the
regular weeding, mowing of grass, irrigation, fertilizing, pruning, and other maintenance of all plantings as needed. Required
landscaping must be maintained in a healthy, growing condition at all times. (Ord. 618, 8-2-1995; amd. 2000 Code)
2. Irrigation: Irrigation shall be provided for all sodded and landscaped areas. Said irrigation shall consist of an underground
sprinkling system that is designed by a professional irrigation installer to meet the water requirements of the site's specific
vegetation. The system shall be detailed on the landscape plan. Systems are permitted in the public right of way. The
maintenance and repair of all private irrigation systems placed in public rights of way shall be the responsibility of the system
owner. Irrigation systems that will interfere with any improvement projects in the public right of way shall upon notification be
moved by the system owner prior to the project commencement. Any costs incurred a as result of irrigation systems that are
not removed after notification shall be the responsibility of the system owner. Irrigation systems shall be so designed and
installed that they do not spray across public streets or sidewalks.
3. Inspections: City officials are authorized to periodically inspect all landscape approved by the Planning Division or to
investigate complaints made by any official or private citizen.
4. Replacement: Plant materials which exhibit evidence of insects, pests, diseases or damage shall be treated when appropriate,
and all dead plant material shall be removed and replaced with another living plant that complies with approved landscape
plan.
5. Public Landscaping Care: The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within
any public right of way or public grounds as may be necessary to ensure the proper health of the vegetation or surrounding
vegetation, the general public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public ground.
K. Alternative Compliance; Design Flexibility: The standards contained in this Section are intended to encourage development which
is economically viable and environmentally satisfying. The standards are not intended to be arbitrary or to inhibit creative
solutions. Project conditions may justify approval of alternative methods of compliance with the standards. (Ord. 618, 8-2-1995)
11-6-6: TREE PRESERVATION:
A. Purpose And Objective:
1. Purpose: Within the city of Cottage Grove, trees and woodlands are considered a valuable asset to the community composite.
The city places a priority on protecting this asset and finds that it is in the best interest to regulate the development and
alteration of wooded areas within the community. The city also finds that a certain amount of tree removal is an inevitable
consequence of the development process, and seeks to establish comprehensive standards related to reasonable tree removal
and preservation.
2. Objective: In order to achieve a realistic balance between tree protection and development, the city has established standards
that with compliance and enforcement will:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 351/454
a. Protect, preserve and enhance the integrity of the natural environment;
b. Allow for orderly development within wooded areas;
c. Minimize tree and wildlife habitat loss and maintain wildlife corridors;
d. Protect privacy by maintaining buffers between land uses;
e. Increase and maintain property values;
f. Prevent and reduce soil erosion and sedimentation;
g. Promote sound stormwater management practices;
h. Improve air quality;
i. Reduce noise pollution;
j. Enhance energy conservation through natural insulation and shading.
B. Definitions:
ACTIVELY DEVELOPING SUBDIVISION: A residential subdivision that has an approved tree preservation plan, and vacant
platted lots controlled by a development company that is actively promoting or selling or building residential units.
dbh: Diameter at breast height.
DYNAMIC DEVELOPMENT PROPERTY: Any platted or unplatted property that has had an application before the city for
zoning or land use review within the previous five (5) years.
HEALTHY TREE: A healthy tree has:
1. A live top (live crown) that is greater than one-third (1/3) the total tree height,
2. Newly dead branches that make up less than fifteen percent (15%) of the total crown,
3. Less than fifteen percent (15%) of the tree crown with missing branches,
4. Foliage that is dense throughout the live portion of the crown,
5. A tree trunk with open wounds that are less than one-third (1/3) the diameter of the tree, no wounds in contact with the
ground, and no wounds that have soft, punky wood or other indication of decay.
LARGE WOODLAND TRACT: A healthy grouping of coniferous and/or deciduous trees with contiguous crown cover, occupying five
hundred (500) or more square feet of property and having a minimum width of twenty feet (20') at the canopy drip line.
QUALIFYING TREE: Healthy trees excluding buckthorn meeting one of the following definitions:
Qualifying Buffer Tree: A healthy tree measuring a minimum of six inches (6") dbh for hardwood deciduous trees, defined
herein, or a minimum of twelve inches (12") dbh for softwood deciduous trees as defined herein; or a minimum of ten feet
(10') in height for coniferous/evergreen trees.
Qualifying Specimen Tree: A healthy deciduous tree measuring equal to or greater than thirty inches (30") dbh and/or a
coniferous tree measuring fifty feet (50') or greater in height.
Qualifying Standard Tree: A healthy tree measuring a minimum of six inches (6") dbh for hardwood deciduous trees, defined
herein, or a minimum of twelve inches (12") dbh for softwood deciduous trees as defined herein; or a minimum of ten feet
(10') in height for coniferous/evergreen trees.
Qualifying Woodland Tree: A deciduous tree that is between four inches (4") and twelve inches (12") in diameter dbh or a
coniferous tree between four feet (4') and twelve feet (12') in height, and is located in a large woodland tract.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 352/454
C. Performance Standards Regulating Tree Removal:
1. Plan Required: A tree preservation plan shall be submitted to and approved by the city and implemented in accordance
therewith in connection with any of the following:
a. The disturbance of qualifying trees within the metropolitan urban service area (MUSA) on a vacant residential parcel.
b. The disturbance of qualifying trees on any property, in any zoning district within the Mississippi River critical area overlay
district.
c. The disturbance of qualifying trees on any dynamic development property.
d. Any project for which a city grading permit is required.
e. Subdivisions, minor subdivisions or lot splits in any zoning district where a qualifying tree will be disturbed.
f. New construction of commercial, industrial or institutional buildings.
g. Expansion of any existing commercial, industrial or institutional building or impervious surface by ten percent (10%) or
greater square feet, where an approved tree preservation plan is not on file with the city.
h. The removal of more than twenty five (25) trees associated with agricultural or commercial horticultural use, where an
approved agricultural tree management/harvest plan is not on file with the city.
2. Tree Inventory Individual: Prior to submittal of a tree preservation plan, the applicant shall have a tree inventory for the entire
site completed by a certified forester or arborist that shall include all of the following:
a. An identification system linked to metal field tags located five feet (5') from grade on all qualifying trees or woodland
boundaries.
b. Graphic and tabular identification tally of quantity, size, species, health, and location of all existing qualifying trees.
c. Delineation of the outline of the existing canopy coverage area(s).
3. Tree Inventory Sampling: As an alternative to an individual tree inventory, the city may approve the use of a sampling inventory
for all or portions of a site to be completed by a certified forester or arborist that shall include all of the following:
a. Methodology for sampling.
b. Identification ribbon around perimeter of sampling areas, and metal field tags located five feet (5') from grade on all
qualifying trees in sampling areas.
c. Graphic and tabular identification tally of quantity, size, species, health, and location of all existing qualifying trees in
sampling area.
d. Graphic and tabular identification tally of quantity, size, species, health, and location of all existing qualifying specimen trees
in areas to be disturbed on site.
e. Total estimates of qualifying trees based on sampling, and field location of qualifying specimen trees.
4. Tree Inventory Combination: Sites with large woodland tracts of qualifying trees that will not be disturbed, can be inventoried
utilizing a combination of the individual and sampling survey methods.
5. Tree Inventory Woodland: In lieu of the completion of an individual or sampling inventory for sites with large woodland tracts of
qualifying trees, the woodland inventory can be utilized. The use of the woodland inventory is the easy and cost effective
method in which to complete an inventory, but note that the replacement ratio schedule is one hundred fifty percent (150%)
greater than the standard qualifying tree replacement formula utilized for the individual or sampling inventory method.
6. Inventory Buffer Area: All deciduous qualifying trees within one hundred feet (100') of the property lines shall be measured at
six inches (6") and greater dbh.
7. Hardwood Deciduous Identification: Hardwood deciduous trees shall include the following species:
a. Ironwood, oak, maple (hard), walnut, ash, hickory, birch, black cherry, hackberry, locust, and basswood.
8. Softwood Deciduous Identification: Softwood deciduous trees shall include the following species:
a. Cottonwood, catalpa, poplars, aspen, silver maple, basswood, box elder, elm and willow.
9. Buckthorn: Buckthorn trees are not required to be inventoried, but can be identified if predominant in a tree protection area.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 353/454
10. Plan Submittal: A tree preservation plan prepared in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be submitted as part
of the application process required by this code. All tree preservation plans must be designed or certified by an arborist,
forester, landscape architect or other agent retained by the applicant and approved by the city. The tree preservation plan shall
include the following information:
a. Contact information of applicants, property owners, developer/builder, and signature of the person(s) preparing the plan, the
certification, and employer or firm.
b. Delineation of the existing buildings, structures, or impervious surfaces situated on the site.
c. Delineation of the proposed buildings, structures, or impervious surfaces planned on the site.
d. Delineation of all areas to be graded and limits of land disturbance.
e. Graphic and tabular identification tally of quantity, size, species, health, and location of all existing qualifying trees.
f. Delineation of the outline of the existing canopy coverage area(s).
g. Delineation of the outline of the proposed canopy coverage area(s).
h. Graphic and tabular identification of all qualifying trees proposed to be removed within the construction area.
i. Measures designed to protect the qualifying trees.
j. Tree replacement schedule including graphic and tabular identification of quantity, size, species, and location of all
replacement trees proposed to be planted on the property.
11. Agricultural Management/Harvest Plan: Properties in active agricultural production of trees/tree farms shall have an
agricultural management/harvest plan filed with the city for planned tree removal in excess of twenty five (25) trees that shall
include the following:
a. Legal description of property.
b. Crop/tree identification.
c. Acres to be managed.
d. Soil erosion control measures.
e. Removal staging plan.
12. Plan Modification: The tree preservation plan shall be reviewed by the city to assess the best possible layout to preserve
significant trees, specimen trees, and significant woodlands and to enhance the efforts to minimize damage to specimen trees,
significant trees and significant woodlands. The applicant shall meet with city staff prior to submission of the development
application or prior to application for the grading permit, whichever is sooner, to determine the most feasible and practical
placement of buildings, parking, driveways, streets, storage and other physical features, in order that the fewest qualifying trees
are destroyed or damaged.
a. The city may require modification to a tree preservation plan based on the proposed tree removal being in excess of what is
allowed by this section.
b. The city may declare an application requiring a tree preservation plan incomplete based on the lack of required submittal
information, or proposed tree removal being in excess of what is allowed by this section.
c. The city may deny an application requiring a tree preservation plan based on the proposed tree removal being in excess of
what is allowed by this section.
d. The city may require a dedication of a deed restricted conservation easement designed to ensure that specific tree
preservation areas are not negatively impacted or destroyed.
e. The city may require relocation of proposed private and public utilities, hard surface, and structures to increase preservation
opportunities within the site.
D. Administration:
1. Permit Required: No qualifying trees shall be removed without a grading permit unless exempt under this section.
2. Permit Application: The applicant shall submit any proposed grading plan for a site with an approved tree preservation plan to
the city at least fourteen (14) working days prior to the issuance of the grading permit to ensure compliance with the approved
tree preservation plan. All sites shall be staked, as depicted in the approved grading plan, and the required tree protection
fencing shall be installed before grading is to commence. Grubbing of protection fencing routes may be permitted prior to
commencement of grading with written city approval.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 354/454
3. Monitoring: The applicant will hire a project arborist that is a certified arborist or forester approved by the city to assist with all
facets of tree preservation on the site.
a. The project arborist will review installation and maintenance of tree preservation fencing prior to tree removal occurring on
the site.
b. The project arborist will complete on site monitoring of grading activity occurring near qualifying trees to be preserved.
Should grading occur within the drip line of a qualifying tree slated for preservation, the project arborist must be contacted.
c. When appropriate, the arborist shall monitor and ensure the completion of the mitigating actions listed in subsection D5 of
this section and other recommended measures designed to aid in preservation of qualifying trees.
d. After initial site grading, the project arborist will review the site and make recommendations for tree mitigation or tree
removal.
e. Qualifying trees designated for preservation which are found to be diseased, or dying, or are not suited for location into the
project may be removed without penalty based upon the recommendation of the project arborist and in agreement between
the city and the applicant.
f. Qualifying trees designated for preservation which are found to be negligently harmed during construction shall be replaced
in accordance with the schedule in subsection F of this section.
4. Preconstruction: The applicant shall arrange for the city and project arborist to inspect the construction site prior to the
beginning of the grading to ensure that protective fencing and other protective measures are in place and installed correctly.
Minor encroachment, grading, trenching, filling, compaction, or change in soil chemistry may occur within the fenced areas
protecting the critical root zone of the trees to be saved under the direct supervision of the project arborist.
5. Protection: The applicant shall complete all recommendations made by the project arborist, and shall implement the following
measures to be utilized to protect qualifying trees:
a. Installation of snow/construction fencing or polyethylene laminate safety netting placed at the drip line or at the perimeter of
the critical root zone, whichever is greater, of qualifying trees designated for preservation. No grade change, construction
activity, or storage of materials shall occur within this fenced area.
b. Placement of mulch bedding around protected qualifying trees near grading limits.
c. Therapeutic pruning.
d. Identification of any oak trees requiring pruning between April 15 and July 1. Pruned oak trees shall be sealed with an
appropriate nontoxic tree wound sealant.
e. Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to concrete washout and leakage or spillage of toxic materials, such as fuels or
paints.
f. Installation of retaining walls or tree wells to preserve trees as directed by the project arborist or approved tree preservation
plan.
g. Placement of utilities in common trenches outside of the drip line of significant trees, or use of tunneled installation, as
directed by the city engineer or the project arborist.
h. Transplanting of significant trees into a protected area for later moving into permanent sites within the construction area.
i. Use of tree root aeration, fertilization, and/or irrigation systems.
E. Tree Removal:
1. Tree Removal Prohibited: The removal of qualifying trees on any property by means of clear cutting en masse or in a
systematic removal method shall be prohibited, except in accordance with a city approved tree preservation plan or agricultural
management/harvest plan.
2. Tree Removal Permitted: The removal of qualifying trees completed on any property in compliance with this section, and below
the threshold allowances established below and in accordance with a city approved tree preservation plan shall be permitted.
a. Single lot development:
(1) Single unit residential, twenty percent (20%).
(2) Commercial, industrial, institutional and multi-unit residential, thirty percent (30%).
b. Single phase, multi-lot development:
(1) Single unit residential, forty percent (40%).
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 355/454
(2) Commercial, industrial, institutional and multi-unit residential, fifty percent (50%).
c. Two-phase development:
(1) Initial site development, twenty five percent (25%).
(2) Individual lot development:
(A) Single unit residential, twenty percent (20%).
(B) Commercial, industrial, institutional and multi-unit residential, thirty percent (30%).
3. Tree Removal Exception: When practical difficulties or practical hardships result from strict compliance with the provisions of
this subsection, the city may permit qualifying tree removal in excess of the allowable limits. In the event such exception is
granted, a reforestation plan or cash mitigation will be implemented by the applicant. The city shall determine which form of
mitigation shall be utilized.
4. Tree Removal Mitigated: The removal of qualifying trees completed on any property in excess of the threshold exceptions
established in subsection E2 of this section shall be required to be mitigated in accordance with subsection F of this section.
5. Tree Removal, Damaged Or Diseased: Notwithstanding the above, the removal of trees seriously damaged by storms, other
catastrophic events or disease is allowed without mitigation requirements.
6. Tree Removal Hazards: Notwithstanding the above, the removal of trees with potential to cause serious damage as determined
by the city or project arborist is allowed without mitigation requirements.
7. Tree Removal, Nonqualifying: Shrubs, brush, buckthorn and other invasive or nonqualifying trees may be removed by a
property owner without submittal of a tree preservation plan, with the practice of all tree protection measures included in this
section, or as modified and approved by the city.
8. Tree Removal, Existing Developments: Individual qualifying trees may be removed on a residentially zoned property that is not
in a pending or actively developing subdivision without submittal of a tree preservation plan, and without requirement of
replacement or mitigation. Tree removal under this subsection shall be completed with the practice of all tree protection
measures included in this section, or as modified and approved by the city.
9. Tree Removal Without Permit: No qualifying trees shall be removed until a tree preservation plan is approved by the city, and a
permit is issued.
F. Tree Mitigation: In any development or site that the allowable qualifying tree removal limits are exceeded, the applicant shall
mitigate the tree loss by either reforestation or payment of a cash in lieu of replacement fee to the city. The form of tree
replacement or cash dedication to be completed by the applicant shall be determined by the city. On site replacement will be the
primary goal; however, replacement may occur within the greater development area or within public land. The city, in agreement
with the applicant, shall determine the location for replacement plantings.
1. Tree Replacement: The number and size of replacement trees will be calculated based upon the following tree replacement
schedules:
a. Tree Replacement Schedule; Quantity:
Size Of Qualifying
Tree Damaged
Or Destroyed Category A Category B Category C
Coniferous:
12 to 24 feet high 1 2 4
24 feet or higher 2 4 8
Hardwood deciduous:
6 to less than 20 inches dbh 1 2 4
20 to less than 30 inches dbh 2 4 8
Softwood deciduous1:
12 to 24 inches dbh 1 2 4
Greater than 24 inches dbh 2 4 8
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 356/454
Specimen tree 3 6 12
Woodland:
Per 1,000 square feet 1.5 3 6
Note:
1.All softwood deciduous trees that are 6 to 30 inches dbh and are removed or damaged within 100 feet of any property line
shall be replaced at the hardwood deciduous ratio.
b. Tree Replacement Schedule; Size:
Replacement
Tree Category A Category B Category C
Deciduous No less than 4 inches No less than 2.5 inches No less than 1.5 inches
Coniferous No less than 12 feet No less than 6 feet No less than 4 feet
2. Species: Native hardwood deciduous trees shall be utilized for replacement trees, and the use of nonnatives can be approved
by the city where appropriate. Where ten (10) or more replacement trees are required, not more than thirty three percent (33%)
of the replacement trees shall be of the same species of tree without the approval of the city. The applicant is encouraged to
plant species indigenous to the area.
3. Warranty: Any replacement tree which is not alive or healthy, as determined by the city, or which subsequently dies, other than
those damaged by storms or other acts of God, or diseased, unless caused by construction activity, within one year after the
date of project closure, shall be removed by the applicant and replaced with a new, healthy tree meeting the same minimum
size requirements immediately after removal.
4. Cash Mitigation: The cash fee in lieu of replacement mitigation fee will be set forth in the city fee schedule, and payment shall
be deposited into the public landscaping initiative account prior to tree removal activities.
5. Damage: If a qualifying tree that was intended to be preserved is removed without permission of the city, or damaged so that it
is in a state of decline within one year from the date of project closure, the applicant shall mitigate the tree removal through
replacement as approved by the city, or a payment of a cash mitigation fee.
6. Addition To Other Landscape: The planting of trees for replacement purposes shall be in addition to any other city landscape
requirements.
G. Performance Guarantee:
1. Amount Of Guarantee: Any applicant of a new development shall provide the required performance guarantee following
preliminary approval of the tree preservation plan and prior to any construction and/or grading. The amount of the performance
guarantee to be submitted, specific to the tree preservation fulfillments, shall be calculated as follows:
a. One hundred fifty percent (150%) of the cost as determined by the city for completing the tree replacement mitigation
required in subsection F of this section.
b. One hundred fifty percent (150%) of the cost as determined by the city for completing the tree protection requirements listed
in subsection D5 of this section.
2. Release Of Guarantee: The performance guarantee will be released or reduced upon verification by the city that the tree
preservation plan was followed and that the tree replacement schedule was complied with, but in no event shall the
performance guarantee be released earlier than one year after the date of the substantial completion of the project. Project
completion will be determined by the city, but may consist of issuance of a certificate of occupancy, completion of final grading
or completion of one phase of the development project.
H. Compliance With Plan:
1. Implementation: The applicant shall implement the tree preservation plan prior to and during any construction. The tree
protection measures shall remain in place until all grading and construction activity is terminated or until a request is made to
and approved by the city staff.
2. Inspection: The city shall have the right to inspect the development and/or building site in order to determine compliance with
the approved tree preservation plan. The city shall determine whether compliance with the tree preservation plan has been
met.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 357/454
I. Maintenance:
1. The applicant or property owner is responsible for maintenance of trees to be preserved and recommended mitigation until
such time as the property is sold to the homeowner, or turned over to a homeowners' association. Prior to closing on a house,
the applicant will review the status of the trees on the site and remove and replace trees designated for preservation if found
dead or dying.
2. On public property, the applicant will be responsible for tree preservation and recommended mitigation until such time as the
area included in the tree preservation plan is no longer in an actively developing subdivision. Review of the public property land
will occur before final development build out and any tree removal and replacement will be the responsibility of the applicant.
3. Individual private property owners shall be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation on the property owner's property.
Qualifying trees preserved as a part of the tree preservation plan are prohibited from being removed until such time as the
entire plat is no longer an actively developing subdivision, or written approval is obtained from the city.
4. Homeowners' associations shall be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation in common areas after title to the common
areas has been transferred to the homeowners' association.
5. Shrubs, brush and buckthorn and other invasive or nonqualifying trees/woodlands may be periodically removed by a property
owner without submittal of a tree preservation plan, with the practice of all tree protection measures included in this section, or
as modified and approved by the city. (Ord. 861, 6-17-2009)
11-6-7: MAINTENANCE REQUIRED:
In all districts, all structures, landscaping and fences shall be maintained so as not to be unsightly or present harmful health and
safety conditions to the adjoining areas. Any building temporarily or permanently closed or requiring modification of the exterior
appearance shall be required to make such modifications consistent with the regular appearance of the existing and adjacent
buildings. (1971 Code § 28-42)
11-6-8: GLARE:
A. In all districts, any lighting used to illuminate an off street parking area, sign, building, or yard shall be so arranged as to deflect
light away from any adjoining residential zone or from the public streets and will be compatible with adjacent lighting in adjoining
districts. Reflected glare of spill light shall not exceed five-tenths (0.5) foot-candle as measured on the property line when abutting
any residential parcel and one foot-candle as measured at the property line when abutting any commercial or industrial parcel.
Streetlights installed in public rights of way shall be exempt from these standards. Direct or sky reflected glare, whether from
floodlights or from high temperature processes, such as combustion or welding, shall not be directed into any adjoining property.
B. Exterior lighting shall be employed to limit glare and spill light to protect neighboring parcels and to maintain traffic safety on public
roads. These measures shall include lenses, shields, louvers, prismatic control devices, and limitations on the height and type of
fixtures. The city may also limit the hours of operation of outdoor lighting if it is deemed necessary to reduce impacts on the
surrounding neighborhood.
C. No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted. Holiday lighting shall be exempt from this provision.
D. The city may require submission of a light distribution plan if deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the intent of this
section. (Ord. 711, 3-20-2002)
11-6-9: SIGNS:
Signs shall be as regulated by title 9, chapter 8 of this code. (1971 Code § 28-44)
11-6-10: PARKING AREAS1:
A. Surfacing And Drainage: Off street parking and driveways must be paved with asphalt, landscape paver bricks, bricks, or
concrete. Parking areas and driveways must be so graded to dispose of all surface water accumulation within the area in a
manner that will prevent water from draining onto adjacent or nearby private property. These requirements also apply to open
sales lots for cars, trucks and other equipment.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 358/454
B. Location: All required off street parking facilities must be located as follows:
1. One- and two-family dwellings, on the same lot as the principal use served.
2. Multiple-family dwellings, on the same lot as the principal use served or within four hundred feet (400') of the main entrance to
the principal building served.
3. Business or industrial districts, within eight hundred feet (800') of a main entrance to the principal building served.
4. There may be no off street parking space within any street right of way.
C. Access: All off street parking spaces must have access off driveways and not directly off the public street.
D. Size Of Areas Determined: A parking space may not be less than three hundred feet (300') of standing and maneuvering area.
When application of these regulations results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (1/2)
shall be disregarded; fractions over one-half (1/2) shall count as one additional space.
E. Other Parking In Residential Areas:
1. Parking in residential areas, off street and on street, shall be limited to the use of the residents of those homes except for short
term parking for six (6) hours or less.
2. Parking of agricultural vehicles and equipment in residential areas is prohibited except upon property complying with the
definition of "rural agricultural area".
F. Sale Of Parking Areas: Property that constitutes required off street parking area must not be separated, through sale or other
means, from the property containing the principal use for which the parking area is required.
G. Joint Facilities:
1. Required parking facilities serving two (2) or more uses may be located on the same lot or in the same structure; provided, that
the total number of parking spaces furnished is not less than the sum of the separate off street parking requirements for each
use during any peak hour parking period when the parking facility is utilized at the same time by two (2) or more uses.
2. The city council may approve the joint use of parking facilities under the following conditions:
a. The proposed joint parking space conforms to subsection 11-3-9D7 of this title.
b. The applicant must show that there is no structural conflict in the principal operating hours of the two (2) buildings or uses for
which joint use of off street parking facilities is proposed.
c. A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties concerned, for joint use of off street parking facilities must be filed
with the city council.
H. Legal Nonconforming Uses:
1. Applications from persons who believe the use of their property constitutes a legal nonconforming use as it relates to the
amendments in this section and sections 11-3-1, 11-3-9 and 11-3-10 of this title must be filed with the director of community
development.
2. Upon submission of the application, the director of community development will review the facts and the application and
conduct any investigation deemed necessary by the director of community development; upon completion of the review and
investigation, the director of community development will submit a report and recommendation to the city council for action; all
applications under this section must be made within ninety (90) days from the passage and publication of this section;
applications submitted after the end of the ninety (90) days will not be considered.
3. Upon a review of the report and recommendation of the director of community development, the city council may find that a
legal nonconforming use exists; upon such a finding by the city council, every legal nonconforming use must be so designated
by resolution reciting the factual basis for the finding.
4. Upon the designation of a legal nonconforming use by the city council pursuant to subsection H3 of this section, the same must
be subject to all of the terms and provisions of section 11-3-1 of this title. (Ord. 807, 10-18-2006)
11-6-11: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 359/454
The traffic generated by any use shall be channeled and controlled in a manner that will avoid congestion on the public streets, traffic
hazards and excessive truck traffic through residential areas. Internal traffic shall be so regulated as to ensure its safe and orderly
flow. Traffic into and out of business and industrial areas shall in all cases be forward moving, with no backing onto streets. (1971
Code § 28-46)
11-6-12: GRADING, FILLING AND EXCAVATION:
A. General:
1. Actions Requiring Grading Permit: No person shall undertake, authorize, or permit any of the following actions without first
having obtained a grading permit from the city:
a. Any excavating, grading, filling, or other change in the earth's topography resulting in the movement of more than twenty (20)
cubic yards of material, except in any wetlands, designated floodplain, or shoreland district. A permit is not required in
conjunction with a council approved mining permit;
b. Earthwork undertaken in accordance with grading plans approved in conjunction with a site and building plan review, rural
subdivision or plat approval;
c. Any excavation, grading, or filling in a wetland, designated floodplain, or shoreland district.
2. When Grading Permit Not Required: No grading permit shall be required under subsections A1a and A1b of this section for any
earthwork that will result in moving less than twenty (20) cubic yards of material but any grading activity must comply with
subsection D of this section, grading standards.
3. Grading Permits As Conditional Use: All grading permits which would result in the moving of more than one thousand (1,000)
cubic yards of material per acre of site area shall be reviewed as a conditional use permit as specified in section 11-2-9 of this
title when not in conjunction with a mining permit, preliminary plat, development plan or site plan review process.
4. Plan Approved: The plan must be approved, where required, by appropriate watershed districts, the United States army corps
of engineers, the Minnesota department of natural resources, and any other governmental agency that has jurisdiction.
5. Postconstruction Stormwater Management: Postconstruction stormwater management standards in sections 3 and 7 of the
city's surface water management plan shall apply to all grading and development activities.
6. Requirements: In addition to all other plan requirements in this chapter, any applicant disturbing an amount of total land area
equal to or exceeding the threshold amount described by current national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES)
requirements shall comply with the following additional requirements:
a. The property owner shall apply for and be issued an NPDES general stormwater permit from the Minnesota pollution control
agency (MPCA); and
b. The property owner or applicant shall submit to the city an approved copy of the erosion and sediment control plan as
required for the NPDES by the MPCA.
B. Grading Permit Application Requirements: Application for grading permit approval may be initiated by the owner, user or potential
user of the subject property by making application in writing to the planning division, on such forms as may be designated.
The application shall include ten (10) copies of clearly legible blue or black lined copies of all drawings on bond paper. The
maximum size of plans shall be thirty inches by forty inches (30" x 40"), and the minimum size shall be eleven inches by
seventeen inches (11" x 17").
The grading plan shall contain the following minimum information and any other items that the planning division considers
necessary for the proper consideration of the application:
1. General Information:
a. Legal Description Of Property: The legal description of the property and evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;
b. Permittee Signature: A signature by the permittee, or his authorized agent, and the property owner;
c. Names, Contact Information: Names, addresses, and phone numbers of the record owner, any agent having control of the
land, the land surveyor, the engineer, and the designer of the plan;
d. Location Map: A location map, including area within one-half (1/2) mile of the site;
e. Property Survey: Property survey with boundary line of property and property dimensions; an arrow indicating the direction of
north; a scale, using a graduated line, which represents the drawn dimensions in relation to actual size of the project site,
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 360/454
usually in number of feet per inch;
f. Training: The applicant must identify a person knowledgeable and experienced in the application of erosion prevention and
sediment control BMPs who will oversee the implementation of the SWPPP, and the installation, inspection and maintenance
of the erosion prevention and sediment control BMPs before and during construction. Name of person(s) trained, proof of
training, date and course name/provider must be on record and made available as part of the permit application.
g. Date: Date of plan preparation; and
h. Engineer/Surveyor Signature: A signature by a registered engineer or land surveyor.
2. Site Information:
a. Existing and proposed final grades utilizing a minimum of two foot (2') contour interval (at least 100 feet beyond the property
boundary);
b. All hold down elevations;
c. The location of any existing or proposed buildings, structures, fences and retaining walls, walks, roads, drives, and parking
areas on the property where the work is to be performed and those on land of adjacent owners which are within fifteen feet
(15') of the property or which may be affected by the proposed grading operations;
d. A delineation of all streams, rivers, ponds, public waters, designated floodplain, shoreland, and wetlands located on and
immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of water, a statement of general water quality and any classification given to
the water body or wetland by the Minnesota department of natural resources (include MN DNR number and ordinary high
water level), the Minnesota pollution control agency, the fish and wildlife service, and/or the U.S. corps of engineers; and
e. Utilities and utility right of way and easements, including electric, natural gas, telephone, water (domestic and fire), and
sewer (sanitary and storm).
3. Plans Required: The following plans are also required and may either be included on the site plan or separately, meeting the
general application requirements and information:
a. A drainage plan that includes the directional flow for the different drainage areas, any engineering work for stormwater
control and retention that may be necessary;
b. A tree preservation plan consistent with the application requirements of subsection 11-6-6C of this chapter;
c. An erosion control plan indicating the type and location of temporary and permanent erosion control, sediment control, and
soil stabilization measures to be used and a progress schedule addressing the critical dates of completion for erosion control,
grading, seeding and related site work;
d. A landscaping and site restoration plan including species, sizes, descriptions, and locations; and
e. If more than ten (10) acres are disturbed and drained to a single point of discharge temporary sediment basins must be
installed. When site restrictions do not allow for a temporary sediment basin, equivalent measures as approved by the city
may be used.
4. Fees And Financial Guarantee:
a. The fee required in the permit application as adopted by the annual city council ordinance establishing fees; and
b. A financial guarantee, in the form of a cash escrow or letter of credit, of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of grading costs, or
an amount sufficient to ensure compliance with the approved permit and adequate site restoration, whichever is greater. The
amount shall be based upon the size of the site, sensitivity of its surroundings, extent of grading, amount of material moved,
necessary site restoration, and potential impacts upon public facilities, including damage to public roadways and property.
5. Additional Information: In addition to the items enumerated above, the city may require submission of the following:
a. A development concept plan indicating how the recontoured parcel may be developed in a manner consistent with city
ordinances and the city's comprehensive plan;
b. A description of traffic movements to and from the site to ensure grading activity does not have a significant adverse effect
on roads, intersections, or development in the area; and
c. Such other information as may be required by the city.
C. Administrative Review:
1. Grading plans that would result in moving more than twenty (20) but less than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of material per
acre must be approved by the planning division. Grading plans within wetland, floodplain or shoreland districts will also be
administratively reviewed unless city council review is required by ordinance or state regulations.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 361/454
2. Individual items on the grading plans may be waived only with the approval of the director of community development.
3. Upon receipt of a completed application, the city shall review the application and notify the applicant by mail of the decision to
approve or deny the application. Grading permits shall be issued only for grading plans providing for adequate drainage,
stormwater retention, and erosion and sediment control measures. The planning division may impose such modifications and
conditions as may be necessary to protect the public interest.
4. Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the planning division may appeal the determination to the planning commission in
accordance with subsection 11-2-6 of this title.
5. The owner shall arrange for a premeeting with city planning staff to discuss the project schedule and to address other matters
of concern before the grading permit is issued.
6. The city shall have the authority to revise a grading permit if on site conditions or changing conditions make the original grading
permit ineffective.
7. The city shall inspect the site for installation of appropriate erosion control, tree protection barriers, and other devices prior to
issuance of the final grading permit.
8. The permittee shall notify the planning division when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not
be given until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all erosion and sediment
control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan signed by the city.
D. Grading, Filling, And Excavating Standards:
1. Vegetation And Ground Cover: The plan shall maximize the preservation of trees and existing vegetation on the property
according to sections 11-6-5 and 11-6-6 of this chapter and the following:
a. Prior to commencement of grading, all trees identified for preservation shall be field identified and grading limits cordoned
with a suitable barrier such as snow fencing by the applicant and verified by the city staff. The barrier shall be located to
coincide to the extent practicable with the drip line of trees to be preserved;
b. Finished grades shall have a minimum topsoil of at least four inches (4");
c. Stabilization of all exposed soils (including stockpiles) must be initiated immediately whenever the construction activity has
been permanently or temporarily ceased on any portion of the site and will not resume for a period exceeding fourteen (14)
calendar days. Stabilization must be completed no later than fourteen (14) calendar days after the construction activity for
that portion of the site has been permanently or temporarily ceased; and
d. All exposed soil areas within one hundred feet (100') of a water of the state or storm drain inlet, or conveyance channel
within one hundred feet (100') of a water of the state, shall have temporary or permanent cover, consistent with current
NPDES permit guidelines; and
e. In instances where an existing natural or created buffer will be impacted by grading or filling operations, site restoration shall
be completed by the permittee in a manner which resembles, to the extent possible, the original vegetative and topographic
state of the property, when deemed appropriate by the city; and
f. Any activity which changes the land surface, including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, grading, construction of
any structure, or alteration of the topographic state of the property, and creates erosion or sedimentation problems, flooding,
ponding and/or negatively alters water drainage shall be corrected by the owner, or designee as determined by city staff.
g. Permanent sediment basins should be designed and constructed with a maintenance access route from an established
public right of way. This route shall be a minimum of twenty five feet (25') in width and be at a maximum grade of five to one
(5:1) at the point of access to the basin. Sediment basins and their maintenance shall be completed in accordance with
accepted design criteria, standards and specifications found in the MPCA publication "Protecting Water Quality In Urban
Areas".
2. Grading Or Development Activities: The plan and grading activity must comply with the following:
a. Land shall be developed in phases of workable size such that adequate erosion and sediment control measures can be
provided as construction progresses. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one period of time;
b. For soil stockpiles greater than ten (10) cubic yards, the toe of the stockpile must be at least thirty feet (30') from any road,
drainage channel, stormwater inlet, or water of the state. Erosion from stockpiles shall be controlled by placing appropriate
barriers around the pile as necessary to contain sediments. If these measures do not adequately control the erosion, the
piles shall be stabilized by mulching, vegetative cover, tarps, or other means. In street utility repair or construction, soil
stockpiles located closer than thirty feet (30') of a roadway, drainage channel, stormwater inlet or water of the state must be
covered with tarps or suitable alternative control. All stockpiles shall have adequate sediment control measures surrounding
its perimeter;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 362/454
c. All storm drain inlets shall be protected during construction, until permanent control measures are in place, with a temporary
measure such as straw bales, silt fence or equivalent barrier meeting accepted design criteria, standards and specifications
found in the MPCA publication "Protecting Water Quality In Urban Areas";
d. A temporary rock pad entrance must be installed at all points where vehicles exit a land alteration site and must be
constructed prior to commencement of grading activity. The rock pad is to be maintained to accommodate continuous
removal of mud from vehicles. The rock pad shall meet design criteria, standards and specifications found in the MPCA
publication "Protecting Water Quality In Urban Areas";
e. Streets abutting the site shall be swept as needed to remove any sediment and/or debris that may accumulate due to land
alteration activities. The city may require street sweeping within twenty four (24) hours of verbal or written notification. If the
street is not swept, the city will clean the street and bill the owner or permittee, as determined by the public works director;
f. Corrective action and landscape restoration for erosion or sedimentation problems on neighboring properties, or any location
other than the permitted site, shall commence within twenty four (24) hours of written or verbal notification. Sediment removal
from wetlands should not commence without prior approval of the city;
g. Under no circumstances shall organic material or construction debris from the site be buried;
h. Water pumped from the site, or from any dewatering operation associated with the permitted activity, shall be treated by
temporary sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand filters, upflow chambers, hydrocyclones, swirl concentrators or other
appropriate controls as appropriate, as determined by the city. Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes
erosion, sedimentation or flooding of the site or receiving channels or a wetland;
i. The grading plan shall adhere to erosion and sediment control standards and specifications contained in the MPCA
publication "Protecting Water Quality In Urban Areas" and the "Minnesota Construction Site Erosion And Sediment Control
Planning Handbook";
j. All erosion and sediment control devices including silt fence, gravel, hay bales or other measures must be installed,
consistent with the approved plan, and verified by the city prior to commencement of grading activity. Silt fence shall be
properly installed by being trenched and buried at least six inches (6") into the soil. All erosion and sediment control devices
shall be removed from the construction site and properly disposed of or recycled within thirty (30) days of the establishment
of permanent vegetative cover on the disturbed areas;
k. The grading plan must comply with the city's surface water management plan;
l. The plan shall not result in sites that are unsatisfactory for development of permitted uses. The development potential of a
site may be adversely impacted by such matters as unsuitable finished grades, poor soil stability, unsatisfactory drainage or
exposure to deleterious influences such as highway frontage for residential property;
m. The plan shall include dust control measures such as daily or more frequent watering if needed for dust suppression;
n. Drainage swales shall be constructed to divert stormwater runoff toward a stormwater conveyance system or infiltration area
for property treatment. Minimum grades on drainage swales should be 1.5 percent;
o. Appropriate on site containment must be provided for all trash, solid waste, construction debris, floating debris, and
hazardous materials. Waste shall be disposed of only in approved locations; and
p. Site grading activity cannot occur between the time period of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. except
by special exception granted by the city council.
3. Residential Standards: In general, residential developments should be designed to reduce potential runoff to the extent
practical. Specific design issues, in addition to those regulations found within this section, may be addressed by the city during
review of a formal planning application. Residential development must comply with the following additional standards:
a. Downspouts and drainage must be diverted away from impervious surfaces, steep slopes and ravines to the greatest extent
possible;
b. Side slopes between adjacent houses should not be greater than three to one (3:1) slope unless the original soil and
vegetation is left undisturbed or there is sufficient area to construct a drainage swale to convey water away from the houses;
c. Prior to approval of a certificate of occupancy by the city, the owner and permittee shall certify that lot grades meet the
standards set in the original grading plan. Such certification shall be completed by a registered surveyor. Lots occupied after
November 15 and before April 30 of each year shall come into compliance by May 31 of each year. Survey certification
requirements shall be guaranteed as part of the subdivision agreement; and
d. For grades greater than four to one (4:1), a vegetative ground cover shall be established within thirty (30) days of certificate
of occupancy or no later than June 1 for homes occupied between October 1 and May 1.
4. Slopes:
a. No natural hillsides steeper than eighteen percent (18%) shall be graded;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 363/454
b. Slope protection shall consist of mulch, sheets of plastic, burlap or jute netting, sod blankets, fast growing grasses or
temporary seeding of annual grasses. Mulch consists of hay, straw, wood chips, cornstalks, bark, or other protective material.
Mulch shall be anchored to slopes with stakes and netting, or shall be worked into the soil to provide additional slope
stability;
c. At the foot of each slope, a channel and berm shall be constructed to control runoff. The channeled water shall be diverted to
a sedimentation basin (debris basin, silt basin or silt trap) before being allowed to enter any natural drainage system; and
d. Along the top of each slope, a berm shall be constructed to prevent runoff from flowing over the edge of the slope if
determined necessary by the city. Where runoff collecting behind the berm cannot be diverted elsewhere and must be
directed down the slope, appropriate measures shall be taken to prevent erosion. Such measures shall either consist of an
asphalt paved flow apron or drop chute laid flow apron. A riprap energy dissipater shall be installed to prevent erosion at the
discharge end.
5. Modification Of Plan: Control measures other than those specifically stated above, or contained in the erosion and sediment
control plan approved by the city, may be used only upon expressed approval of the city, based on the determination that they
will effectively protect against erosion.
6. Inspections: Inspections and maintenance must be documented and readily available for review on site. Inspections are
required as follows:
a. Once every seven (7) days on exposed soil areas.
b. Within twenty four (24) hours after a 0.5 inch rain event over twenty four (24) hours.
c. Once every thirty (30) days on stabilized areas.
d. As soon as runoff occurs or prior to resuming construction on frozen ground.
7. Maintenance: Maintenance is required as follows:
a. When sediment reaches half the height of the BMP on perimeter control devices, sediment must be removed within twenty
four (24) hours.
b. If the perimeter control device is not functional it must be repaired or replaced within twenty four (24) hours.
c. Temporary sediment basins shall be maintained when sediment reaches half the outlet height or half the basin storage
volume. Basin must be drained or sediment removed within seventy two (72) hours.
d. Sediment tracked from construction site vehicle entrance and exit locations must be removed from paved surfaces within
twenty four (24) hours of discovery.
e. Inlet protection devices must be cleaned when sediment reaches half the height of the device.
8. Right Of Entry And Inspection: The permittee and property owner shall allow the city and their authorized representatives, upon
presentation of credentials:
a. To enter upon the permitted site for the purpose of obtaining information, examination of records, conducting investigations
or surveys.
b. To bring such equipment upon the permitted site as is necessary to conduct such surveys and investigations.
c. To examine and copy any books, papers, records, or memoranda pertaining to activities or records required to be kept under
the terms and conditions of the permitted activity.
d. To inspect the erosion and sediment control measures required by the permit.
e. To sample and monitor any items or activities pertaining to permits issued by the city.
f. To enter upon the permitted site for the purpose of correcting any grading condition that presents an imminent hazard to
persons or property. Except in the case of emergencies, the city must notify the permittee of the condition to be corrected
and provide the permittee a reasonable opportunity (not less than 24 hours) to correct the condition prior to entering the
permitted site and performing the corrective work.
g. To enter upon the permitted site after the suspension or revocation of the permit for the purpose of correcting violations or
providing appropriate stabilization and ground cover to address any erosion concerns. (Ord. 941, 3-4-2015)
E. Suspension Or Revocation: The city may suspend or revoke a grading permit whenever the permit is issued in error or on the
basis of incorrect information supplied, or is found to be in violation of any local, state, or federal ordinance or regulation or any of
the provisions of this section. The city will provide written notice of the intent to suspend or revoke the permit based upon the
above criteria. If within seven (7) days of notification to the permittee, the situation related to the revocation or suspension has not
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 364/454
been brought into compliance the permit will be considered null and void. The permittee may request a hearing before the director
of community development upon notice of the violation.
The city may suspend grading activity if it is found that the grading activity is in violation with this section or any conditions stated
on the face of the approved grading permit. To assure that the grading activity is being conducted in accordance with the
conditions stated on the permit and with the requirements of this section, the community development director may make, at the
expense of the person or firm conducting the land alteration, those field measurements the community development director
deems necessary to assure that such conditions and requirements are being followed, such work to be done at the direction of
the community development director on an hourly basis at the time charge fixed by the community development director.
F. Violations: Any person, company or organization who violates, fails to comply with, or assists, directs, or permits the violation of
the terms or conditions of an approved site and building plan, landscape plan, or grading plan shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Such violation shall be a violation of the approved site and building plan, landscape plan, or grading plan and shall render the
approval or plan null and void. (Ord. 701, 7-18-2001)
11-6-13: ARCHITECTURE:
A. Approval Required; General Requirements: In all districts, all principal buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings must be
designed or approved by a registered architect or engineer. A building permit shall not be issued where the materials, scale, bulk
or character of a structure, house or building is so similar or dissimilar to other structures, houses or buildings in the vicinity as to
result in depreciation of property values or the degradation of the environment in the area. However, any denial of such a permit
must be confirmed by the city council.
B. Residential Districts: In districts R-1, R-2, R-2.5, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6, the following standards shall apply for single-family
detached dwellings:
1. Minimum Width: The minimum width of the main portion of the structure shall be not less than twenty feet (20'), as measured
across the narrowest portion.
2. Minimum Roof Pitch: The pitch of the main roof shall be not less than two and one-half feet (21/2') of rise for each twelve feet
(12') of horizontal run. This requirement may be waived for earth sheltered structures.
3. Placement: Every single-family dwelling shall be placed so that the apparent entrance or front of the home faces or parallels
the principal street frontage, except where the lot size exceeds one acre.
4. Foundations: Every dwelling shall be placed on a permanent foundation in compliance with the building code as adopted by
the city. (1971 Code § 28-48; amd. 2000 Code)
C. Nonresidential Structures:
1. Purpose: The purpose of this subsection C is to establish minimum standards for exterior architecture of nonresidential
structures. To ensure high quality development, redevelopment, and compatibility with evolving architectural or planning
themes that contributes to the community's image of quality, visual aesthetics, permanence and stability are in the best interest
of the citizens in the city. These standards are intended to prevent use of materials that are unsightly, rapidly deteriorate,
contribute to depreciation of area property values, or cause urban blight.
These standards are further intended to ensure coordinated design of building exteriors, additions and accessory structure
exteriors in order to prevent visual disharmony; minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties from buildings which are or
may become unsightly, and structures that detract from the character and appearance of the area. It is not the intent of this
chapter to unduly restrict design freedom when reviewing and approving project architecture in relationship to the proposed
land use, site characteristics and interior building layout.
2. Application Of Provisions: This subsection C applies to all nonresidential structures, additions, exterior remodeling and
accessory structures, unless different exterior construction materials are specifically approved as part of an overall planned unit
development (PUD) or planned development overlay (PDO).
3. Minimum Submission Requirements: The applicant must submit the following:
a. Elevations and dimensions of all sides of existing and proposed structures, including roof mechanical equipment, vents,
chimneys, or other projecting items above the roofline.
b. Elevations and dimensions of all existing or proposed solid waste and recycling containment areas.
c. Detailed exterior descriptions, including type and color of all exterior construction materials, awnings, exterior lighting,
mechanical screening material, fencing, metal flashing and the like.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 365/454
d. Schematic floor plans showing proposed window locations, doors, loading docks, projected interior layouts, seating, bar
areas, waiting areas, vestibules, storage areas, food preparation areas, interior trash or recycling space and the like.
e. Heating, air conditioning and ventilating and electrical equipment heights, locations and screening materials.
f. Colored renderings, exterior construction and finish material samples and color palettes.
g. Schematic sign package that meets the sign ordinance.
h. Other information as required.
4. Exterior Design Standards; Office, Commercial And Institutional Structures: Exterior surface materials of structures are subject
to the following:
a. Classes Of Materials: For the purpose of this subsection, materials are divided into class 1, class 2, class 3, and class 4
categories as described below:
Class 1:
Copper panels
Fired clay face brick
Natural stone, synthetic or cultured stone
Transparent glass, opaque or mirror window panels
Other comparable or superior materials
Class 2:
Architecturally finished precast concrete panels; grade A or B
Concrete brick
Masonry stucco
Specialty concrete block such as textured, burnished block or rock faced block
Tile (masonry, stone or clay)
Class 3:
Architectural metal panels
Cementitious board
Exterior finish insulation system (EFIS), synthetic stucco or similar material
Class 4:
Ceramic
Glass block
Smooth concrete block
Smooth scored concrete block
Steel or aluminum siding
Wood
b. Incorporation Of Materials: Structures must incorporate classes of exterior construction materials in the following manner:
(1) Office, commercial, and institutional structures must use at least three (3) different class 1 materials and be composed of
at least sixty five percent (65%) class 1 materials and not more than ten percent (10%) of class 4 materials.
5. Exterior Design Standards; Industrial And Warehouse Structures:
a. Classes Of Materials: For the purpose of this subsection, materials are divided into class 1, class 2, class 3 and class 4
categories as described below:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 366/454
Class 1:
Architecturally finished precast concrete panels; grade A
Copper panels
Fired clay face brick
Natural stone, synthetic or cultured stone
Transparent glass, opaque or mirror window panels
Other comparable or superior materials
Class 2:
Architectural metal panels
Architecturally finished precast concrete panels; grade B
Concrete brick
Exterior finish insulation system (EFIS), synthetic stucco or similar material
Masonry stucco
Specialty concrete block such as textured, burnished block or rock faced block
Tile (masonry, stone or clay)
Class 3:
Cementitious board
Ornamental metal
Class 4:
Ceramic
Glass block
Smooth concrete block
Smooth scored concrete block
Steel or aluminum siding
Wood
b. Incorporation Of Materials: Structures must incorporate classes of materials in the following manner:
(1) Industrial and warehouse buildings must use at least two (2) different class 1 or 2 materials on the majority of the
structure.
(2) Architectural metal panel use shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of any wall of the structure.
(3) No more than ten percent (10%) of any structure may be constructed with class 4 materials.
(4) Architecturally finished precast concrete panels; grade A may be painted when prepped per industry standards.
(5) Grade C precast panels are prohibited.
6. General Requirements:
a. The exterior wall of any nonresidential structure visible from a highway, public street, park, or public view from adjacent
properties, or a residential use or district must be composed of at least sixty five percent (65%) class 1 materials. Exterior
walls with limited public exposure may use combinations of class 2, 3, or 4 materials.
b. Structures in nonresidential zoning districts that are not office, commercial, institutional, industrial, or warehouse uses must
conform to the exterior finish materials of subsection C4a of this section unless otherwise approved by the city council as
meeting the purpose of this section.
c. The use of class 2, 3 or 4 materials must be distributed throughout the exterior of a structure unless the city agrees that
materials consolidated on more visible locations provide the most positive architectural appeal to the general public.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 367/454
d. Expansions of less than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area of the existing structure may use the same materials as the
existing structure. Expansions greater than fifty percent (50%) of the existing structure's floor area may use the same exterior
materials as the existing structure if the following criteria are all met:
(1) The addition is a minimum of six hundred feet (600') from public right of way, public property and public waterways; and
(2) The property that the expansion is located on is a minimum of one hundred (100) acres. Adjoining land in the same
ownership and zoning classification may be used in calculating the minimum acreage requirement.
e. A distinctively different color of brick may be considered as a second class 1 material. However, minor blended color
variations will not be considered as a separate material.
f. To be counted as a primary material, the product must comprise at least five percent (5%) of the exterior wall.
g. Structures may be constructed primarily of one specific class 1 material provided the design is superior to the general intent
of this subsection, provides variation in detailing, footprint of the structure, or deviations in long wall sections to provide visual
interest.
h. Garage doors, window trim, flashing accent items and the like, do not constitute the required materials that make up the
exterior of a structure.
i. Exposed roof materials must be similar to, or an architectural equivalent, of a three hundred (300) pound or better asphalt or
fiberglass shingle, wooden shingle, standing seam metal roof or better.
j. Bright accent colors (i.e., orange, bright yellow, or fluorescent colors) for cloth or metal awnings, trim, banding, entries or any
portion of the structure must not exceed five percent (5%) of each wall area.
k. Equipment used for mechanical, processing, bulk storage tanks, or equipment used for suppressing noise, odors and the like
that protrudes from a side of a structure or is located on the ground adjacent to a structure must be screened from public
view as much as practical with materials matching the design of the structure. Where miscellaneous exterior equipment
cannot be fully screened with matching construction materials, landscaping may be used as additional screening.
l. Face brick must be a fired clay brick material of at least three and one-half inch (31/2") width, two and one-fourth inch (21/4")
height, and eleven and one-half inches (111/2") long.
m. Any decorative concrete block or brick material may be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated throughout the
entire block or brick (not including natural gray).
n. Structure construction and design must be used to create equally attractive sides, except for those instances specified in this
subsection C.
o. Primary building entrances must be clearly defined to promote visual interest and architectural presence.
p. Large, uninterrupted expanses of a single material are prohibited, unless the design is obviously superior to the intent of this
chapter as determined by the city council.
q. No wall that faces a public right of way, parks, the public view from adjacent properties or a residential use or district may
have an uninterrupted length exceeding one hundred feet (100') without including at least two (2) of the following: change in
plane, change in texture or masonry pattern, windows, or an equivalent element that subdivides the wall into human scale
proportions.
r. All nonresidential structures erected shall be type II construction as defined in the 2015 state of Minnesota building code.
s. Nonresidential structure design which will demonstrate enhanced energy conservation and uses active or passive solar
design is highly encouraged by the city.
t. Loading docks shall be prohibited on structure exteriors facing the public streets of a minor arterial classification.
u. All structures shall contain a concrete floor.
v. All final architectural designs and exterior wall surface materials shall be reviewed and approved by the community
development director prior to the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 978, 3-15-2017)
D. Agricultural Districts: In districts AG-1 and AG-2, the standards for residential districts in subsection B of this section shall apply;
except, that the requirements may be waived upon granting of a conditional use permit by the city council. (1971 Code § 28-48)
11-6-14: EXPLOSIVES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 368/454
A. No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products such as TNT or dynamite which could
decompose by detonation shall be permitted, except such as are licensed by the city council.
B. Business or industrial uses which manufacture or store large quantities or varieties of solvents and miscellaneous chemicals
which are potentially explosive may be issued a single license to include all such activities; a license for each material stored or
manufactured shall not be required. (1971 Code § 28-49)
11-6-15: RADIOACTIVITY AND ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES:
No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radioactivity beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no electrical disturbance,
except from domestic household appliances, adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment, including, but not
limited to, radio and television reception, other than that of the creator of the disturbance. (1971 Code § 28-50)
11-6-16: POLLUTION SOURCES:
Requirements as regulated by the environmental protection agency and the state pollution control agency shall be utilized as
minimum standards for pollution sources such as smoke and particulate matter, toxic or noxious materials, odors, air pollution,
vibration and noises. (1971 Code § 28-51)
11-6-17: RESERVED:
(Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
11-6-18: AUGMENTATION OF STATE AND FEDERAL STANDARDS:
State and federal performance standards may be exceeded if the city council so deems it in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare. (1971 Code § 28-52)
Chapter 7
ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES
11-7-1: PURPOSE; FACTS:
A. The purpose of this Chapter is to stage the zoning, subdivision and development of land within the City's residential, commercial
and industrial areas so that sewer and transportation capacity demands caused by new development are consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan, do not have substantial impacts on metropolitan, County and City sewer and transportation facilities and
plans, and the adequate facility and infrastructure capacity is available concurrently with demands generated by new
development. In particular, this Chapter is intended to control the generation of peak period traffic on Highway 61/10 and the use
of the Cottage Grove sewage treatment plant by imposing staged limits on the use of existing, planned and programmed capacity.
B. The Cottage Grove wastewater treatment plant operated by the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services Division provides
service to only Cottage Grove. The plant has a capacity to treat 2.54 million gallons per day. The plant is not projected to have an
expansion for additional capacity prior to 2003.
C. The City has three hundred three (303) acres of residential, fifty six (56) acres of commercial and five hundred thirty (530) acres of
industrial land within the Metropolitan Urban Service Area (MUSA) which is not developed. Based on a market study, the
industrial land is projected to develop at an average rate of three percent (3%) per year. Based on the development history of
residential land use, the City does not have adequate land within the MUSA to accommodate additional residential growth.
D. In order to accommodate development of land within the MUSA and obtain a reasonable amount of additional residential land, to
be added to the MUSA without exceeding the current capacity of the plant, the City is enacting an ordinance to allow
development, but only if there is adequate sewer plant capacity to serve new development. (Ord. 625, 3-20-1996)
11-7-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 369/454
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to land that is within the MUSA that has not received approval for development before
February 21, 1996. Any development approved after February 21, 1996, must comply with the terms of this Chapter. (Ord. 625, 3-20-
1996)
11-7-3: ADMINISTRATION:
A. All applications, maps and documents relative to a new development shall be submitted to the Director of Community
Development. All new developments shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with applicable procedures established
elsewhere in this Code.
B. The Planning Commission and Council may not approve a new development unless: 1) the public facilities to serve the new
development exist or, in the case of transportation facilities, are planned for construction, or 2) the developer has executed an
agreement to construct the necessary improvements to enable compliance with this Chapter. Nothing in this Chapter shall
prevent the City from approving a portion of a new development if the approved portion complies with the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 625, 3-20-1996)
11-7-4: MINIMUM NEEDS ASSESSMENT:
A. Transportation Impact Analysis:
1. A traffic impact analysis shall be prepared and submitted to the Director of Community Development for each new
development. An environmental assessment worksheet may, if it contains the following, be substituted for a traffic impact
analysis. A traffic impact analysis must contain the following information:
a. Introduction and description of existing conditions and identification of the traffic study area. This should include maps of the
existing roads and highways including intersections that will be impacted by vehicular traffic generated by the new
development.
b. Analysis of existing traffic conditions within the traffic study area.
c. Analysis of future traffic conditions within the study area without the proposed development. Use various measures as
appropriate (intersection capacity analysis; level of service; volume/capacity ratio).
d. Description of proposed site traffic characteristics within the traffic study area which shall include the number of A.M. and
P.M. peak period trips that will be generated by the new development.
e. An analysis of future traffic conditions with proposed development within the traffic study area. This includes an assignment
of the new trips to the roadway network (trips added to TH 61/10 must be shown).
2. A determination of the level of service resulting from the additional trips must be made. If the level of service causes the future
traffic conditions outside of the proposed development to fall below "D", the improvements needed to mitigate the additional
traffic must be described and proposed. These improvements may include both capacity improvements (e.g., signalization, turn
lanes, new roads) and traffic demand management strategies (e.g., park and ride, flexible work hours, telecommuting). How the
improvements will be phased along with the staging of development and a schedule and commitment to both capital
improvements and TDM strategies must be shown.
3. A development that is projected to generate peak period trips (PPT) exceeding the "baseline peak period trip contribution
(BPPTC)", as defined in Section 11-1-3 of this Title, may not be approved without implementation of traffic mitigation measures
that reduce the PPT to or below the BPPTC.
B. Sewer Impact Analysis: A sewer impact analysis shall be prepared and submitted to the Director of Community Development for
each new development. A sewer impact analysis shall contain information necessary to determine whether existing public
facilities which will be utilized by the new development will be adequate to serve the demand generated by the new development.
An environmental assessment worksheet may, if it contains the following, be substituted for a sewer impact analysis. A sewer
impact analysis shall contain the following: Analysis of the amount (average daily) of sewage flow to be generated from the new
development within the study area and a breakdown by proposed use. (Ord. 625, 3-20-1996)
11-7-5: STANDARDS FOR DETERMINATION OF ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES:
A. Roads:
1. It shall be determined that there are adequate public facilities to serve a new development if, after taking into account traffic
generated by all existing and approved new development which will utilize the impacted roads, one of the following conditions
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 370/454
will be satisfied:
a. Existing City, County, State or regional roads and intersections which will be impacted will be adequate to accommodate the
traffic that will be generated by the new development; or
b. Any road or intersection construction necessary to accommodate the additional traffic above BPPTC from the new
development is planned for construction; or
c. The new development will not cause the vehicular trip generation from the City to exceed the baseline peak period trip
contribution; or
d. That with offsetting improvements, or the implementation of transportation demand management strategies, the new
development will not cause the vehicular trip generation from the City to exceed the baseline peak period trip contribution.
2. In determining compliance with the above factors, the following shall be considered, and related requirements may be
imposed:
a. Whether the developer agrees to construct necessary roads and road and intersection improvements, implement a traffic
management plan or undertake other traffic mitigation measures that offset impacts from the new development.
b. The availability and likely use of existing or programmed public bus, rail, or other forms of mass transportation to serve the
new development.
c. Other plans, programs or measures that would offset impacts from the new development.
B. Sewers:
1. Generally: It shall be determined that there are adequate public facilities to serve a new development if, after taking into
account sewerage generated by all existing and approved new development which will impact the sewage treatment plant, the
following conditions will be satisfied:
a. The expected annual average and maximum daily loadings from the new development, together with existing flows and flows
from other approved development, will not exceed the maximum allocated sewer capacity.
b. The provisions of this subsection may not be amended without approval of the Metropolitan Council.
2. Sewers In Industrial Park MUSA: High capacity sanitary sewer discharge users shall be limited to fifty (50) acres within the
industrial park MUSA. The fifty (50) acres may "float" within in the industrial park MUSA and are not assigned to a particular
fifty (50) acres. Once fifty (50) acres of land within the industrial park MUSA has developed with high capacity sewer discharge
users, any land remaining undeveloped within the industrial park MUSA must develop only with low capacity sanitary sewer
discharge users. (Ord. 625, 3-20-1996)
11-7-6: PRIORITY LIST:
The City shall create and maintain a priority list which shall be a waiting list arranged by date of completion of the review for
approved new developments which are prevented from developing due to the lack of adequate public facility capacity. Removal from
priority list shall occur and construction of the new development may commence when condition(s) preventing construction of the
new development have been satisfied, including the execution of necessary public facility improvement agreements. (Ord. 625, 3-20-
1996)
11-7-7: ANNUAL DEVELOPMENT REPORT:
A. The Department of Community Development shall prepare an annual development report describing new development and facility
capacity for submission to the Planning Commission, City Council and Metropolitan Council by January 31 for each previous year.
The annual development report shall describe the development which has occurred in the preceding year. The report shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:
1. Number of building permits approved for new residential dwelling units by type.
2. Number of building permits approved for nonresidential uses by type and total floor area.
3. Estimated increase in population, household and employment.
4. Presentation of the same information for the previous five (5) years.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 371/454
B. The annual report shall include an analysis of the current and future utilization and capacity of specific public facilities and
services. For sewers, the report shall include the following:
1. Average sewage generation (in gallons per day and RECs) for each type of dwelling unit and commercial/industrial use;
2. Inventory/tabulation of existing flows, including all allocations to the system and total system capacity;
3. Sewage generation projection for the system including the basis for their computation; and
4. A list of capital projects contained in the capital improvements program for the expansion of sewage facilities and the
construction of improvements to reduce sewage flow including project status.
C. The report shall contain the following information with regard to transportation:
1. Peak period trip generation on Highway 61/10 attributable to new development during the past year;
2. A list of the existing average daily traffic (ADT) and level of service on major roadways within and which service the City; and
3. A list of capital improvement projects contained in the City's capital improvements program for expanded transportation
services and capital improvement projects contained in the County and State transportation improvement programs which will
facilitate transportation in the City.
D. The City shall submit the annual development report to the Metropolitan Council and shall meet with the Metropolitan Council staff
to review and, as appropriate, supplement and/or modify the information contained in the report within one month following
submission.
E. Based on development, capacity improvements planned for construction, and traffic demand strategies, the Metropolitan Council
will evaluate the base peak period trips on an annual basis. After completing the evaluation, the Metropolitan Council will
determine if any revision to the BPPTC figures should be made. (Ord. 625, 3-20-1996)
11-7-8: PROVISIONS ARE SUPPLEMENTAL:
The provisions of this Chapter are supplementary to other laws, rules, regulations and ordinances applicable to development within
the City. Compliance with the provisions in this Chapter shall not release an applicant from complying with the requirements of other
Federal, State, County and City laws, rules, regulations and ordinances applicable to the zoning, subdivision, development and use
of land within the City. (Ord. 625, 3-20-1996)
Chapter 8
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. AG-1 AGRICULTURAL PRESERVATION DISTRICT
11-8A-1: PURPOSE:
This District is established for those areas where it is necessary and desirable because of the high quality of the soils, availability of
water and/or highly productive agricultural capability to preserve, promote, maintain and enhance the use of the land for long-term
agricultural purposes, and to protect such land form encroachment by the premature conversion to nonagricultural uses. This District
represents areas where services required for urban development will not be available within at least ten (10) years. (Ord. 617, 8-2-
1995)
11-8A-2: PERMITTED USES:
No structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:
1.Commercial agriculture and horticulture.
2.Farm buildings and pole barns.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 372/454
3.Farm drainage and irrigation systems.
4.Feedlots and poultry facilities.
5.Forestry.
6.One single-family detached dwelling per each forty (40) acres, on a separately owned parcel. Any parcel of land that has thirty
seven and one-half (37.5) acres or more, after deducting road right of way, and variations due to longitude and latitude deviations,
complies with the forty (40) acre requirement.
A. Lot Dimensions And Setbacks:
Lot area 1 1/2 acres
Lot width 180 feet
Front yard 100 feet
Side yard 25 feet
Rear yard 50 feet
B. Lot Depth: A new parcel subdivided after August 19, 1981, must not have a lot depth more than three (3) times greater than
the lot width.
C. Sewage Disposal: The lot must have an acceptable on-site sewerage disposal area of at least one and one-half (11/2) acres
on a slope of less than thirteen percent (13%).
D. Location Of Nonfarm Structures: No nonfarm structure may be located closer than three hundred feet (300') from the nearest
accessory farm building or property regularly used as pasture for livestock.
E. Location Of Driveways: The lot shall be located in such a manner that no driveways may be located within three hundred feet
(300') of an intersection of a minor arterial with another road or within one hundred fifty feet of an intersection of two (2)
collector streets. (Ord. 617, 8-2-1995)
11-8A-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly subordinate to permitted uses and structures shall be permitted,
including:
1.Accessory structures incidental to residential uses as provided in Section 11-3-3 of this Title for R-1 Rural Residential Districts.
2.Home occupations subject to standards and permit procedures contained in section 11-9A-3 of this title, "Home occupations".
3.Private swimming pools, intended for and used solely by the occupants of the property on which it is located and their guests.
4.Signs as regulated by the city in residential districts.
5.Structures incidental to farm operations such as garages, barns, storage buildings, poultry barns, etc.
6.Farmers' market on nonresidential property, subject to compliance of the following criteria:
A. No portion of this use shall take place within any public right of way or within any required setback area.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 373/454
B. Parking and display areas associated with the sale shall not interfere with existing business operations or traffic circulation
patterns.
C. The site must be kept in a neat and orderly condition and display of items must be as compact as possible so as to not
interfere with existing business, parking or driveway operations.
D. Temporary signs must comply with title 9, chapter 8 of this code. Off premises signage is prohibited.
E. The owner/operator of the outdoor temporary/seasonal sales or farmers' market must have the written permission of the
current property owner to locate on a specific site.
F. All items for sale must be stored indoors or removed from the site at the close of each business day.
G. Processing or preparation (e.g., cooking, barbecuing, baking, etc.) of food products is prohibited.
H. Assembly or production (e.g., wood carving/engraving, craft materials, pottery, etc.) of merchandise is prohibited.
I. Compliance is required with title 4, chapter 9 of this code.
J. Compliance with all department of health requirements and licenses.
K. No pets or live animals within the display area, except for guide dogs.
L. Outdoor public address systems or speakers are prohibited.
M. The site must be kept in a neat and orderly fashion, free from litter, refuse, debris, junk, or other waste.
N. Power generators are prohibited. (1971 Code § 28-68.1; amd. Ord. 841, 8-13-2008; Ord. 923, 12-18-2013)
11-8A-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
No structure or land shall be used for one or more of the following uses except by conditional use permit:
1.Religious institutions and columbariums.
2.Commercial horse stables, dog kennels, boarding stables and similar uses, which shall not be located within three hundred feet
(300') of a dwelling other than the dwelling on the property in question.
3.Density transfers. Within the same zoning district, a property owner may transfer the development rights of undeveloped acreage
upon compliance with the following conditions:
A. The parcel meets the minimum lot requirements of section 11-8A-2 of this article, "One single-family detached dwelling...".
B. The parcels that are either receiving or giving up the development rights are contiguous, or in the same section, or are in
contiguous sections.
C. As a condition of approval of the density transfer, a deed restriction restricting the development rights of the parcel giving up
the density shall be signed by the owner and recorded in the office of the county recorder. The restriction shall give up any
rights of the owner, the owner's heirs or representatives or assigns to construct a residential dwelling on the parcel from which
the development density right is transferred. The restriction shall expire upon the rezoning of the property from agricultural to
another zoning classification.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 374/454
D. Any property that is under a development restriction on a quarter/quarter basis that can comply with the terms of this section
may amend the development restriction to conform to the terms of this title.
E. Any lot of record, prior to August 19, 1981, the date of the adoption of the one unit per quarter/quarter section restriction, shall
be exempt from the maximum development density of this title.
4.Detached domesticated farm animal building on parcels between five (5) and ten (10) acres.
5.Detached rural storage buildings on parcels of less than ten (10) acres in size.
6.Electromagnetic communication facilities as regulated in section 11-4-7 of this title.
7.Limited commercial ventures conducted at "historic properties" as defined in section 11-9H-4 of this title, "Limited commercial
ventures...".
8.Public utility and public service structures, including electrical transmission lines and substations, gas regulator stations,
communications equipment buildings, pumping stations or reservoirs. (1971 Code § 28-68.1; amd. Ord. 617, 8-2-1995; Ord. 635,
9-18-1996; Ord. 653, 2-4-1998; 2000 Code; Ord. 841, 8-13-2008; Ord. 884, 10-20-2010)
11-8A-5: HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES:
No nonfarm structure or building shall exceed thirty feet (30') in height, except as provided in this title. (1971 Code § 28-68.1)
ARTICLE B. AG-2 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
11-8B-1: PURPOSE:
This District represents those areas which are suitable for agricultural uses, but because of the capability of the soils and/or because
they may be needed for urban development within ten (10) years, are not considered to be prime lands suited to long-term
agricultural preservation. It is the purpose of this District to preserve these lands in agricultural uses until such time as streets,
sewers, water supply and other community facilities and services are provided or scheduled, so as to ensure orderly and beneficial
conversion of such lands to nonagricultural use, and to prevent their premature conversion. (Ord. 617, 8-2-1995)
11-8B-2: PERMITTED USES:
No structure or use of land shall be used except for that permitted in Section 11-8A-2 of this Title and regulated therein; except, that
up to four (4) dwelling units per forty (40) acres, as defined in Section 11-8A-2 of this Title, entry #6, "One single-family detached
dwelling...", is allowed. (Ord. 617, 8-2-1995)
11-8B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
No accessory structure or use of land shall be permitted, except for any use permitted as accessory in Section 11-8A-3 of this Title
and regulated therein. (1971 Code § 28-68.2)
11-8B-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
No structure or use of land shall be used for any use permitted in Section 11-8A-4 of this Title except by conditional use permit. (Ord.
617, 8-2-1995)
11-8B-5: HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES:
No nonfarm structure or building shall exceed thirty feet (30') in height, except as provided in this Title. (1971 Code § 28-68.2)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 375/454
Chapter 9
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-1 RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
11-9A-1: PURPOSE:
The R-1 rural residential district represents those areas suitable for residential development that are without public utilities. These
areas are designated as rural residential in the city's comprehensive plan. It is the intent that low densities be maintained in order to
permit efficient resubdivision of lots to urban densities at such future time that public utilities become available. (Ord. 939, 2-4-2015)
11-9A-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
On any individual lot, the following uses can be conducted as a principal use:
1.One single-family detached dwelling.
2.Agriculture - rural.
3. Agriculture - urban.
4. Agricultural buildings.
5. Habitable or nonhabitable structures for local, county, state, or federal government purposes.
6. Public utility structures and stormwater ponds.
7. Public roads, bridges, trailways and sidewalks.
8. Public parks, scientific natural areas, and playgrounds.
9. Signs as regulated by title 9, chapter 8 of this code.
10. A state licensed residential facility or housing established with services registered under Minnesota state statutes chapter 144D
serving six (6) or fewer persons, a licensed daycare facility serving twelve (12) or fewer persons, and a group family daycare
facility licensed under Minnesota rules, parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445 to serve fourteen (14) or fewer children. (Ord. 939, 2-4-
2015)
11-9A-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly subordinate to permitted uses and structures shall be permitted,
including:
1.Accessory apartments.
A. Purpose: The purpose of this entry is to permit the installation of no more than one accessory apartment in an existing singlefamily
dwelling. Because this opportunity is allowed in neighborhoods with established recreation facilities, utility systems,
parking, traffic patterns and architectural character, the installation and use of accessory apartments must be strictly controlled
to avoid adverse physical, social, economic, environmental and aesthetic impacts. By allowing only those accessory
apartments that are in compliance with all of the performance standards of this entry, the character and quality of existing
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 376/454
neighborhoods will be protected.
B. Permit Procedures:
(1) Permit Required; Application; Fee: No one shall install an accessory apartment without first having obtained a permit from
the director of community development. Application for the permit shall be made on such form(s) as may be designated by
the director of community development and shall be accompanied by the required permit fee, established by city council
ordinance.
(2) Issuance Or Denial Of Permit; Appeals: Within ten (10) working days after receiving the application, the director of
community development shall review the application and inspect the property to determine whether or not the proposed
accessory apartment meets the performance standards. He/she shall deny or approve the application based upon a
statement of findings relative to the standards. The decision to issue or deny the permit may be appealed to the planning
commission.
(3) Renewal Of Permit: The permit shall be renewed biennially, subject to an inspection and the permit renewal fee.
(4) Revocation Of Permit; Appeals: Violation of the performance standards shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. Notice
of intent to revoke the permit shall be sent by the director of community development to the permit holder, stating the grounds
for revocation. The holder of the permit shall have ten (10) days from the receipt of the notice to file an appeal to the planning
commission. Failure to file an appeal within ten (10) days forfeits any challenge to the revocation. At the expiration of the ten
(10) day appeal period, the permit shall be revoked. Operation of the accessory apartment shall cease within sixty (60) days
from the date of revocation.
C. Performance Standards:
(1) All remodeling for the addition of the accessory apartment shall be on the inside of the structure. Exceptions to this condition
will be made only if the applicant submits exterior elevation drawings determined by the director of community development
to be architecturally compatible with adjacent structures.
(2) At least four (4) paved off street parking spaces shall be available on the site, in a location other than in a required front
yard.
(3) Detached accessory structures shall not be converted to living space.
(4) Both the principal and accessory unit must meet the applicable standards of the building code.
(5) The owner(s) of the residence in which the accessory unit is created shall occupy at least one of the dwelling units on the
premises, except for temporary absences.
(6) No more than ten percent (10%) of the single-family dwellings in any one block may contain an accessory apartment. A
"block" shall be interpreted to be an area enclosed on its perimeter by streets. In some cases, a block may also be bordered
by a body of water or a municipal boundary line.
(7) If the dwelling utilizes an on site sewage disposal system, additional capacity shall be added to the system if needed for the
accessory unit. All systems shall be inspected by a licensed contractor or inspector prior to issuance or renewal of the
accessory apartment permit. The system shall be pumped as necessary.
(8) House numbers shall be placed on the principal structure to indicate that the structure contains an accessory apartment.
2.Excavation incidental to construction on the premises.
3.Home occupations.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 377/454
A. Purpose: The purpose of this entry is to recognize that certain home occupations conducted for gainful employment involving
the manufacture, provision, or sale of goods and/or services are compatible with the character of residential neighborhoods and
to further establish regulations relating to permitted home occupations. In addition, this section is intended to provide a
distinction between permitted and prohibited activities and uses concerning home occupations.
B. Home Occupations: Home occupations are permitted as an accessory use to the principal use of properties within all zoning
districts within the city subject to meeting the performance standards established in this entry.
C. Performance Standards: A home occupation must conform to all of the following standards:
(1) No more than one person, other than a member of the immediate family occupying the dwelling, shall be employed on the
premises at any one time.
(2) Identification signs shall conform to title 9, chapter 8 of this code.
(3) The appearance of the structure shall not be altered or the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner which
would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting or
advertising signs or the emission of sounds, odors, noise, vibrations, heat, glare or electrical disturbances.
(4) No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building.
(5) The use shall not create substantial traffic. The number of customer vehicular trips to the dwelling unit for the purpose of
obtaining products or service shall not exceed ten (10) per day. Vehicular trips related to package pick ups and deliveries for
home occupations shall be limited to four (4) per day and is restricted to straight axle vehicles only. Any need for parking
shall be off the street and be located on approved parking surfaces.
(6) No home occupation shall cause an increase in sewer or water usage so that the combined total use for dwelling and home
occupation purposes exceeds the normal range for residences in the city.
(7) Exterior storage or display of materials or equipment of any kind is prohibited.
(8) Any construction, or alteration of the principal structure, electrical, or mechanical equipment requires a building permit. The
use and/or storage of chemicals or materials shall not change the fire rating of the principal dwelling.
(9) The operation of the home occupation shall begin no earlier than seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and end no later than ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M.
(10) No more than twenty five percent (25%) of the principal structure may be devoted to home occupation use.
D. Permitted Home Occupations: All uses that are not prohibited in this section and are conducted as a home occupation are
required to meet the purpose statement and performance standards of this entry in addition to any applicable state or federal
requirements, codes, or statutes. The city zoning administrator is designated with the authority to determine if a specific use is
allowed as a permitted home occupation.
E. Prohibited Home Occupations: The following uses shall not be permitted as home occupations:
(1) Adult uses.
(2) Animal hospitals, pet shops, pet daycare.
(3) Check cashing.
(4) Clinics or hospitals.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 378/454
(5) Contractor yard including the storage of equipment, materials, and other accessories for the construction and service
trades.
(6) Equipment and supply rental.
(7) High intensity arc and oxyacetylene welding.
(8) Limousine services.
(9) Machining.
(10) Medical marijuana dispensary.
(11) Medical and dental offices, clinics and laboratories.
(12) Microbreweries open to the public.
(13) Mortuaries and crematoriums.
(14) Pawnbroker.
(15) Precious metal dealer.
(16) Private clubs.
(17) Repair shops or service establishments, except the repair of computers, cameras, phones or similar small devices and
equipment.
(18) Restaurants or any catering or food preparation business.
(19) Smoking lounges.
(20) Stables or kennels, except as provided under section 11-9A-4 of this article, "Commercial horse stables...".
(21) Retail shopping stores.
(22) Uses utilizing gunpowder or explosives.
(23) Vehicle sales requiring a Minnesota dealers or wholesale license.
(24) Vehicle, trailer, or boat rental.
(25) Vehicle, trailer or boat painting or detailing.
(26) Vehicle, trailer or boat repair or service.
(27) Other uses determined by the zoning administrator to not be a permitted home occupation.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 379/454
4.Identification signs, in accordance with performance standards governing signs.
5.Accessory structure as regulated in section 11-3-3 of this title.
6.Private swimming pools intended for and used solely by the occupants of the property on which they are located and their guests.
7.Real estate sales by a subdivider in model homes within his/her own subdivision.
8.Signs, as regulated by the city.
9.Farmers' market, subject to compliance of the criteria established in section 11-8A-3 of this title, "Farmers' market on nonresidential
property...". (Ord. 939, 2-4-2015)
11-9A-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
No structure or land shall be used for one or more of the following uses except by conditional use permit:
1.Accessory buildings and structures requiring a conditional use permit as provided in section 11-3-3 of this title.
2.Cemeteries.
3.Religious institutions and columbariums, including those related structures located on the same site which are an integral part of
the church proper; convents or homes related to a religious function on the same site; provided, that no more than ten (10)
persons shall reside on the site, and no building shall be located within fifty feet (50') of any lot line.
4.Commercial greenhouses; provided, that all outside storage is fenced in such a manner so as to screen the stored material from
view when observed from the public street or an adjoining lot.
5.Commercial horse stables, kennels for domesticated animals, dog kennels, boarding stables and similar uses shall not be located
within three hundred feet (300') of a dwelling unit other than the dwelling unit of the property in question.
6.Electromagnetic communication facilities as regulated in section 11-4-7 of this title.
7.Essential service structures; provided, that no building shall be located within fifty feet (50') of any lot line of an abutting lot in an R
district.
8.Golf courses and country clubs, which may include a restaurant, on-sale liquor license, assembly, and accessory retailing; tennis
clubs, and swimming pools serving more than one family. The principal structure for any of the above listed uses shall be one
hundred feet (100') or more from any abutting lot in an R district, and accessory structures shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50')
from any lot line.
9.Home occupations not meeting the performance standards of section 11-9A-3 of this article, "Home occupations", subsection C,
"Performance Standards"; provided, that the building in which the home occupation is conducted shall be set back at least one
hundred feet (100') from any lot line and at least two hundred feet (200') from a residence of a person other than the home
occupation permit holder; provided, further, that the lot on which the home occupation is located shall be at least five (5) acres in
size. In no case shall a conditional use permit issued pursuant to this entry permit a home occupation that employs more than
seven (7) persons, other than members of the immediate family occupying the dwelling, on the premises at one time; nor shall
such a permit allow deviations from the requirements for the appearance of the structure as required by section 11-9A-3 of this
article, "Home occupations", subsection C(3), or from the limitations on excessive traffic (section 11-9A-3 of this article, "Home
occupations", subsection C(5)), or from the limitations on storage and display (section 11-9A-3 of this article, "Home occupations",
subsection C(7)), or from the normal hours of operation of home occupations (section 11-9A-3 of this article, "Home occupations",
subsection C(9)), nor shall any such permit allow a use prohibited by section 11-9A-3 of this article, "Home occupations",
subsection E, "Prohibited Home Occupations".
10.Limited commercial ventures conducted at "historic properties" as defined in section 11-9H-4 of this chapter, "Limited commercial
ventures...".
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 380/454
11.Tax exempt clubs and lodges.
12.Public, private and parochial schools of all educational levels; provided, that no building shall be located within fifty feet (50') of
any lot line.
13.Limited use dog training facilities, subject to the following performance standards:
A. Parcels ten (10) acres or greater.
B. No overnight boarding.
C. Minimum setback of fifty feet (50') from all property lines for all training facility arenas and buildings.
D. Limited hours of operation.
E. Limited number of vehicular trips equivalent to the number of trips that could be generated if the property was developed at its
maximum allowed density.
F. Noise control as regulated by local and state standards.
G. Nuisance control as regulated by local and state standards.
H. Any other reasonable standards or conditions deemed applicable by the planning commission or city council. (Ord. 939, 2-4-
2015)
11-9A-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Minimum Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this title:
Lot area 3 acres
Lot width 180 feet
Front yard 30 feet
Rear yard 50 feet
Side yard 25 feet
Side yard, attached garage 20 feet
Maximum structure height 30 feet
Maximum impervious lot coverage 10 percent
B. Cluster Developments: In order to encourage the preservation of environmentally sensitive areas, encourage more efficient
allocation and maintenance of privately controlled open space and more efficiently utilize investment in and maintenance of public
streets, cluster developments in the R-1 district shall be encouraged under the following conditions:
1. No individual lot shall be less than one and one-half (11/2) acres in size, with a minimum of one and one-half (11/2) acres of
land suitable for on site sewage disposal systems. Exceptions to the minimum lot width requirement may be granted.
2. The overall density of the parcel shall not exceed one dwelling unit per three (3) acres.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 381/454
3. The remaining area shall be permanently preserved as open space. This area may be accepted by the city as fulfillment of the
park dedication requirement of the subdivision regulations, if consistent with the parks and open space element of the
comprehensive plan. If not so dedicated, the open space shall be placed under control of a homeowners' association or other
appropriate jurisdiction. Deed restrictions requiring the permanent preservation of these areas as open space shall be recorded
before building permits for lots in a cluster development may be issued. (Ord. 939, 2-4-2015)
ARTICLE B. R-2 RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICT
11-9B-1: PURPOSE:
The R-2 residential estate district is intended to represent areas which, because of rugged, wooded terrain, are well suited to high
value housing of very low densities. These areas will provide a permanent, semirural lifestyle on land for which this is considered the
highest and best use. Since these areas will be planned to exist without public sewer and water systems, only areas with soils and
topography suitable for on site utilities will be considered for this district. Areas designated on the comprehensive plan as rural
residential may be considered for inclusion in this district only if they are programmed for public utilities before the year 2000, as
shown on the utility staging plan. Before land is placed in the R-2 district, the effect on future extension of public utilities will be
considered. (1971 Code § 28-54)
11-9B-2: PERMITTED USES:
No structure or land shall be used except for any use permitted in section 11-9A-2 of this chapter and regulated therein. (1971 Code
§ 28-54)
11-9B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
No accessory structure shall be permitted except for any use permitted as accessory in section 11-9A-3 of this chapter and regulated
therein. (1971 Code § 28-54)
11-9B-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
No structure or land shall be used for one or more of the following uses, except by conditional use permit:
1.Accessory buildings and structures requiring a conditional use permit as provided in section 11-3-3 of this title.
2.Religious institutions and columbariums, including those related structures located on the same site which are an integral part of
the church proper; convents or homes related to a religious function on the same site; provided, that no more than ten (10)
persons shall reside on the site, and no building shall be located within fifty feet (50') of any lot line.
3.Electromagnetic communication facilities as regulated in section 11-4-7 of this title.
4.Essential service structures; provided, that no building shall be located within fifty feet (50') of any lot line of an abutting lot in an R
district.
5.Golf courses and country clubs, which may include a restaurant, on-sale liquor license, assembly, and accessory retailing; tennis
clubs, and swimming pools serving more than one family. The principal structure for any of the above listed uses shall be one
hundred feet (100') or more from any abutting lot in an R district, and accessory structures shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50')
from any lot line.
6.Home occupations not meeting the performance standards of section 11-9A-3 of this chapter, "Home occupations", subsection C,
"Performance Standards", as provided by section 11-9A-4 of this chapter.
7.Limited commercial ventures conducted at "historic properties" as defined in section 11-9H-4 of this chapter, "Limited commercial
ventures...".
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 382/454
8.Public, private and parochial schools of all educational levels; provided, that no building shall be located within fifty feet (50') of any
lot line.
9.Signs, as regulated by the city.
10.Limited use dog training facilities, subject to the following performance standards:
A. Parcels ten (10) acres or greater.
B. No overnight boarding.
C. Minimum setback of fifty feet (50') from all property lines for all training facility arenas and buildings.
D. Limited hours of operation.
E. Limited number of vehicular trips equivalent to the number of trips that could be generated if the property was developed at its
maximum allowed density.
F. Noise control as regulated by local and state standards.
G. Nuisance control as regulated by local and state standards.
H. Any other reasonable standards or conditions deemed applicable by the planning commission or city council. (1971 Code § 28-
54; amd. Ord. 635, 9-18-1996; Ord. 653, 2-4-1998; Ord. 663, 4-21-1999; Ord. 884, 10-20-2010; Ord. 887, 2-16-2011)
11-9B-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set
forth in this title:
Lot area 11/2 acres
Lot width 180 feet
Front yard 30 feet
Rear yard 50 feet
Side yard 25 feet
Side yard, garage 20 feet
Maximum structure height 30 feet
(1971 Code § 28-54)
ARTICLE C. R-2.5 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
11-9C-1: PURPOSE:
The R-2.5 residential district is to provide appropriate areas for unattached single-family living at reasonable population densities
consistent with sound standards of public health and provide institutional and community services such as parks, schools, religious
facilities, and community centers supportive to a residential area while safeguarding the residential character. This district is located
within the metropolitan urban service area (MUSA), and each dwelling unit is intended to be connected to the public sewer and water
systems. (Ord. 640, 12-4-1996)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 383/454
11-9C-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the R-2.5 residential district:
1.Agriculture.
2.Essential services.
3.Public and private parks, playgrounds, and open space.
4.Public utility and public park buildings and structures.
5.Single-family detached dwellings.
6.State licensed residential facility serving six (6) or fewer persons, a licensed daycare facility serving twelve (12) or fewer persons,
and a group family daycare facility licensed under Minnesota rules, parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445 to serve fourteen (14) or fewer
children. (Ord. 640, 12-4-1996)
11-9C-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses in the R-2.5 residential district:
1.Accessory apartments as regulated in section 11-9A-3 of this chapter, entry #1, "Accessory apartments".
2.Buildings or trailers temporarily located for purposes of construction or sales on the premises for a period of not to exceed the time
necessary for such construction.
3.Decorative landscape features including, but not limited to, arbors, fences, retaining walls and terraces.
4.Detached accessory structures as regulated in section 11-3-3 of this title.
5.Garage sales, not to exceed two (2) per calendar year.
6.Gardening and other horticultural uses where materials or products are grown but not sold on the premises, unless in accordance
with state statutes.
7.Home occupations as regulated in section 11-9A-3 of this chapter, entry #3, "Home occupations", and section 11-9A-4 of this
chapter, entry #9, "Home occupations not meeting the performance standards...".
8.Off street parking as regulated in section 11-3-9 of this title.
9.Private swimming pools, recreational courts and play apparatus intended for and used by the occupants of the property on which
they are located.
10.Real estate sales in model homes.
11.Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the occupant.
12.Signs, as regulated by title 9, chapter 8 of this code.
13.Farmers' market, subject to compliance of the criteria established in section 11-8A-3 of this title, "Farmers' market on
nonresidential property...". (Ord. 640, 12-4-1996; amd. Ord. 841, 8-13-2008)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 384/454
11-9C-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
No structure or land shall be used for one or more of the following uses, except by conditional use permit:
1.Religious institutions and columbariums, including those related structures located on the same site which are an integral part of
the church proper; convents or homes related to a religious function on the same site; provided, that no building shall be located
within fifty feet (50') of any lot line.
2.Electromagnetic communication facilities as regulated in section 11-4-7 of this title.
3.Essential service structures; provided, that no building shall be located within fifty feet (50') of any lot line.
4.Golf courses (except miniature courses and driving ranges operated for commercial purposes); and country clubs, which may
include a restaurant, on-sale liquor license, assembly, and accessory retailing; tennis clubs, and swimming pools serving more
than one family. The principal structure for any of the above listed uses shall be one hundred feet (100') or more from any
abutting lot in an R district, and accessory structures shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any lot line.
5.Group daycare/nursery school in a religious institution, community center, or academic educational institution.
6.Hospitals for human care, sanatoriums, rest homes and nursing homes; provided, that all structures except fences shall be located
one hundred feet (100') or more from the lot line.
7.Limited commercial ventures conducted at "historic properties" as defined in section 11-9H-4 of this chapter, "Limited commercial
ventures...".
8.Municipal buildings and utility structures.
9.Public, private and parochial schools of all educational levels; provided, that no building shall be located within fifty feet (50') of any
lot line.
10.Limited use dog training facilities, subject to the following performance standards:
A. Parcels ten (10) acres or greater.
B. No overnight boarding.
C. Minimum setback of fifty feet (50') from all property lines for all training facility arenas and buildings.
D. Limited hours of operation.
E. Limited number of vehicular trips equivalent to the number of trips that could be generated if the property was developed at its
maximum allowed density.
F. Noise control as regulated by local and state standards.
G. Nuisance control as regulated by local and state standards.
H. Any other reasonable standards or conditions deemed applicable by the planning commission or city council. (Ord. 653, 2-4-
1998; amd. Ord. 663, 4-21-1999; Ord. 884, 10-20-2010; Ord. 887, 2-16-2011)
11-9C-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 385/454
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set
forth in this title:
Lot area 11,000 square feet
Lot width 85 feet
Front yard 30 feet
Rear yard 35 feet
Side yard (living area of dwelling) 10 feet
Side yard (attached garage) 10 feet
Maximum principal structure height 35 feet
Maximum lot coverage of impervious surfaces 50 percent
Minimum lot width at right of way line for cul-de-sac lots 65 feet
Minimum lot width at setback line for cul-de-sac lots 90 feet
(Ord. 640, 12-4-1996)
ARTICLE D. R-3 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
11-9D-1: PURPOSE:
The R-3 single-family residential district is intended to preserve the character of existing neighborhoods, and to provide for
development of those areas designated single-family residential in the comprehensive plan at densities and standards consistent
with existing single-family developments. (1971 Code § 28-55)
11-9D-2: PERMITTED USES:
No structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:
1.Agriculture.
2.Municipal buildings and structures.
3.One-family detached dwellings.
4.Public parks and playgrounds.
5.Public utilities.
6.Zero lot line single-family dwellings. (1971 Code § 28-55)
11-9D-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
No accessory structure or use of land shall be permitted, except for any use permitted as accessory in section 11-9A-3 of this
chapter and regulated therein. (1971 Code § 28-55)
11-9D-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
No structure or land shall be used for one or more of the following uses except by conditional use permit:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 386/454
1.Boarding homes, lodging houses and tourist homes.
2.Cemeteries.
3.Religious institutions and columbariums, including those related structures located on the same site which are an integral part of
the church proper; convents or homes related to a religious function on the same site; provided, that no more than ten (10)
persons shall reside on the site, and no building shall be located within fifty feet (50') of any lot line.
4.Dormitories as accessory uses to schools with accommodations for up to seventy five (75) persons residing on the site provided
that no buildings shall be located within fifty feet (50') of any lot line.
5.Electromagnetic communication facilities as regulated in section 11-4-7 of this title.
6.Essential service structures; provided, that no building shall be located within fifty feet (50') of any lot line of an abutting lot in an R
district.
7.Golf courses and country clubs, which may include a restaurant, on-sale liquor license, assembly, and accessory retailing; tennis
clubs, and public swimming pools serving more than one family. The principal structure for any of the above listed uses shall be
one hundred feet (100') or more from any abutting lot in an R district, and accessory structures shall be a minimum of fifty feet
(50') from any lot line.
8.Home occupations not meeting the performance standards of section 11-9A-3, "Home occupations", subsection C, "Performance
Standards", as provided by section 11-9A-4 of this chapter.
9.Hospitals for human care, sanatoriums, rest homes and nursing homes; provided, that all structures except fences shall be located
one hundred feet (100') or more from the lot line of any abutting lot in an R district.
10.Limited commercial ventures conducted at "historic properties" as defined in section 11-9H-4 of this chapter, "Limited commercial
ventures...".
11.Nonprofit clubs and lodges.
12.Public, private and parochial schools of all educational levels; provided, that no building shall be located within fifty feet (50') of
any lot line.
13.Real estate sales in a structure not permanently on a subdivided lot.
14.Signs as regulated by the city.
15.Limited use dog training facilities, subject to the following performance standards:
A. Parcels ten (10) acres or greater.
B. No overnight boarding.
C. Minimum setback of fifty feet (50') from all property lines for all training facility arenas and buildings.
D. Limited hours of operation.
E. Limited number of vehicular trips equivalent to the number of trips that could be generated if the property was developed at its
maximum allowed density.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 387/454
F. Noise control as regulated by local and state standards.
G. Nuisance control as regulated by local and state standards.
H. Any other reasonable standards or conditions deemed applicable by the planning commission or city council. (1971 Code § 28-
55; amd. Ord. 635, 9-18-1996; Ord. 653, 2-4-1998; Ord. 663, 4-21-1999; Ord. 797, 7-19-2006; Ord. 884, 10-20-2010; Ord. 887,
2-16-2011)
11-9D-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Minimum Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this title:
Lot area 10,000 square feet
Lot width 75 feet
Front yard 30 feet
Rear yard 35 feet
Side yard 10 feet
Side yard, garage 5 feet
Maximum structure height 30 feet
B. Cluster And Zero Lot Line Development: Variances from the strict lot size, width and setback requirements may be granted for
developments utilizing a cluster platting or zero lot line concept, with the following general requirements:
1. All variances requested shall be noted on the preliminary plat at the time of application.
2. The number of dwellings proposed for the entire site shall not exceed the maximum permitted if cluster or zero lot line
development is not used. The maximum number of dwelling units shall be determined by dividing the gross acreage of the
project area by ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
3. Any one lot shall not be reduced to less than sixty six percent (66%) of the required lot area nor less than sixty six percent
(66%) of the required lot footage.
4. Land which is to be set aside as permanent open space shall be clearly indicated on the plan. If this area is not to be dedicated
as public park land, it shall be placed under the control of a homeowners' association, and provisions for its continual
maintenance shall be made. Deed restrictions requiring the permanent reservation of these areas as open space shall be
recorded with the final plat. (1971 Code § 28-55)
ARTICLE E. R-4 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
11-9E-1: PURPOSE:
The R-4 Low Density Residential District represents those areas designated on the City's Comprehensive Plan as low density
residential where all public services, utilities and amenities needed for urban residential development are available. Development
densities shall not exceed five (5) dwelling units per gross acre, except as modified in this Title. The purpose of the District is to allow
flexibility in attaching and clustering single-family units in order to promote the availability of affordable housing and to decrease
energy costs and costs of public improvements and utilities. (1971 Code § 28-56)
11-9E-2: PERMITTED USES:
1. Agriculture.
2. Municipal buildings and structures.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 388/454
3. One-family detached dwellings.
4. Public parks and playgrounds.
5. Public utilities.
6. Single-family attached dwellings, including duplexes, twin homes, quad homes and town houses up to a maximum of eight (8)
units attached. (1971 Code § 28-56)
11-9E-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
No accessory structure or use of land shall be permitted except for any use permitted as accessory in Section 11-9A-3 of this Title
and regulated therein. (1971 Code § 28-56)
11-9E-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
No structure or land shall be used except for any use permitted as conditional in Section 11-9D-4 of this Title and regulated therein.
(1971 Code § 28-56)
11-9E-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Single-Family Detached Dwellings:
1. The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the additional requirements, exceptions and modifications
as set forth in this Title:
Lot area 7,500 square feet
Lot width 60 feet
Front yard 30 feet
Rear yard 35 feet
Side yard 7.5 feet
Side yard, garage 5 feet
Maximum structure height 35 feet
2. In no case shall more than thirty percent (30%) of a single-family lot be covered with structures.
3. Garages are not required by this Title. In the case of single-family dwellings constructed without garages, however, the site
shall be planned with a garage location consistent with all setback requirements.
B. Cluster Developments And Attached Dwellings: Exceptions to rigid lot area, width and depth requirements shall be granted for
cluster developments and attached units subject to approval of a site plan pursuant to Section 11-2-4 of this Title in compliance
with the development standards of this District.
1. Setbacks:
a. There shall be a minimum separation of fifteen feet (15') between detached dwelling units and/or structures containing two
(2) or more dwellings This separation may be decreased to ten feet (10') in the case of residential garages or underground
structures. All setbacks and structure separations shall provide reasonable visible and acoustical privacy, light and air for all
dwelling units.
b. There shall be a minimum setback of twenty five feet (25') from all district boundaries abutting the R-l, R-2, R-2.5 and R-3
Zoning Districts for all structures and parking. This area shall be adequately landscaped with trees and shrubbery, so as to
provide a pleasing transition between the two (2) districts.
2. Parking: A minimum of two (2) paved off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Sidewalks shall be
provided from parking areas to the dwellings that they serve.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 389/454
3. Site Coverage: A maximum of forty percent (40%) of the total area of the project shall be covered with structures, driveways,
streets or other impervious surfaces. Site coverage may be further restricted if necessitated by capacities of the City's storm
sewer system.
4. Open Space:
a. A minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of usable open space per dwelling unit shall be provided. "Usable open space"
is defined as an area which is graded, developed, landscaped, equipped, intended and maintained for either active or
passive recreation, or both. Such areas shall contain improvements containing benches, pedestrian paths and trails, play
equipment, fixtures or features. The least dimension of the space so provided shall be thirty feet (30') or greater.
b. Wherever possible, usable open space shall be contiguous. It shall be easily accessible to all residents of the development
by means of an internal circulation system of paths or walkways. The area shall be landscaped according to an approved
plan at a density of at least twenty (20) trees per acre. A mixture of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs will be used.
c. The area shall be permanently reserved as open space. It may be accepted by the City as partial fulfillment of the park
dedication requirements if consistent with the parks and open space element of the Comprehensive Plan. If not so dedicated,
the open space shall be placed under the control of a homeowners' association or other appropriate jurisdiction. Deed
restrictions requiring the permanent reservation of these areas as open space shall be recorded prior to the issuance of any
building permit for residential structures.
5. Landscaping:
a. At least one shade tree, a minimum of two inches (2") caliper size shall be planted per dwelling unit. This shall be in addition
to any plantings required in the usable open space area.
b. All signs, mailboxes and accessory lighting shall be uniform in materials and design and be approved as a part of the
landscape plan.
c. The completion of the landscape plan shall be assured and included in any bond required as a part of the development
process. (1971 Code § 28-56; amd. 2000 Code)
11-9E-6: DENSITY BONUSES:
Density bonuses in excess of those allowed by right in this District may be granted by the City Council if the plan provides one or
more of the following features which enhance the design of the project, display innovative site planning techniques, or contribute to
the availability of affordable housing. The allowable total density increase under this provision shall be no more than twenty percent
(20%). Density bonuses shall not be granted in any case where the increased density would overload public utility systems,
roadways, parks or schools:
Design Feature Density Bonus
Preservation of significant natural site
features, such as vegetation, and minimizing
grading of natural slopes
0-10%
Provision of affordable housing; provided, that: 0-10%
A. Units reserved for low and moderate income
persons (subsidized housing) do not exceed
more than 20% of the development total.
B. Units for sale or rental at a price less than
or equal to the modest cost housing level
determined by the Metropolitan Council do not
exceed more than 33% of the development total.
C. The City shall require from the developer a
guarantee that all units for which such bonuses
will be awarded for sale or rent are within
these guidelines.
D. All of the affordable units shall be integrated
into the overall design of the development
and scattered throughout the project to
the maximum extent possible.
Provision of common recreation facilities
and/or open space beyond that which is
required by the provisions of this Section,
including playground equipment, swimming
pools and tennis courts
0-5%
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 390/454
A site planning concept demonstrating innovative
energy conservation efforts, including
features such as orientation of lots and/or
units for maximum use of passive solar
energy, earth sheltering, alternative energy
sources and preservation of solar access for
active solar energy systems
0-5%
(1971 Code § 28-56)
ARTICLE F. R-5 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
11-9F-1: PURPOSE:
The R-5 medium density residential district represents those areas designated on the city's comprehensive plan as medium density
residential, where all public services, utilities and amenities needed for urban residential development are available. Development
densities shall not exceed ten (10) dwelling units per gross acre, except as modified in this title. The purpose of the district is to allow
for higher densities for attached single-family units in order to promote the availability of affordable housing and to decrease energy
costs of public improvements and utilities. (1971 Code § 28-57)
11-9F-2: PERMITTED USES:
No structure or land shall be used except for any use permitted in section 11-9E-2 of this chapter. (1971 Code § 28-57)
11-9F-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
No accessory structure or use of land shall be permitted except for any use permitted as accessory in section 11-9A-3 of this chapter
and regulated therein. (Ord. 841, 8-13-2008)
11-9F-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
No structure or land shall be used except for any use permitted as conditional in section 11-9E-4 of this chapter and regulated
therein. (1971 Code § 28-57)
11-9F-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Development standards shall be the same as those for the R-4 district, contained in section 11-9E-5 of this chapter, except as
hereby modified.
B. There shall be a minimum setback of fifty feet (50') from district boundaries abutting the R-1, R-2, R-2.5, R-3 and R-4 zoning
districts for all aboveground structures and parking. In case of a boundary abutting a street, the street right of way may be
included in this setback. This area shall be landscaped with a dense combination of deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs and
bushes and berms, so as to form a screen to the adjoining districts as appropriate. (1971 Code § 28-57; amd. 2000 Code)
11-9F-6: DENSITY BONUSES:
Density bonuses in excess of those allowed by right in this district may be granted by the city council according to the provisions of
section 11-9E-6 of this chapter. The allowable total density increase shall be no more than twenty percent (20%). Density bonuses
may be granted for the following design features, in addition to those listed in section 11-9E-6 of this chapter:
Design Feature Density Bonus
1/3 or more of the required parking spaces in covered or underground parking structures 0_10 percent
(1971 Code § 28-57)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 391/454
ARTICLE G. R-6 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
11-9G-1: PURPOSE:
The R-6 High Density Residential District represents those areas designated on the City's Comprehensive Plan as multiple-family
residential, where all public services, utilities and amenities needed for urban residential development are available. Development
densities shall not exceed sixteen (16) dwelling units per gross acre, except as modified in this Title. The purpose of this District is to
allow a mix of housing types, including apartments, in attractive developments with adequate amounts of open space and
recreational facilities. (1971 Code § 28-57.1)
11-9G-2: PERMITTED USES:
No structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:
1. Any use permitted in Section 11-9E-2 of this Title.
2. Apartments. (1971 Code § 28-57.1)
11-9G-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
No accessory structure or use of land shall be permitted except for any use of land permitted as accessory in Section 11-9A-3 of this
Title and regulated therein. (1971 Code § 28-57.1)
11-9G-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
No structure or land shall be used except for any use permitted as conditional in Section 11-9E-4 of this Title and regulated therein.
(1971 Code § 28-57.1)
11-9G-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development standards for the R-6 District shall be the same as those for the R-4 District contained in Section 11-9E-5 of this Title,
except as hereby modified:
A. Setbacks:
1. In the case of residential structures greater than two (2) stories in height, the minimum separation between structures shall be
fifty feet (50'). This separation may be reduced to twenty five feet (25') if the horizontal extension of the lines created by the
nearest vertical surfaces would create an angle of not less than forty five degrees (45°).
2. There shall be a minimum setback of one hundred feet (100') from District boundaries abutting any R-1, R-2, R-2.5, R-3, and
R-4 Zoning District for all aboveground structures and parking. If the boundary abuts a street, right of way may be included in
the setback area. This area shall be suitably landscaped with a dense combination of deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs
and bushes so as to form a screen to the adjoining districts as appropriate.
B. Site Coverage: A maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the total area of the project shall be covered with structures, driveways,
streets or other impervious surfaces. Site coverage may be restricted further if necessitated by the capabilities of the City's storm
sewer system.
C. Landscaping: All yard areas and usable open space shall be landscaped according to an approved landscape plan. All signs,
mailboxes and accessory lighting shall be uniform in materials and design and be approved as part of the plan. Completion of the
landscape plan shall be assured and included in any bond required as a part of the development process. (1971 Code § 28-57.1;
amd. 2000 Code)
ARTICLE H. UR URBAN RESERVE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 392/454
11-9H-1: PURPOSE:
The UR urban reserve residential district represents transition areas of the city that have been identified in the city's comprehensive
land use plan as being physically eligible, fiscally practical, and generally suitable for future staging of urbanized development. The
identified areas are located contiguous to and outside of the metropolitan urban service area, and require installation of private well
and septic systems until urban services are available. Development densities shall not exceed one dwelling unit per twenty (20)
acres. The intent of the district criteria is to promote the preservation of large blocks of undeveloped land that is unencumbered by
inefficient building and road layouts, and to give notice to landowners about the likelihood for the future extension of a full range of
urban services into the area. The expected future land uses could be residential, commercial and parks and open spaces. (Ord. 639,
12-4-1996)
11-9H-2: PERMITTED USES:
No structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:
1.Agriculture.
2.Essential services.
3.Public and private parks, playgrounds, and open space.
4.Public utility and public park buildings and structures.
5.Single-family detached dwellings, private garages and accessory structures.
6.State licensed residential facility serving six (6) or fewer persons, a licensed daycare facility serving twelve (12) or fewer persons
and a group family daycare facility licensed under Minnesota rules, parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445 to serve fourteen (14) or fewer
children. (Ord. 639, 12-4-1996)
11-9H-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
The following accessory uses shall be permitted:
1.Accessory apartments as regulated in section 11-9A-3 of this chapter, entry #1, "Accessory apartments".
2.Accessory structures as regulated in section 11-3-3 of this title.
3.Home occupations as regulated in section 11-9A-3 of this chapter, entry #3, "Home occupations".
4.Private swimming pools intended for and used solely by the occupants of the property on which they are located and their guests.
5.Real estate sales in model homes.
6.Renting of rooms by a resident family for lodging purposes only and for the accommodation of not more than two (2) roomers in a
single-family dwelling.
7.Signs, as regulated by title 9, chapter 8 of this code.
8.Farmers' market, subject to compliance of the criteria established in section 11-8A-3 of this title, entry #6, "Farmers' market on
nonresidential property...". (Ord. 639, 12-4-1996; amd. Ord. 841, 8-13-2008)
11-9H-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 393/454
No structure or land shall be used for one or more of the following uses except by conditional use permit:
1.Religious institutions and columbariums, including those related structures located on the same site which are an integral part of
the church proper; convents or homes related to a religious function on the same site; provided, that no building shall be located
within fifty feet (50') of any lot line.
2.Essential service structures; provided, that no building shall be located within fifty feet (50') of any lot line.
3.Limited commercial ventures conducted at historic properties meeting established performance standards of subsection A of this
entry; and containing one or more of the following uses: class 1 restaurant, catering centers, bed and breakfasts, overnight
rooms, reception facilities, meeting or conference facilities, professional office uses, museums, art galleries, antique shops, craft
boutiques, site tours, limited retail activities, or other uses deemed similar by the director of community development.
A. Historic Property Performance Standards: In order to be considered eligible for a historic properties conditional use permit,
properties must be in conformance with the following:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that the historic characteristics of the property cannot be maintained reasonably and
economically unless the conditional use permit is granted.
(2) Listed on the city register of historic sites and landmarks or the national register of historic places.
(3) The property is adequately sized to meet the proposed use.
(4) Adequately served by municipal services or a septic system with adequate capacity for the proposed use.
(5) In conformance with all applicable building and fire codes, and ADA requirements.
(6) In conformance with all state and county health regulations.
(7) In conformance with the city's off street parking requirements pursuant to subsection 11-3-9F of this title, or proof of parking,
if deemed reasonable by the city.
(8) Adequately situated and designed so as to not create a significant traffic impact on adjoining public roadways, and includes
safe ingress and egress to the site.
(9) The development meets all applicable setback requirements.
(10) Activity areas are appropriately screened from adjoining properties.
(11) The property and land use are adequately designed so as not to create an adverse impact on the residential character of
the surrounding area.
(12) The development meets all applicable commercial site development performance standards.
(13) The development does not create any increase in the level of noise, air, or other pollution which would have an adverse
effect on other properties.
(14) One advertising sign not to exceed twenty (20) square feet.
(15) Site improvements meet the city's historic preservation standards and guidelines.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 394/454
(16) All applications for city permits are reviewed by the advisory committee on historic preservation, and a certificate of
appropriateness is obtained for site work to preserve, rehabilitate, restore or reconstruct historic buildings, structures,
landscapes or objects.
4.Public, private and parochial schools of all educational levels; provided, that no building shall be located within fifty feet (50') of any
lot line.
5.Limited use dog training facilities, subject to the following performance standards:
A. Parcels ten (10) acres or greater.
B. No overnight boarding.
C. Minimum setback of fifty feet (50') from all property lines for all training facility arenas and buildings.
D. Limited hours of operation.
E. Limited number of vehicular trips equivalent to the number of trips that could be generated if the property was developed at its
maximum allowed density.
F. Noise control as regulated by local and state standards.
G. Nuisance control as regulated by local and state standards.
H. Any other reasonable standards or conditions deemed applicable by the planning commission or city council. (Ord. 653, 2-4-
1998; amd. Ord. 884, 10-20-2010; Ord. 887, 2-16-2011)
11-9H-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the additional requirements, exceptions and modifications as set
forth in this title:
Lot area 20 acres
Lot width 320 feet
Front yard 30 feet
Rear yard 50 feet
Side yard 25 feet
Side yard, garage 20 feet
Maximum structure height 35 feet
(Ord. 639, 12-4-1996)
ARTICLE I. R-2A THROUGH R-2F RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
11-9I-1: PURPOSE STATEMENTS:
A. R-2A, Residential Single-Family District: The purpose of the R-2A, residential single-family district is to provide for low density
detached single-family dwellings and directly related complementary uses on lots ensuring adequate light, air, privacy and open
space for each dwelling; protect residents from the impacts of high levels of traffic; minimize traffic congestion; and avoid the
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 395/454
overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size when compared with surrounding structures.
This district is intended for areas that are designated for "low density" in the comprehensive plan.
B. R-2B, Detached Single-Family District: The purpose of the R-2B, detached single-family district is to provide appropriately located
areas for a single-family unit on a larger lot to ensure adequate light, air, privacy and open space for each dwelling; protect
residents from the impacts of high levels of traffic; minimize traffic congestion; avoid the overloading of utilities by preventing the
construction of buildings of excessive size when compared with surrounding structures; and provide institutional and community
services such as parks, schools, religious institutions, and community facilities supportive of a residential area. This district is
intended for areas that are designated for "low density" in the comprehensive plan.
C. R-2C, Detached Single-Family District: The purpose of the R-2C, detached single-family district is intended to recognize areas
which, because of topography, level of services, or other natural or development factors, are best served by a large lot
designation. Development should not exceed an overall average of two (2) dwelling units per acre.
D. R-2D, Twin Home Single-Family District: The R-2D district is designed to permit twin home residential units in or near detached
single-family and attached family unit residential neighborhoods. This district does not provide for the sale of individual dwelling
units. Development of R-2D property will be allowed in the low density and medium density residential land use designations in
the comprehensive plan.
E. R-2E, Residential Townhouse District: The R-2E, residential townhouse district is intended for areas that are designated for
"medium density" in the comprehensive plan, where a moderate density of townhouse or apartment dwelling units is expected.
Development of the R-2E district will be in proximity to either neighborhood or community collector roads or to arterial roads.
F. R-2F, Residential Multi-Family District: The purpose of the R-2F, residential multi-family district is to expand life cycle housing
options by allowing a variety of attached dwelling unit types and directly related complementary uses. Lot sizes are intended to
reflect the city's objective of promoting efficient use of land and public utilities. A full range of public services and facilities will be
available to this district. R-2F districts are areas designated for "high density" in the comprehensive plan. Property within this
district is in close proximity to community collector roads and arterial roads. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
11-9I-2: PERMITTED, ACCESSORY, AND CONDITIONAL USES:
Except as provided in this title or otherwise as provided by law, a principal building, structure or land use is permitted only in the
zones indicated in the following table 1. A use listed in table 1 of this section in any zone denoted by the letter "P" is permitted, by the
letter "A" is accessory use, and by the letter "C" is a conditional use. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
TABLE 1
PRINCIPAL, ACCESSORY, AND CONDITIONAL
USES PERMITTED IN ZONES
Uses R-
2A
R-
2B
R-
2C
R-
2D
R-
2E
R-
2F
A state licensed residential facility or a housing with services establishment registered under
Minnesota state statutes chapter 144D serving from 7 through 16 persons or a licensed
daycare facility serving from 13 through 16 persons
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
C C
A state licensed residential facility or a housing with services establishment registered under
Minnesota state statutes chapter 144D serving 6 or fewer persons, a licensed daycare facility
serving 12 or fewer persons, and a group family daycare facility licensed under Minnesota
rules, parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445 to serve 14 or fewer children
P P P P P P
Accessory apartments A A A A A A
Accessory buildings and structures requiring a conditional use permit as provided in section
11-3-3 of this title
C C C C C C
Accessory structures A A A A A A
Agriculture P P P P P P
Antennas and towers A A A A A A
Apartments n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
C C
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 396/454
Boarding homes, lodging houses, and tourist homes C C C C C C
Building and trailers temporarily located for purposes of construction or sales on the premises
for a period of not to exceed the time necessary for such construction
A A A A A A
Cemeteries and columbariums C C C C C C
Commercial horse stables, kennels, boarding stables and similar uses C C C C C C
Decorative landscape features, including, but not limited to, arbors, fences, retaining walls,
and terraces
A A A A A A
Electromagnetic communication facilities as regulated in section 11-4-7 of this title C C C C C C
Essential service structures C C C C C C
Excavation incidental to construction on the premises A A A A A A
Farmers' market, subject to compliance of the criteria established in section 11-8A-3 of this
title, "Farmers' market on nonresidential property..."
A A A A A A
Fences A A A A A A
Garage sales A A A A A A
Gardening and other horticultural uses where materials or products are grown but not sold on
the premises, unless in accordance with state statutes
A A A A A A
Golf courses and country clubs, which may include a restaurant, on-sale liquor license,
assembly, and accessory retail; tennis clubs, and swimming pools serving more than 1 family
C C C C C C
Group daycare/nursery school in a religious institution, community center, or academic
education institution
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
C C
Home occupations A A A A A A
Hospitals for human care, sanatoriums, rest homes and nursing homes n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
C C
Limited commercial ventures conducted at historic properties as defined in section 11-9H-4 of
this chapter
C C C C C C
Municipal buildings and structures P P P P P P
Nonprofit clubs, lodges, social halls, fraternal organizations, and clubs n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
C C
Parking lots and parking areas A A A A A A
Parks and playgrounds P P P P P P
Private swimming pools, recreation courts, and play apparatus intended for and used by the
owners of the property
A A A A A A
Public, private, and parochial schools, and quasi-public buildings and uses of a recreational,
educational, religious, cultural, or public service types
C C C C C C
Public utilities P P P P P P
Real estate sales in model homes A A A A A A
Religious institutions, including those related structures on the same site which are an integral
part of the facility
C C C C C C
Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the property owner A A A A A A
Signs, complying with the applicable regulations set forth in title 9, chapter 8 of this code A A A A A A
Single-family detached dwelling; 1 dwelling per lot P P P n/a
n/a
n/a
Townhouses, row homes, or multi-family apartments having 3 or more residential units
attached
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
C C
Twin home n/a
n/a
n/a
P P n/a
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 397/454
(Ord. 796, 6-21-2006; amd. Ord. 841, 8-13-2008; Ord. 884, 10-20-2010)
11-9I-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following table 2 of minimum lot area, yard, and bulk requirements must be observed:
TABLE 2
MINIMUM LOT AREA, YARD, AND BULK REQUIREMENTS
R-2A R-2B R-2C R-2D R-2E R-
2F
Minimum lot area for detached single-family dwellings 11,000
sq. ft.
13,000
sq. ft.
21,500
sq. ft.
n/a n/a n/a
Minimum lot area for 2 single-family units attached n/a n/a n/a 20,000
sq. ft.
20,000
sq. ft.
n/a
Minimum lot width for detached single-family dwellings 85 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. n/a n/a n/a
Minimum lot width for 2 single-family units attached n/a n/a n/a 135 ft. 135 ft. n/a
Minimum lot width at the right of way line for cul-de-sac lots 65 ft. 65 ft. 85 ft. 90 ft. n/a n/a
Minimum lot width that the minimum front yard setback line for culde-
sac lots
90 ft. 90 ft. 90 ft. 90 ft. n/a n/a
Minimum front yard setback for attached garage if there is no
porch on the front of the home
35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 50 ft. 50
ft.
Minimum front yard setback for attached
garage if there is a porch on the front yard
30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 50 ft. 50
ft.
Minimum front yard setback for all principal structures 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 50 ft. 50
ft.
Maximum projection of an attached garage in front of the dwelling
6 ft. 6 ft. 6 ft. 6 ft. n/a n/a
Minimum front yard setback for an attached garage with the
garage door facing a side property line
30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 50 ft. 50
ft.
Minimum rear yard setback for all principal structures 35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 50 ft. 50
ft.
Minimum interior side yard setback for a principal structure with
less than 30 feet in height
10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft. 50 ft. 50
ft.
Minimum interior side yard setback for principal structures that are
greater than 30 feet to 35 feet in height
15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 50 ft. 50
ft.
Minimum interior side yard setback for nonliving area of the
principal structure
10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft. 50 ft. 50
ft.
Minimum corner side yard setback for a principal structure
adjacent to a collector or arterial street
25 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 50
ft.
Minimum corner side yard setback for a principal structure
adjacent to a local street
20 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 35
ft.
Maximum lot coverage of all impervious surfaces 50% 50% 50% 50% 40% 40%
Maximum principal structure height 35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 45
ft.
(Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
11-9I-4: SINGLE-FAMILY PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 398/454
The following performance standards for all new single-family residential development zoned R-2A, R-2B, and R-2C must be
observed:
A. The minimum finished floor area for the following dwelling types are as follows:
Single-family rambler 1,500 square feet
All other single-family designs 2,000 square feet
(Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
11-9I-5: MULTI-FAMILY AND TOWNHOUSE PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following performance standards for all new multi-family and townhouse residential development must be observed:
A. A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of all townhouse structures' and sixty percent (60%) of all multiple-family structures' exterior
elevations, exclusive of doors, windows, and garage doors must be covered by brick or artificial stone. (Ord. 827, 10-17-2007)
B. The minimum finished floor area for the following dwelling types zoned R-2D, R-2E, and R-2F are as follows:
Detached townhomes without basements 1,700 square feet
Detached townhomes with basements 1,500 square feet
Attached townhomes without basements 1,400 square feet
Attached townhomes with basements 1,200 square feet
C. Site and architectural plans will be reviewed by a licensed design professional selected by the city. The cost for this review will be
paid by the developer as part of the planning application escrow fee.
D. Structures must incorporate varied and articulated facades. Buildings must include prominent entry features, pitched roofs, and
transitional architectural features such as porches and covered stoops. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
Chapter 10
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. PURPOSE
11-10A-1: LIMITED BUSINESS DISTRICT, B-1:
The limited business district (B-1) is intended to provide a district which is related to and may reasonably adjoin residential districts
for the location and development of administrative office buildings and related office uses which are subject to more restrictive
controls. (Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
11-10A-2: RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT, B-2:
The retail business district (B-2) is to encourage retail sales and services by grouping businesses in patterns of workable
relationships to minimize the influence on surrounding residential neighborhoods by limitation and control of permitted uses. (Ord.
904, 5-16-2012)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 399/454
11-10A-3: GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT, B-3:
The purpose of the general business district is to provide centralized areas for retail business areas, for highway or automobile
oriented businesses, and for quasi-industrial and wholesale enterprises that do not need an industrial setting but have considerable
customer contact. (Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
11-10A-4: PLANNED BUSINESS DISTRICT, P-B:
The planned business district (P-B) is intended to provide for the mix of suitable retail, commercial and industrial uses which are
complementary and ancillary to the Cottage Grove industrial park. The district allows for a blend of manufacturing and retail uses
which have significant customer interaction. (Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
11-10A-5: NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT, N-B:
The neighborhood business district (N-B) is a commercial district intended to provide a mix of convenience oriented retail sales and
services. The district is related to and may reasonably adjoin residential districts for the location and development of retail and office
uses that are subject to more restrictive controls than in other business districts. Neighborhood business districts are intended to be
compact districts that serve local rather than regional commercial needs. Developments in such districts are intended to function as a
neighborhood center with internal traffic and pedestrian systems that facilitate access to all properties within the district. Because of
their proximity to residential areas, developments in such districts are intended to be aesthetically consistent within the district and to
complement adjacent residential development through the use of landscaping in and around the district to provide appropriate
screening. (Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
ARTICLE B. COMMERCIAL DISTRICT USES
11-10B-1: PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, ACCESSORY, AND INTERIM USES:
A. Purpose: The use table as provided in this section depicts the classification of land uses within zoning districts.
B. Table Key: The following labeling applies to the table in this section:
1. Uses Defined: Uses are often defined in section 11-1-3 of this title. Uses not defined are subject to standard dictionary
definitions.
2. Permitted Uses: Uses identified in the zoning district column with the letter "P" are allowed as permitted uses, primary or
accessory, in the respective zoning district.
3. Conditional Uses: Uses identified in the zoning district column with the letter "C" are allowed as conditional uses, primary or
accessory, in the respective zoning district. Conditional uses must obtain a conditional use permit prior to commencing.
4. Interim Uses: Uses identified in the zoning district column with the letter "I" are allowed as interim uses, primary or accessory,
in the respective zoning district. Interim uses must obtain an interim conditional use permit prior to commencement.
5. Accessory Uses: Uses identified in the zoning district column with the letter "A" are allowed as accessory uses in the
respective zoning district. Accessory uses must not occupy more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total floor area on a site.
6. Prohibited Uses: Uses not associated with a letter in the zoning district column are prohibited uses in the respective zoning
district.
7. Standards: For ease of reference, uses for which specific standards apply include a reference to the applicable code section.
(Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
C. Use Table:
Use Type
Zoning District
References
B-
1
B-
2
B-
3
PB
NB
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 400/454
Accessory structures or uses other than those listed as permitted C
C
C
C
C
Accessory uses or retail sales which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to
the primary use
A
A
A
A
A
Adult uses P
Title 11,
chapter 5
Agricultural uses P
P
P
P
Amusement center P
P
P
Any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct a permitted use; provided, that
such accessory use shall not exceed 30 percent of the floor space of the principal building
A
A
Any incidental repair, processing or storage necessary to conduct a permitted principal
use; provided, that such accessory use shall not occupy more than 20 percent of the
gross floor area of the principal building
A
A
11-10D-2
Armories, convention halls, sports arenas and stadiums C
C
Assembly and packaging (inside a building) P
11-10D-1
Auction establishments, indoor only (including storage), and not for livestock, motorized
vehicles, or farm implement equipment
C
C
Auto body repair C
C
11-10D-6
Automated banking machines A
A
A
A
A
11-10D-2
Automated car wash in conjunction with principal use A
A
A
A
11-10D-1,
11-10D-2,
11-10D-3
Automobile car wash (drive-through, mechanical and self-service) C
C
C
C
11-10D-3
Automobile fluid maintenance station P
P
P
P
11-10D-1,
11-10D-2
Automobile, motorcycle, trailer, recreational vehicles, boats/marine, and farm implement
establishments for display, hire, service, rental and/or sales conducted entirely within a
building, including, as incidental to these major uses, all repair work in connection with
their own and customers' vehicles
P
P
11-4-1, 11-
4-9
Automotive, motorcycle, trailer, recreation vehicles, boats/marine and farm implement
establishments for display, hire, service, rental and/or sales conducted outside a building
C
11-4-1, 11-
4-9
Automotive towing C
11-10D-1
Banks and other financial institutions with a drive-up window C
C
C
C
C
11-10D-1,
11-10D-2
Banks and other financial institutions without drive-up window facilities P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-1,
11-10D-2
Barbershops or beauty shops P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-1,
11-10D-2
Bicycle racks and transit shelters A
A
A
A
A
11-10D-1,
11-10D-2
Bingo games and gambling P
P
P
Title 3,
chapter 2
Blacktop or crushing materials for roadway materials I I I I
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 401/454
Branch post office or shipping supply P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-1,
11-10D-2
Building materials; provided, that they are conducted entirely within an enclosed structure
P
P
11-10D-1
Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises, for a period
not to exceed the time necessary to complete such construction
A
A
A
A
A
11-10D-1,
11-10D-2
Bus passenger depots/terminals C
C
11-10D-2
Business or vocational schools C
C
11-10D-1
Business services and offices, including accounting, advertising, auditing, commercial art,
computer services, mailing, photocopying, and public relations
P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-1,
11-10D-2
Business signs A
A
A
A
A
Cabinetmaking P
11-10D-1
Cafeterias not open to the general public A
A
A
A
11-10D-1,
11-10D-2
Carnivals, circuses or festivals I I I
Casket supplies and monument sales P
P
11-10D-1
Catering establishments P
P
P
11-10D-1
Christmas tree sales lots P
P
P
P
Clinics for human care including medical and dental clinics P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-1,
11-10D-2
Collection offices or public utilities P
P
P
Commercial kennels with outdoor runs C
C
C
11-10D-1
Commercial overnight delivery drop box A
A
A
A
A
11-10D-1,
11-10D-2
Commercial parking for passenger vehicles P
P
P
11-10D-1,
11-3-9
Commercial recreation uses as listed below: C
C
C
Amusement centers where mechanical, electrical and electronic games are played
Arcade parlors
Archery and shooting ranges
Billiards
Bowling alley
Driving ranges
Miniature golf
Pool halls
Skating
Swimming pools
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 402/454
Tennis courts and handball courts, including racquetball and other racket games. Tennis
or racquetball club
3 or more mechanical, electrical or electronic games
Community rooms or centers P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-1,
11-10D-2
Convention, banquet and exhibition halls C
C
Credit card/bank processing P
P
Currency exchanges C
11-10D-4
Dance and/or music studios P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Data processing P
P
P
P
Decorative landscape features A
A
A
A
A
11-10D-2
Dinner and/or live theater P
P
Dry goods and fabrics P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Educational/training centers; excluding elementary, secondary, and private schools P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Electrical generators (backup units) A
A
A
A
A
11-10D-2
Electrical, heating, plumbing, appliances, upholstery or air conditioning sales and service
shops; provided, that they do not have more than 4 commercial vehicles parked outside a
building or storage of equipment, supplies or materials inside a building
P
P
Electrical, heating, plumbing, appliances, upholstery or air conditioning sales and service
shops that have more than 5 commercial vehicles parked outside a building or storage of
equipment, supplies or materials outside a building
C
C
Electromagnetic communication facilities C
C
C
11-4-7
Employment agencies P
P
P
P
P
Equipment rental, inside a building P
P
P
Equipment rental with outside storage C
C
Essential service structures, including, but not limited to, buildings such as telephone
stations, booster or pressure stations, elevated tanks, lift stations and electric power
substations
C
C
C
C
Exterior employee break areas A
A
A
A
A
11-10D-2,
11-10D-8
Exterior storage yards for rental services, lumberyards, and similar uses C
C
C
Farmers' market A
A
A
A
A
11-8A-3(6)
Fencing and other screening techniques A
A
A
A
A
11-10D-2
Funeral homes and mortuaries P
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 403/454
Furniture, upholstering, picture framing, interior decorating studios and furniture repair,
refinish shops and sales
P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Greenhouses and nurseries C
C
Hardware P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Health and physical exercise clubs greater than 3,500 square feet of gross floor area C
C
P
Health and physical exercise clubs, having less than 3,500 square feet of gross floor area
and with no locker room facilities
P
P
P
P
P
Historical buildings, museums, art galleries and theaters for the performing arts C
C
C
Home improvement retail inside a building P
P
P
Hospitals for human care; provided, that all buildings be located not less than 75 feet from
the lot line of any lot in a residential zoning district
C
C
C
C
Hotel, motel and/or conference center - permitted ancillary uses within a hotel and/or
conference center with limited exterior signage approved as part of a conditional use
permit such as: health and fitness center, class I or II restaurants, retail or personal
services, car rental without vehicles occupying off street parking otherwise required by
city ordinance, not to exceed inventory of 10 vehicles per rental agency, banquet facilities,
theater or dinner theater
C
C
C
Indoor self-storage units P
P
P
11-10D-1,
11-10D-2
Institutional uses: adult daycare, charitable or philanthropic institution, childcare center,
housing for senior adults and persons with disabilities
P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Landscape nursery, landscape material sales with enclosed outdoor display and storage P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Lawn and garden centers having exterior storage and display, when in conjunction with
principal use
C
C
C
Lawn and garden centers with no exterior storage and display P
P
P
Manufacture of electronic instruments P
Manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, or indoor storage of products and
materials as an accessory use provided that such activity does not occupy more than 20
percent of the gross floor area of the building
A
Medical, optical and dental offices and laboratories P
P
P
P
P
Motor fuel stations (minor and major) without mechanical service/repair C
C
C
C
11-4-1
Movie theater C
C
C
Municipal buildings and structures, including police, fire, library, museum, art gallery or
studio and community buildings, but not public works garages
P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Nursery schools and daycare centers for all ages - adults and kids P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Nursing homes, congregate care, rest homes or retirement homes; provided, that the site
shall contain not less than 600 square feet of lot area for each person to be
accommodated
C
C
C
Off-sale liquor of 3,000 square feet or less P P P Title 3,
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 404/454
chapter 12
Off-sale liquor with 3,001 square feet or greater P
P
Title 3,
chapter 12
Off street parking, parking decks, parking ramps and off street loading A
A
A
A
A
11-10D-2
Off street parking, storage garage and buildings and loading areas when incidental and
subordinate to any permitted use
A
A
A
A
A
11-3-9, 11-
10D-2
Off street parking when the principal site of the off street parking abuts on a lot which is
another B or I district and is in the same ownership as the land in the B or I district and
subject to those conditions as set forth in this title and such other conditions as are found
necessary by the council to carry out the intent of this title
C
C
C
C
C
Offices for administrative, executive, professional, research or similar organizations, and
laboratories having only limited contact with the general public; where these uses are
permitted, no merchandise is permitted to be sold on the premises
P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
On-sale liquor stores and restaurants with an on-sale liquor license C
C
C
C
Title 3,
chapter 12
Open sales lots or open storage when incidental to a principal use C
C
Opticians and optometrists P
P
P
P
P
Orthopedic and medical appliances P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Outdoor seating or dining A
A
A
A
11-10D-8
Outdoor storage tanks and equipment for products that are used in conjunction with the
primary use
A
A
A
A
11-10D-2
Outdoor temporary/seasonal sales A
A
A
A
11-10D-5
Park and ride facilities P
P
P
Pawnbrokers and secondhand goods dealers C
C
C
Title 3,
chapter 5
Pawnshop C
C
C
Title 3,
chapter 5
Pet shops, including grooming P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Pharmaceutical sales P
P
P
P
Postal substations and post offices P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Print shops/photographic copying P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Printing and silk screening P
P
P
P
Private garages, off street parking and loading spaces A
A
A
A
A
Professional and scientific instrument sales and repair P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Professional services, including architect, attorney, dental and medical, financial services,
insurance, and real estate businesses
P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Public infrastructure and utility uses P P P P P 11-10D-2
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 405/454
Public or governmental services, including libraries, city offices, auditoriums, public
administration buildings, civic centers, school administration offices
P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Public parks P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Public, parochial and private schools, colleges and universities C
C
C
P
Public, quasi-public, and essential service structures that are not permitted uses,
including, but not limited to, buildings such as telephone exchange stations, booster or
pressure stations, lift stations, electric power substations and public utility uses
P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Radio and television studios P
P
P
P
Radio and television towers, satellite dishes, microwave dishes C
C
C
C
Recording studios P
P
P
P
Recycling collection points, exterior storage C
C
C
Rental services, including the leasing of automobiles, utility trailers, household equipment
and similar rental equipment when conducted entirely inside a building
P
P
Research and development of items including, but not limited to: software,
pharmaceuticals, communications, medical devices and the like
P
P
P
Restaurants, classes 1, 2, and 3, excluding drive-up window P
P
P
P
Restaurants, classes 1, 2 and 3 (with drive-up window) C
C
C
Retail uses: Stores and shops selling household goods over a counter or selling personal
services. Included are stores selling such items as: antique, art and school supplies,
appliance and electronics sales and service, automobile parts (excluding auto salvage
parts) and accessories, bakery goods, delicatessens, bagel shops, ice cream and other
specialty stores, bicycles, books, magazines, cards, stationery and newsstands, candy,
camera and photographic supplies, carpets, rugs and floor coverings, china and
glassware, clothing, apparel and costumes, dry goods, floral shops, foods, electric and
household appliances, furniture, fur goods, garden supplies (year round operation only),
groceries, hardware, hobby supplies, jewelry, leather goods and luggage, boat sales that
are within a completely enclosed building, medical supplies, musical instruments, office
supplies, paint and wallpaper, professional and scientific instrument sales and repair,
electronics, audio and visual equipment and accessories, shoes, sign shops (inside a
building), sporting goods, tobacco goods, toys, laundromat and dry cleaning, photography
studios, picture framing, locksmith shops, movie and electronic game sales and rental,
and repair incidental to sale of goods listed above
P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Satellite or microwave dishes and the like A
A
A
A
A
11-4-8
Saunas and massage parlors P
P
P
P
P
Title 3,
chapter 8
Self-storage facility C
C
C
11-10D-7
Sewing centers, machine sales, and sewing classes P
P
P
11-10D-2
Showroom warehouse P
P
P
Sidewalks and trails A
A
A
A
A
11-10D-2
Sign shops, limited to over the counter retail sales of signs, banners or other related P P P P 11-10D-2
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 406/454
graphic imagery
Signs A
A
A
A
A
Title 9,
chapter 8,
11-10D-2
Solar energy incidental to the principal structure A
A
A
A
A
Stockpiling of material I I I I
Tanning salons P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Tattoo and body piercing P
P
P
Tax exempt lodges and clubs; provided, that they are not less than 75 feet from a
residential district
C
C
Teen center P
P
P
P
Telecommuting center P
P
P
P
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the completion
date of such construction
A
A
A
A
A
11-10D-2
Temporary outdoor promotional and merchandising activities (e.g., craft sales, food
stands, car washes, flea markets, and other activities/events deemed similar by the
community development director and not meeting title 5, chapter 5 of this code) lasting 4
or more consecutive days and directed at the general public may be allowed as an
accessory use on the premises of permitted and conditional uses
C
C
11-10D-9
Theaters, drive-in C
Theaters, indoor C
C
C
Travel bureaus/agencies P
P
P
P
P
11-10D-2
Underground parking C
C
C
C
C
11-10D-2
Vehicle repair - conditional use C
C
C
11-10D-6
Vehicle repair - permitted use P
P
P
11-10D-6
Veterinary clinic with outdoor kennels C
C
Veterinary offices and clinics; provided, no kennels or treatment areas are located outside
of the building
P
P
P
P
Wholesale businesses P
P
P
Wind energy conversion systems C
C
C
C
C
11-4-6, 11-
10D-2
Wireless communication facility entirely within an existing building or on the roof or side of
a building, or attached to an existing structure
A
A
A
A
A
11-10D-2
Wireless communications freestanding ground mounted antenna support structure C
C
(Ord. 904, 5-16-2012; amd. Ord. 958, 3-2-2016)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 407/454
ARTICLE C. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-10C-1: MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Standards To Be Observed: The minimum and maximum development standards for each zoning district shown in the
development standards table shall be observed.
B. Development Standards Table:
Development
Standards B-1 B-2 B-3 P-B N-B
Lot area Minimum of 10,000 sq. ft.,
unless the land is adjacent to an
existing commercial area
Minimum of 10,000 sq.
ft., unless the land is
adjacent to an existing
commercial area
Minimum of 2 acres,
unless the land is
adjacent to an existing
commercial area
Minimum
of 1 acre
Maximum
of 5
acres
Minimum lot
width
100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft.
Screening Whenever a B-1 limited
business district abuts or is
across the street, but not on the
side considered to be the front,
from an R district, a screen not
less than 50% opaque nor less
than 6 ft. in height shall be
erected and maintained in the
front portion of the lot or along
the side or rear property line
that abuts the R district, except
adjacent to a street, where it
shall be not less than 3 nor
more than 4 ft. in height
Whenever a B-2 retail
business district abuts
an R district, a screen
not less than 50%
opaque nor less than 6
ft. in height shall be
erected and maintained
along the side or rear
property line that abuts
the residential district,
except adjacent to a
street, where it shall be
not less than 3 nor more
than 4 ft. in height
Whenever a B-3 district
abuts a residential
district, a screen not less
than 50% opaque nor
less than 6 ft. in height;
except adjacent to a
street, where it shall be
not less than 3 ft. nor
more than 4 ft. in height;
shall be erected and
maintained along the
side or rear property line
that abuts the residential
district
Section
11-10D-2
of this
chapter
Maximum
building
height
35 ft. 35 ft., except buildings
over 35 ft. shall be
subject to receiving a
conditional use permit
35 ft., except buildings
over 35 ft. shall be
subject to receiving a
conditional use permit
45 ft. Section
11-10D-2
of this
chapter
Minimum
front yard
30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft.
Minimum side
yard, interior
lot line
10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 30 ft.
Minimum side
yard interior
lot line
adjacent to a
residential
district
30 ft. 30 ft. 75 ft. 75 ft. 75 ft.
Minimum side
yard line
adjacent to a
street
30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. Section
11-10D-2
of this
chapter
Minimum rear
yard
35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 10 ft. 30 ft.
Minimum rear
yard, abutting
a residential
district
75 ft. 75 ft. 75 ft. 75 ft. 75 ft.
Minimum rear
yard, abutting
10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 408/454
a railroad
track right of
way
Maximum
building
coverage
35%
Lot
requirements
Any area zoned B-1 shall
include at least 2 acres, unless
the land is adjacent to an
existing commercial area
Any area zoned B-2 shall
include at least 2 acres,
unless the land is
adjacent to an existing
commercial area
Section
11-10D-2
of this
chapter
(Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
ARTICLE D. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
11-10D-1: PLANNED BUSINESS DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish regulations and standards for the installation and operation of uses, based
upon consideration of the potential objectionable characteristics of such uses. Further, this section prescribes procedures and
methods of measurement of industrial characteristics with which permitted uses must comply.
B. Permit Procedures And Requirements: Any use permitted in the P-B district, whether such use is permitted as a principal,
conditional or accessory use, shall be subject to these standards:
1. Permit Procedure: Before the city issues a building permit for a use in the planned business district, the applicant shall furnish
the director of community development sufficient information to ensure that all performance standards and site development
standards set forth in this title will be complied with. In order to determine whether or not the applicant will meet such
standards, the director of community development may require the applicant to submit the following information:
a. A site plan showing the location of all present and proposed structures, drives, parking lots, waste disposal areas, bulk
storage areas, streets, on site stormwater detention ponds, or other significant features on or within two hundred feet (200')
of the proposed site.
b. Other data and certification as may reasonably be required by the director of community development to reach a
determination.
2. Performance Standards Enumerated: No structure or premises within the P-B district shall be used for one or more of the
following uses unless its use complies with the following regulations:
a. Businesses To Be Conducted Within A Building: Except for off street vehicular parking, off street loading, or as specifically
permitted in other sections of this title, all business, service, storage, merchandise, display, repair, waste disposal, and
processing shall be conducted wholly within a building.
b. Waste Material:
(1) All liquid and solid wastes shall be identified in all processes and operations and approved disposal methods identified.
All waste discharged to the sanitary sewer shall meet the requirements of the city and the rules and regulations of the
Metropolitan Council Wastewater Services. No waste will be permitted to be discharged into the storm sewer system;
provided, that this does not exclude storm drainage, cooling water, and other water not prohibited by any law, rule,
regulation, or ordinance. Storm drainage shall meet the requirements of all state laws, rules, regulations, watershed district
and city requirements as may be amended. Stormwater drainage shall be protected from pollution and contaminants.
(2) All solid waste material, debris, rubbish, junk, refuse or garbage shall be kept within a completely enclosed building or
properly contained within a closed container specifically designed for such purpose. In no case shall noxious or odorous
refuse or garbage be kept outside of a completely enclosed building for a period of time exceeding the interval of refuse
collection by commercial rubbish haulers.
(3) Hazardous wastes generated from any activity or operation shall be properly contained, labeled and stored for transfer to
an authorized processing, storage or burial facility, according to the laws of federal, state, and local requirements.
c. Landscaping: Open landscaped and green areas left in a natural state shall be kept free of litter, debris, and noxious weeds.
d. Vehicles:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 409/454
(1) No storage, display or parking of vehicles shall be permitted in any required yard or landscaped areas.
(2) No commercial vehicle, class I or class II, shall park in front of the principal structure.
e. Utility Lines: All utility service lines including electric, gas, water, sanitary sewer, telephone, and cable shall be placed
underground at the owner's expense for all new structures or new additions which expand the gross square footage by more
than fifty percent (50%), and in those instances in which any new service is provided to an existing building.
f. Loading Docks: Loading docks shall not be permitted along the side of a building which faces a public street.
3. Compliance; Investigations And Tests: In order to ensure compliance with the performance standards set forth above, the city
council may require the owner or operator of any use to have made such investigations and/or tests as may be required to
show adherence to the performance standards. Such investigations and/or tests as are required to be made shall be carried
out by an independent testing organization as may be selected or approved by the city. The cost incurred in such investigation
or testing shall be shared equally by the owner or operator and the city unless the investigations and tests disclose
noncompliance with the performance standards; in which case, the investigation or testing shall be paid by the owner or
operator. (Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
11-10D-2: NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Drive-Through Banks:
1. Each drive-through must have stacking for six (6) vehicles.
2. The drive-through must have a separated designated drive aisle.
3. The drive-through is limited to two (2) drive aisles in total.
B. Motor Fuel Stations:
1. Only one gas station/convenience center is permitted per N-B district.
2. The total square footage for the gas station/convenience center and any accessory structures, including a car wash is limited to
four thousand (4,000) square feet.
3. The station is limited to four (4) pumps, eight (8) pumping stations, unless, after consideration of a traffic study, the city council
finds that additional pumps are necessary to reduce negative traffic impacts.
4. The canopy must be located away from adjoining residential neighborhoods.
5. Canopy lighting must be recessed flush mounted.
6. The canopy face shall be unlit except for the amount allocated to signage.
7. The hours of operation for the gas station/convenience store shall not exceed five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. The hours of operation for the car wash, if applicable, shall not exceed six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
8. The canopy must meet the same setbacks as the motor fuel station listed in section 11-4-1 of this title.
9. The canopy size cannot exceed the aggregate square footage of the other buildings on the site.
C. Structure Height: No structure or building shall exceed twenty five feet (25') in height except as provided in this title. Height greater
than twenty five feet (25'), but not exceeding thirty five feet (35'), would be considered if it is deemed that the expanded height
improves the visual aesthetics of the building. Special consideration will be given for buildings with hip, gabled, or mansard roofs
that would mimic surrounding residential development.
D. Screening And Landscaping:
1. Berms: Wherever a neighborhood business district abuts or is across the street from a residential district, earthen berms at
least four feet (4') in height with landscaping must be erected and maintained along the property lines that face the residential
district. The city council may waive compliance with this paragraph if it finds that site topography and tree preservation provide
equivalent natural screening without berming.
2. Landscape Screening: Landscaping shall consist of compact evergreen or deciduous hedge and over and under story trees in
a buffer strip at least twelve feet (12') in width. At planting, hedge material must be two and one-half feet (21/2') in height and
deciduous trees must be at least five feet (5') in height and with a minimum of two and one-half inch (21/2") caliper. Coniferous
trees must be at least six feet (6') in height.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 410/454
3. Parking Screening: Where any off street parking area contains more than four (4) parking spaces, screening shall be placed on
each side adjoining a residential use or a public street.
4. Loading Area And Loading Dock Screening: All loading docks shall be screened from view on the property's street frontage(s),
or from the neighborhood business district boundary by a wall, earth berms or plant material or combination of these at least
ten feet (10') in height. Such wall shall be designed to be harmonious with the structure having the loading dock.
E. Lot Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications as set forth in this title:
Building setback: front, side and rear yard from exterior district boundaries 30 feet
Parking area setback: front, side and rear yards from exterior district boundaries 25 feet
Minimum separation between buildings 30 feet
Minimum building setback from any public or private road within the district 25 feet
Minimum parking setback from any public or private road within the district 20 feet
F. District Requirements:
1. Size Limitation: A neighborhood business district, N-B may not exceed five (5) acres in size.
2. Location Limitation: Neighborhood business district, N-B must abut upon a designated arterial or collector street.
G. General Performance Standards: Uses within the neighborhood business district, N-B must comply with the requirements in
chapter 6 of this title or the requirements of this section, whichever is more restrictive.
H. Signs:
1. Monument signs must be installed to denote the overall development project within the district.
2. Covenants must be recorded to ensure consistency of signage for all properties in the district. The covenants must identify
permitted sizes, locations, and types of signage.
3. Each tenant within the district is permitted one temporary sign for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days in a calendar year.
I. Parking And Traffic Circulation:
1. The number of parking spaces may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the minimum requirements set forth in section 11-3-9
of this title.
2. The district may be designed to have shared parking and shared private access, provided that traffic safety and circulation are
not compromised, in the judgment of the city council. A traffic study may be required by the city, assessing the ability of shared
parking opportunities.
3. The district must include an internal street system that connects properties within the district.
4. Pedestrian walkways must be provided that connect properties within the district and provide connection to adjoining
residential neighborhoods.
J. Additional Use Restrictions:
1. Area Limitation On Uses: No single use may occupy more than seven thousand (7,000) square feet in a building.
K. Site Design Elements:
1. Entry points to the district must be designed with a common theme. The entrances shall be enhanced with a combination of
landscaping and built material to denote the entrance to the site.
2. Benches, trash receptacles, and outdoor ashtrays must be of a color and style compatible with the project architecture.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 411/454
3. Sidewalks in front of retail shops must incorporate planting beds or planters against any wall area that exceeds four feet (4') in
length.
4. Building architecture must be complementary to existing residential development in the area, and all buildings within the district
must maintain a single architectural theme with consistent use of colors and exterior materials.
5. Exterior materials must be predominately, at least seventy percent (70%), brick, stone and glass on the front elevation. Brick,
stone, integrally colored rock face concrete block, glass, or equivalent products or better on the remaining sides and rear of
structures. Structures must have a facade articulation of base, middle and top. Transparent doors and windows must not
exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total front facade.
6. Three hundred sixty degree (360°) architecture is required. All sides of all buildings are to be treated with the same
architectural style, use of materials, and details as the front elevation of the building, as determined by the city. (Ord. 904, 5-16-
2012)
11-10D-3: AUTOMOBILE CAR WASH:
Automobile car wash is subject to the following:
A. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of the washing operation on adjacent properties and public rights of
way. No car wash use shall be located abutting any residential use or district, unless a public street separates the two (2) uses.
B. The principal building shall be the primary source for screening the stacking and exiting areas from adjacent properties and/or
public rights of way. Landscaping and berming shall be a secondary source for screening the stacking and exiting areas. Should
landscaping and berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an
alternative. Screening walls shall be constructed of the same materials as the principal building and shall not extend more than
twenty five feet (25') without a change in architecture to reduce their mass and appearance. Stacking areas shall have a minimum
of ninety percent (90%) opacity screen to a height of six feet (6') while exiting areas shall have a minimum of fifty percent (50%)
opacity screen to a height of at least four feet (4').
C. All overhead vehicle doors on the building shall remain closed except when a vehicle is entering or exiting the building.
D. Commercial car washes shall have a minimum of six (6) stacking spaces per wash stall. Each space shall be a minimum of nine
feet (9') wide by eighteen feet (18') long.
E. Stacking lanes shall not interfere with circulation in any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area.
F. Untreated water from the car wash shall not be discharged into the storm sewer. (Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
11-10D-4: CURRENCY EXCHANGE PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
In addition to other requirements of this chapter, currency exchanges are subject to the following performance standards:
A. Shall be a minimum of one mile away from another licensed currency exchange business. The distance is measured by a straight
line from the closest points of the property boundary lines involved.
B. Comply with chapter 53A of the Minnesota statutes.
C. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation wishing to operate a currency exchange establishment must obtain annual approval
by the city by December 31 of each year.
D. Shall be a minimum of eight hundred feet (800') away from secondhand goods stores, pawnshops, residential zoning districts
and/or five hundred feet (500') from daycare facilities. The distance is a straight line measured from the closest points of the
property boundary lines involved. (Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
11-10D-5: OUTDOOR TEMPORARY/SEASONAL SALES:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 412/454
Outside merchandise display and storage or equipment may be displayed and offered for sale, rental or lease outside the building
providing that:
A. The merchandise or equipment are adjacent to and project no farther than five feet (5') from the primary building.
B. Where sidewalks are present, a minimum access width of four feet (4') must be provided.
C. Outside display area is limited to a maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the building frontage and not to exceed a total of one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of area. For purposes of this section, a frontage must contain a public or customer entrance or exit
and no space allowed more than two (2) building frontages.
D. Vending machines or cabinets for items such as beverage, ice, DVD rental and propane are limited to a maximum of two (2)
machines or cabinets per building frontage.
E. Outside display to be maintained in an orderly and attractive manner that does not detract from the image of the community or
adjacent businesses.
F. Outside display should be a general representation of the products sold or rented on site, not a storage area for inventory on
pallets. (Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
11-10D-6: VEHICLE REPAIR AS PERMITTED OR CONDITIONAL USES:
A. Vehicle repair as a permitted use is subject to the following:
1. Vehicle repair uses within one hundred feet (100') from a residential use or residential zoning district are prohibited.
2. All repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles shall occur within a closed building, except minor maintenance,
including tire inflation, adding oil, wiper replacement and the like.
3. Outdoor storage of tires, parts, materials and equipment is prohibited.
4. Vehicle repair uses shall designate on a site plan separate areas for customer parking and parked vehicles awaiting repair or
pick up.
5. Public address system outside a building is prohibited.
6. The hours of operation for a vehicle repair use shall be between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.,
seven (7) days per week.
7. A vehicle repair use not meeting these conditions must obtain a conditional use permit from the city; except that vehicle repair
uses in existence as of January 1, 2011, as an accessory or principal use are permitted if they comply with subsections A2, A3,
A4, A5, A6, A8, A9, A10, B3 and B12 of this section; such uses will be deemed legally nonconforming with respect to any
noncompliance with subsections A1 and A11 of this section.
8. Auto body repair is prohibited.
9. Test driving vehicles on local residential streets as described in the transportation element of the adopted future vision 2030
comprehensive plan is prohibited.
10. Repair of commercial vehicle class I and class II is prohibited.
11. Landscaping must be in compliance with section 11-6-5 of this title.
B. Vehicle repair as a conditional use is subject to the following:
1. The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of this use on adjacent properties and public right of way.
2. All repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles shall occur within a closed building, except minor maintenance,
including tire inflation, adding oil, wiper replacement and the like.
3. All overhead vehicle doors facing a residential use or residential zoning district shall remain closed except when a vehicle is
entering or exiting the building.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 413/454
4. Outdoor storage of tire, parts, materials and equipment is prohibited.
5. Vehicle repair uses shall designate on a site plan separate areas for customer parking and parked vehicles awaiting repair or
pick up. Storage of inoperable vehicles awaiting repair that are within one hundred feet (100') from a residential use or
residential zoning district must be enclosed from public view with a solid fence that is six feet (6') in height. A chainlink fence
with slats is not acceptable.
6. Public address system outside a building is prohibited.
7. The hours of operation may be restricted to limit impacts to adjacent uses.
8. Auto body repair is prohibited.
9. Additional landscaping and screening on the site may be required to limit sight and noise impacts on adjacent uses.
10. Test driving vehicles on local residential streets as described in the transportation element of the adopted future vision 2030
comprehensive plan is prohibited.
11. Repair of commercial vehicles class I and class II is prohibited.
12. Advertising signage facing residential uses is prohibited.
13. Landscaping must be in compliance with section 11-6-5 of this title. (Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
11-10D-7: SELF-STORAGE FACILITIES:
Self-storage facilities are subject to the following conditions:
A. Shall not allow maintenance of any vehicles on site, except for minor maintenance such as tire inflation, adding oil, wiper
replacement, and battery replacement.
B. Shall have a security system adequate to limit access to persons renting a storage site.
C. Shall screen all storage, consistent with the requirements of this code.
D. Shall be screened from all public right of way and residential use and/or zone, with an opaque fence, wall or berm not to exceed
eight feet (8') in height, constructed of new materials (chainlink with slats is not an acceptable screening material), and
maintained in good condition.
E. Exterior storage is prohibited.
F. Shall not be located closer than three hundred feet (300') to any residential use and/or zone.
G. All drive aisles and parking surfaces are surfaced with asphalt or concrete.
H. All storage space openings shall be oriented internally to the facility and shall not directly face a public street or adjoining property.
I. An accessory caretaker residence may be permitted with a storage facility, provided it is only used for resident security and
management purposes and the exterior building materials match those of the principal and accessory storage facility structures.
J. The hours of operation of the self-service storage facility shall be restricted to between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
K. Access to the interior of the fenced area shall be available to emergency responders in a manner acceptable to the fire marshal.
L. Common parking space available to all storage units shall be provided at a rate no less than one space per six thousand (6,000)
square feet of storage area. (Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 414/454
11-10D-8: OUTDOOR SEATING OR DINING:
Outdoor seating or dining is subject to the following:
A. The site and enclosure(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of outdoor seating or dining areas on contiguous properties and/or
public right of way.
B. The seating area shall be located on private property along the front, side or rear of the principal building, but shall not be located
within a required setback or on the side abutting any residential use or district.
C. The seating area shall not interfere with circulation in any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area.
D. The seating area shall be located in a controlled or cordoned area acceptable to the city with at least one opening to an
acceptable pedestrian walk.
E. The seating area shall not be permitted within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any residential use or district as measured at the
property line and shall be separated from residential use or district by the principal structure or other method of screening
acceptable to the city. The minimum distance from a residential use or district may be reduced should the city determine the
applicant has added sufficient elements to reduce the impact of this use.
F. No public address system or external music, live or recorded shall be audible from a noncommercial or nonindustrial use or
district.
G. The seating and tables shall consist of good quality patio or cafe type furniture that enhances the appearance of the business.
H. No beverages or food shall be served to persons outside of the designated outdoor seating area.
I. The seating area, if not slab on grade, shall be subject to applicable setback requirements.
J. The seating area shall have a permanent surface of concrete, asphalt, wood or other fabricated construction material.
K. The seating shall be located so as not to compromise safety. Seating shall not obstruct the entrance or any required exits or be
located on landscaping or parking areas. If located on private sidewalks or walkways, it shall be located so as to leave a minimum
of a four foot (4') wide passage for pedestrians. Applicable building and fire codes for ingress and egress shall be met.
L. Additional parking for thirty (30) outdoor seats or less is not required. Any additional seating over thirty (30) seats shall provide
required parking based on one space per three (3) seats and must apply for a conditional use permit.
M. The outdoor seating area shall be subordinate to the principal use and shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the square
footage of the principal use building space.
N. Lighting shall be permitted to the extent that it only illuminates the designated area.
O. The business owner or designated person shall inspect the premises on a daily basis including all adjacent streets, sidewalks,
alleys, parking areas and sidewalks within one hundred feet (100') and remove all litter. Appropriate receptacles for rubbish,
garbage, litter, etc., must be provided in close proximity to the outdoor seating area.
P. Additional conditions may be imposed by the city, including, but not limited to, hours of outdoor seating area use and additional
screening or buffering to residential zoned or used areas.
Q. For establishments with liquor licenses, the following regulations apply in addition to those listed above:
1. The seating shall be located in a compact and contiguous location to the principal structure. No alcoholic beverages shall be
served or consumed in an outdoor seating area unless the liquor license approved by the city specifies the compact and
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 415/454
contiguous location.
2. The outdoor seating area shall be defined with the use of landscaping and permanent attractive fencing which is a minimum of
four feet (4') in height with at least fifty percent (50%) opacity that contains the tables and chairs for the use as demonstrated
on a site plan.
3. No alcoholic beverages shall be served to persons outside of the designated outdoor seating area or those not seated at
tables. Signage shall be posted that restricts consumption of alcohol outside of the designated outdoor seating area.
4. Bars are prohibited in outdoor seating areas (with the exception of a service bar for the exclusive use of the establishment's
employees).
5. Patrons shall only access the outdoor seating area through the interior of the main building and be seated by the
establishment's staff at full service restaurants. No other ingress or egress shall be allowed other than required emergency
exits. (Ord. 904, 5-16-2012)
11-10D-9: TEMPORARY OUTDOOR PROMOTIONAL AND MERCHANDISING ACTIVITIES:
Temporary outdoor promotional and merchandising activities (e.g., craft sales, food stands, car washes, flea markets, and other
activities/events deemed similar by the community development director and not meeting title 5, chapter 5 of this code) lasting four
(4) or more consecutive days and directed at the general public may be allowed as an accessory use on the premises of permitted
and conditional uses, subject to the following performance standards:
A. The outdoor event activity shall not be more than once per week.
B. Tents, stands, and other similar temporary structures and temporary vehicles and mobile equipment may be utilized, provided they
are clearly identified on the submitted plan, and provided that it is determined by the director of community development that they
will not impair parking capacity, emergency access, or the safe and efficient movement of pedestrian and vehicle traffic on or off
the site.
C. The submitted plan clearly demonstrates that adequate off street parking for the proposed event can and will be provided for the
duration of the event. Determination of compliance with this requirement shall be made by the director of community development
who shall consider the nature of the event and the applicable parking requirements of this title.
D. Parking on public rights of way and streets is prohibited.
E. The activity or event shall not interrupt vehicular circulation on the site or obstruct parking spaces needed by permanent
businesses established on the site.
F. Shall have written authorization from property owner.
G. The business operator shall secure all applicable licenses and approvals from the city, Washington County, or other appropriate
jurisdictions.
H. Signage related to the event shall be in compliance with the city's sign ordinance.
I. All sales must be conducted at least thirty feet (30') from the right of way line of any street and one hundred feet (100') from any
developed property zoned for residential use.
J. Hours of operation shall be limited by permit based upon location and proposed activity.
K. Adequate sanitary facilities are provided on site.
L. No permanent or temporary lighting shall be installed without an electrical permit and inspection.
M. The site shall be cleared of all debris and all temporary structures at the end of the event.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 416/454
N. The display of items shall be limited to representative samples and arranged in a compact manner as reasonably practicable.
O. The conditional use permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed three (3) years from the date of approval. (Ord. 904, 5-16-
2012)
Chapter 11
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
11-11-1: PURPOSE STATEMENTS:
A. I-1 Limited Industry District: The I-1 limited industry district is intended to provide for industrial uses that may be suitably located in
areas of relatively close proximity to nonindustrial development. The uses in this district include service industries and industries
which manufacture, fabricate, assemble or store products where the process is not likely to create offensive noise, vibrations,
dust, heat, smoke, odor, glare, or other objectionable influences to other property in close proximity. Generally, these uses include
wholesale, service and light industries which are dependent upon raw materials refined elsewhere. Properties zoned I-1 will be
located within the metropolitan urban service area (MUSA) and served by public utility systems.
B. I-2 General Industrial District: The I-2 general industrial district is intended to provide a district which is appropriate for
manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of products which are of a more intense use than the I-1
district. Property zoned I-2 will be located within the metropolitan urban service area (MUSA) and served by public utility systems.
C. I-3 Heavy Industrial District: The I-3 heavy industrial district is to provide areas suitable for industrial uses which are more intense
than the I-2 district and may have greater impact to noncommercial land uses. Property zoned I-3 will be located outside the
metropolitan urban service area (MUSA).
D. I-4 Commercial Excavation District: The I-4 commercial excavation district is to provide for the availability of sand, gravel and
other mineral deposits or materials. This district seeks to permit other land uses as long as it will not conflict with adjacent land
uses. (Ord. 621, 12-20-1995)
E. I-5 Railroad Access Industrial District: The I-5 railroad access industrial district provides areas with direct access to railroad lines
which are suitable for uses that rely on railroad shipments. The types of uses allowed in the I-5 district include manufacturing,
processing, and distribution of products. (Ord. 782, 12-21-2005)
11-11-2: PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES:
A. Except as provided in this title or otherwise as provided by law, a principal building, structure or land use shall be permitted only in
the zones indicated in the following table. A principal use listed in the table in any zone denoted by the letter "P" is permitted, the
letter "C" is a conditional use and the letter "A" is an accessory use. The uses in table 1 of this section are permitted in the zones
designated. However, the director of community development shall have the right to allow any other use which is similar to and
compatible with those uses permitted in the district. Such a determination by the director of community development shall be in
writing. (Ord. 914, 5-15-2013)
TABLE 1
PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN ZONES
I-1 I-2 I-3 I-4 I-5
1. High capacity sanitary sewer discharge:
Bottling works P P P
Bus maintenance shops and bus parking lots C C C
Cans and other container manufacturing C C C
Carpet and rug cleaning plants P P P
Clinics P P
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 417/454
Hotels and motels P
Laundry and dry cleaning P P P
Motor fuel stations/truck stops C C C C
Offices P P P P
Pharmaceutical manufacturing C P P
Plastics manufacturing and fabrication C P P
Private vocation/technical schools P P P P
Processing and packaging food products C C C
Restaurants P P P P
Wastewater treatment facilities C C C
2. Low capacity sanitary sewer discharge:
Agricultural, excluding greenhouses P P P P P
Agricultural implement sales, service, and storage (inside the principal structure) C C C
Appliance repair P P P P
Archery ranges (inside the principal structure) P P P P P
Armories and convention halls C C C
Assembly and packaging (inside the principal structure) C P P P
Auction halls C C C C
Auto body and painting (inside the principal structure) P P P
Automobile distribution facilities C
Automobile repair (inside the principal structure) P P P
Bakeries P P P
Boat, trailer, marine sales (inside the principal structure) P P
Broadcasting studios (television and radio) P P P P
Builder's supply yards and lumberyards (having outdoor storage) C
Bulk materials storage (inside the principal structure) C C
Ceramic products P P
Credit card/bank processing P P
Electromagnetic communications facilities C C C C C
Essential services (public utilities) P P P P P
Furniture repair, refinishing shops and sales P P P P
Glue manufacturing P P
Greenhouses (commercial production) P P P
Greenhouses (inside the principal structure) C P
Gun clubs (inside the principal structure) P P P P
Ice, cold storage P P P
Limited automotive sales (inside the principal structure) A
Machine shops P P P
Manufacture of electronic instruments P P P P
Metal polishing and plating P P P
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 418/454
Millworking P P P
Mining and excavation P
Municipal buildings (office/public safety buildings) P P P P P
Municipal buildings (storage buildings) P P P P
Nature centers (private or public) P
Nursery and garden supplies (exterior or enclosed sales) C C C
Parcel delivery services P P P
Plumbing, electrical and carpenter shops P P P
Primarily gas fired power plants/cogeneration power plants C C
Public enclosed rental storages or garages C C P P
Public utility installations P P P P P
Publishing plants (printing) P P P
Recycling operations other than reduction or processing of refuse, trash, and garbage C C C
Research, testing and scientific laboratories P P P
Sign shops C C
Sign shops (inside the principal structure) P P P P
Stonecutting (inside the principal structure) P P P
Storage of crude oil, refined oil, alcohol and other liquids (inside the principal structure) C C
Truck, service and maintenance stations (inside the principal structure) C C C
Utility stations and substations P P P P P
Veterinarian hospitals/clinics (inside the principal structure) P P
Warehouses and enclosed storages P P P P
Welding shops P P P
Well drilling services P P
(Ord. 873, 2-3-2010; amd. Ord. 914, 5-15-2013)
B. Prohibited uses:
1. Commercial waste incineration facilities. (Ord. 873, 2-3-2010)
11-11-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
The following accessory uses shall be permitted within any industrial district:
1.Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction for the construction period only.
2.Essential security and safety facilities as approved by the city council.
3.Off street parking, storage garages and buildings and loading areas when incidental and subordinate to any permitted use
and as regulated in this title.
4.Outdoor parking of trucks and vehicles incidental to the principal use.
5.Outside, aboveground storage facilities for gaseous, nonliquid fuels used for heating purposes, or for purposes incidental to
the approved principal uses and not for sale.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 419/454
6.Railroad spurs.
7.Residential structures and related residential uses necessary for security and safety.
8.Signs as regulated in title 9, chapter 8 of this code.
9.Within the I-2 district, outdoor testing of window and door products when conducted within an area screened by a minimum of
a six foot (6') high fence or landscaped earth berm.
10.Farmers' market, subject to compliance of the criteria established in section 11-8A-3 of this title, "Farmers' market on
nonresidential property...". (Ord. 621, 12-20-1995; amd. Ord. 673, 12-15-1999; Ord. 840, 6-18-2008; Ord. 841, 8-13-2008)
11-11-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following table of minimum lot area, yard and bulk requirements shall be observed:
TABLE 2
MINIMUM LOT AREA, YARD, AND BULK REQUIREMENTS IN ALL ZONES
I-1 I-2 I-3 I-4 I-5
Lot area2 1 acre 1 acre 2 acres 20 acres 1 acre
Lot width3 125 feet 175 feet 200 feet 200 feet 175 feet
Front yard setback 40 feet 40 feet 100 feet 100 feet 40 feet
Side yard setback:
Interior 15 feet 40 feet1 50 feet 100 feet 40 feet1
Abutting an R district 100 feet 125 feet 150 feet 200 feet 125 feet
Adjacent to a street 40 feet 80 feet 50 feet 125 feet 80 feet
Rear yard setback: 30 feet 60 feet 60 feet 100 feet 60 feet
Abutting an R district 100 feet 100 feet 150 feet 200 feet 100 feet
Building height 35 feet 45 feet 60 feet 60 feet 45 feet
Maximum building coverage 35 percent 45 percent 50 percent 20 percent 45 percent
Notes:
1. 40 feet, plus 1 foot for each foot of building height over 30 feet.
2. No minimum lot area is required for essential public services.
3. No minimum lot width is required for essential public services.
(Ord. 787, 3-15-2006)
11-11-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish regulations and standards for the installation and operation of industrial uses,
based upon consideration of the objectionable characteristics of such uses and the zones in which they are permitted. Further,
this section is intended to prescribe procedures and methods of measurement of industrial characteristics subject to such
standards. (Ord. 621, 12-20-1995; amd. 2000 Code)
B. Permit Procedures And Requirements: Any use permitted in the I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4, or I-5 district, whether such use is permitted as a
principal, conditional or accessory use, shall be subject to: (Ord. 782, 12-21-2005)
1. Permit Procedure: Before the city issues a building permit for a use in any industrial district, the applicant shall furnish the
director of community development sufficient information to ensure that all performance standards and site development
standards set forth in this title will be met. In order to determine whether or not the applicant will meet such standards, the
director of community development may require the applicant to submit the following information:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 420/454
a. A site plan showing the location of all present and proposed structures, drives, parking lots, waste disposal areas, bulk
storage areas, streets, on site storm water detention ponds, or other significant features on or within two hundred feet (200')
of the proposed site.
b. A description of the activity to be conducted regarding waste products, external effects or other conditions which are
regulated herein; provided, however, that if there is any trade secret information that would be disclosed in the application,
the applicant must state if the necessary information demonstrating compliance with the building code and fire code can be
provided without disclosing the trade secret.
c. The type and location of abatement devices to control, or recording instruments to measure, conformance with required
standards, not including devices and instruments which are inherent in the manufacturing process.
d. Other data and certification as may reasonably be required by the director of community development to reach a
determination. (Ord. 621, 12-20-1995; amd. 2000 Code)
2. Performance Standards Enumerated: No structure or premises within any industrial district shall be used for one or more of the
following uses unless its use complies with the following regulations:
a. Outdoor Storage Within The I-1, I-2, And I-3 Districts: All business, service, storage, merchandise, display, repair, waste
disposal, and processing must be conducted wholly within a building, except for off street vehicular parking, and off street
loading and uses specifically listed as including outdoor storage. Within the I-5 district, outdoor storage is allowed, with a
conditional use permit, when the following standards are met:
(1) All outdoor storage areas must be completely screened from all public streets and adjacent properties not in the I-5
district. Such screening must include a combination of earth berms and landscaping. Fences and walls will be considered
as screening devices only when the city finds that berming and landscaping are not practical.
(2) All lighting of open storage areas must comply with the provisions of section 11-6-8, "Glare", of this title. (Ord. 782, 12-21-
2005)
b. Vibration: Ground transmitted steady state or impact vibration caused by any use or activity is not permitted at any point on
or beyond the boundary line of any lot. "Steady state vibrations", for the purpose of this title, are vibrations which are
continuous or vibrations in discrete pulses more frequent than one hundred (100) per minute.
c. Glare And Heat: Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within an enclosure so as not to be
perceptible at the property line.
d. Waste Material:
(1) All liquid and solid wastes shall be identified in all processes and operations and approved disposal methods identified.
All waste discharged to the sanitary sewer shall meet the requirements of the city and the rules and regulations of the
metropolitan council wastewater services. All proposed discharges to the storm sewer shall be identified. No waste will be
permitted to be discharged into the storm sewer system; provided, that this does not exclude storm drainage, cooling
water, and other water not prohibited by any law, rule, regulation, or ordinance. Storm drainage shall meet the
requirements of all state laws, rules, regulations, watershed district requirements, and city requirements. Storm water
drainage shall be protected from pollution and contaminants.
(2) All solid waste material, debris, rubbish, junk, refuse or garbage shall be kept within a completely enclosed building or
properly contained within a closed container specifically designed for such purpose. In no case shall noxious or odorous
refuse or garbage be kept outside of a completely enclosed building for a period of time exceeding the average interval of
refuse collection by commercial rubbish haulers.
(3) Hazardous wastes generated from any activity or operation shall be properly contained, labeled and stored for transfer to
an authorized processing, storage or burial facility, according to the laws of federal, state, and local requirements.
e. Noise:
(1) Noise levels inside and outside of all buildings must meet federal, state, and local requirements.
(2) No outdoor public address systems shall be permitted.
f. Dust, Dirt, Smoke, Odor, Gases: All solid and liquid particulate, smoke, gases, toxic or noxious materials and other materials
emitting odors shall be regulated by the standards of the MPCA.
g. Landscaping: Open landscaped and green areas left in a natural state shall be kept free of litter, debris, and noxious weeds.
h. Manufacture Of Certain Products Prohibited: Manufacture of a product which decomposes by detonation is prohibited.
i. Access Drives: Access drives must not be closer than seventy five feet (75') to the intersection of the nearest curb of any
public street unless it can be demonstrated that adherence to this standard will cause undue hardship to the property owner.
j. Vehicle Parking, Storage And Display:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 421/454
(1) No storage, display or parking of vehicles shall be permitted in any required yard or landscaped areas.
(2) Commercial vehicles, classes I and II, are prohibited from parking in front of the principal structure.
k. Utility Lines: All utility service lines including electric, gas, water, sanitary sewer, telephone, and cable shall be placed
underground at the owner's expense for all new structures or new additions which expand the gross square footage by more
than fifty percent (50%), and in those instances in which any new service is provided to an existing building.
l. Loading Docks: Loading docks shall not be permitted along the side of a building which faces a public street.
3. Compliance; Investigations And Tests: In order to ensure compliance with the performance standards set forth above, the city
council may require the owner or operator of any use to have made such investigations and/or tests as may be required to
show adherence to the performance standards. Such investigations and/or tests as are required to be made shall be carried
out by an independent testing organization as may be selected or approved by the city. The cost incurred in such investigation
or testing shall be shared equally by the owner or operator and the city unless the investigations and tests disclose
noncompliance with the performance standards; in which case, the investigation or testing shall be paid by the owner or
operator. (Ord. 621, 12-20-1995; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 12
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
11-12-1: AUTHORITY; FINDINGS OF FACT; PURPOSE:
A. Statutory Authority: The legislature of the state of Minnesota, in Minnesota statutes chapters 103F and 462, has delegated the
responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
B. Findings Of Fact: The city council of the city of Cottage Grove makes the following findings:
1. The flood hazard areas of the city of Cottage Grove, Minnesota, are subject to periodic inundation which results in potential
loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures or flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
2. This chapter is based upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established
by the Minnesota department of natural resources.
3. This chapter is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program codified as 44 code of
federal regulations parts 59-78, as amended, so as to maintain eligibility of the Cottage Grove community in the national flood
insurance program.
C. Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize
those losses described in this section. (Ord. 872, 2-3-2010)
11-12-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Lands To Which Chapter Applies: This chapter applies to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city as shown on the city's official
zoning map and the attachments thereto as being located within the boundaries of the floodway, flood fringe, or general floodplain
districts.
B. Establishment Of Official Zoning Map: The official zoning map together with all attachments thereto is hereby adopted by
reference. The attachments to the official zoning map include the flood insurance study for Washington County, Minnesota, and
incorporated areas and flood insurance rate map panels therein numbered 27163C0392E, 27163C0394E, 27163C0403E,
27163C0405E, 27163C0410E, 27163C0411E, 27163C0412E, 27163C0413E, 27163C0414E, 27163C0416E, 27163C0417E,
27163C0418E, 27163C0419E, 27163C0430E and 27163C0438E, all dated February 3, 2010, and prepared by the federal
emergency management agency. The official zoning map shall be on file in the office of the city clerk.
C. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation: The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be seven hundred feet (700') above mean
sea level or an elevation no lower than one foot (1') above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation
caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway, whichever is greater.
D. Interpretation:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 422/454
1. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state
statutes.
2. The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map. Where interpretation
is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the official zoning map, as for example where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions and there is a formal appeal of the
decision of the zoning administrator, the board of zoning appeals shall make the necessary interpretation. All decisions will be
based on elevations on the regional (100-year) flood profile, the ground elevations that existed on the site at the time the city
adopted its initial floodplain ordinance or on the date of the first national flood insurance program map showing the area within
the 100-year floodplain if earlier, and other available technical data. Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the board of zoning appeals and to submit technical evidence.
E. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail. The regulations in this chapter are in addition to rather than in substitution of regulations imposed by any other zoning
classification for designated floodplains. In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this chapter and other city
code provision, the more restrictive provision shall prevail.
F. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: This chapter does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses permitted
within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
G. Severability: If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
H. Annexations: The flood insurance rate map panels adopted by reference in this section may include floodplain areas that lie
outside of the corporate boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of this chapter. If any of these floodplain land areas are
annexed into the city after the date of adoption of this chapter, the newly annexed floodplain lands shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter immediately upon the date of annexation into the city. (Ord. 872, 2-3-2010)
11-12-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICT OVERLAY:
A. Flood Management Overlay Districts:
1. Floodway District: The floodway district shall include those areas designated as floodway on the flood insurance rate map
adopted in section 11-12-2 of this chapter.
2. Flood Fringe District: The flood fringe district shall include those areas designated as floodway fringe. The flood fringe district
shall include those areas shown on the flood insurance rate map as adopted in section 11-12-2 of this chapter as being within
zone AE but being located outside of the floodway.
3. General Floodplain District: The general floodplain district shall include those areas designated as zone A and zone AE without
a floodway on the flood insurance rate map adopted in section 11-12-2 of this chapter.
B. Compliance: No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted,
or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses
within the jurisdiction of this chapter. Within the floodway, flood fringe and general floodplain districts, all uses not listed as
permitted uses or conditional uses in sections 11-12-4, 11-12-5 and 11-12-6 of this chapter that follow, respectively, shall be
prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here that:
1. New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the
general provisions of this chapter and specifically section 11-12-9 of this chapter.
2. Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal maintenance and repair, or repair after damage to existing
nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the general provisions of this chapter
and specifically section 11-12-11 of this chapter.
3. As built elevations for elevated or floodproofed structures must be certified by ground surveys and floodproofing techniques
must be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified in the general provisions of this
chapter and specifically as stated in section 11-12-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 872, 2-3-2010)
11-12-4: FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW):
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 423/454
A. Permitted Uses:
1. General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop
harvesting.
2. Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport landing strips.
3. Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming
areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet
ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or multiple purpose recreational trails.
4. Residential lawns, gardens, accessory parking areas, and play areas.
B. Standards For Floodway Permitted Uses:
1. The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
2. The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district.
3. The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations
or storage of materials or equipment.
C. Conditional Uses:
1. Structures accessory to permitted uses listed above.
2. Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.
3. Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures.
4. Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines.
5. Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials, other than fuel storage tanks.
6. Placement of fill or construction of fences.
7. Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of record or in existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type
campgrounds, subject to the exemptions and provisions of subsection 11-12-9C of this chapter.
8. Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect
individual structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or
less than the 10-year frequency flood event.
D. Standards For Floodway Conditional Uses:
1. All Uses: No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of
materials or equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause any increase in the stage of the 100-
year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.
2. Conditional Uses: All floodway conditional uses are subject to the procedures and standards contained in subsection 11-12-
10D of this chapter.
3. Conditional Use Permissible: The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district.
4. Fill:
a. Fill, dredge spoil, and all other similar materials deposited or stored in the floodplain shall be protected from erosion by
vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
b. Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be allowed in the floodway unless a long term site development
plan is submitted which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
c. As an alternative, and consistent with subsection D4b of this section, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations
may allow temporary, on site storage of fill or other materials which would have caused an increase to the stage of the 100-
year or regional flood but only after the city has received an appropriate plan which assures the removal of the materials from
the floodway based upon the flood warning time available. The conditional use permit must be recorded in the office of the
county recorder or county registrar of titles, as appropriate.
5. Accessory Structures:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 424/454
a. Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
b. Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters:
(1) Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
(2) So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining
structures.
c. Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry floodproofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2
floodproofing classifications in the state building code. As an alternative, an accessory structure may be floodproofed to the
FP-3 or FP-4 floodproofing classification in the state building code provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal
investment, does not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in size at its largest projection, and for a detached garage, the
detached garage must be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. All floodproofed accessory structures must
meet the following additional standards:
(1) The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be
designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;
(2) Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation
or properly floodproofed; and
(3) To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of two (2) "automatic" openings in the
outside walls of the structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding. There must be openings on at least two (2) sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings
must be no higher than one foot (1') above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a
garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.
6. Storage Of Materials And Equipment:
a. The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human,
animal, or plant life is prohibited.
b. Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a
flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the city council.
7. Structural Works: Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross section of protected wetlands
or public waters shall be subject to the provisions of Minnesota statutes, chapter 103G. Community wide structural works for
flood control intended to remove areas from the regulatory floodplain shall not be allowed in the floodway.
8. Levee, Dike Or Floodwall In Floodway: A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not cause an increase to the
100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
(Ord. 872, 2-3-2010)
11-12-5: FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF):
A. Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or structures listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use
district(s). All permitted uses shall comply with the standards for flood fringe district "permitted uses" listed in subsection B of this
section and subsection E, "Standards For All Flood Fringe Uses", of this section.
B. Standards For Flood Fringe Permitted Uses:
1. All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or
above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures shall be no lower than one foot (1')
below the regulatory flood protection elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least fifteen feet (15') beyond the
outside limits of the structure erected thereon.
2. As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed five
hundred (500) square feet at its largest projection may be internally floodproofed in accordance with subsection 11-12-4D5c of
this chapter.
3. The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill is located on the
parcel shall be allowable only as a conditional use, unless said fill is specifically intended to elevate a structure in accordance
with subsection B1 of this section.
4. The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
5. The provisions of subsection E of this section shall apply.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 425/454
C. Conditional Uses: Any structure that is not elevated on fill or floodproofed in accordance with subsections B1 through B2 of this
section or any use of land that does not comply with the standards in subsections B3 through B4 of this section shall only be
allowable as a conditional use. An application for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and evaluation
procedures specified in subsections D and E of this section and subsection 11-12-10D of this chapter.
D. Standards For Flood Fringe Conditional Uses:
1. Alternative Methods: Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to elevate a structure's lowest floor
above the regulatory flood protection elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of stilts, pilings, parallel walls,
etc., or above grade, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall
be considered above grade and not a structure's basement or lowest floor if: a) the enclosed area is above grade on at least
one side of the structure; b) it is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood resistant materials; and c) it is used
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The above noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the
following additional standards:
a. Design And Certification: The structure's design and as built condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect as being in compliance with the general design standards of the state building code and, specifically, that all
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to prevent floodwater from entering or accumulating within these
components during times of flooding.
b. Specific Standards For Above Grade, Enclosed Areas: Above grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck
under garages must be designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
(1) A minimum area of openings in the walls where internal flooding is to be used as a floodproofing technique. There shall
be a minimum of two (2) openings on at least two (2) sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no
higher than one foot (1') above grade. The automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered professional engineer or architect
certifies that a smaller net area would suffice. The automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters without any form of human
intervention; and
(2) That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in
the state building code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles or storage.
2. Basements: Basements, as defined by section 11-1-3 of this title, shall be subject to the following:
a. Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation.
b. Nonresidential basements may be allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation provided the basement is
structurally dry floodproofed in accordance with subsection D3 of this section.
3. Floodproofing Structures Below Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation: All areas of nonresidential structures including
basements to be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the structurally
dry floodproofing classifications in the state building code. Structurally dry floodproofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-2
floodproofing classification in the state building code and this shall require making the structure watertight with the walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be
permitted.
4. Erosion/Sedimentation Control Plan: When at any one time more than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill or other similar
material is located on a parcel for such activities as on site storage, landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads,
dredge spoil disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion/sedimentation control plan must be submitted unless
the city is enforcing a state approved shore land management ordinance. In the absence of a state approved shore land
ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the
100-year or regional flood event. The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer or other
qualified individual acceptable to the city council. The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the material
from the floodplain if adequate flood warning time exists.
5. Storage Of Materials And Equipment:
a. The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human,
animal, or plant life is prohibited.
b. Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a
flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the city council.
6. Other Provisions That Apply: The provisions of subsection E of this section shall also apply.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 426/454
E. Standards For All Flood Fringe Uses:
1. All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an elevation not more than two feet (2') below the
regulatory flood protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the board of zoning appeals must specify
limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate
flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.
2. Commercial uses: Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the employees or the general public
shall not be granted in the absence of a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth and velocity such that when multiplying the depth (in feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the product
number exceeds four (4) upon occurrence of the regional flood.
3. Manufacturing and industrial uses: Measures shall be taken to minimize interference with normal plant operations especially
along streams having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards and parking lots may be at lower
elevations subject to requirements set out in subsection E2 of this section. In considering permit applications, due consideration
shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires that it be located in floodplain areas.
4. Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other
acceptable method. The federal emergency management agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special
flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation; FEMA's
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot
developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood
hazard area designation will be requested.
5. Floodplain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any
tributary watercourse or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not been specified on the official
zoning map.
6. Standards for recreational vehicles are contained in subsection 11-12-9C of this chapter.
7. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation,
collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over the top or frame ties
to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(Ord. 872, 2-3-2010)
11-12-6: GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT:
A. Permissible Uses:
1. The uses listed in subsection 11-12-4A of this chapter shall be permitted uses.
2. All other uses shall be subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation criteria pursuant to subsection B of this section. Section
11-12-4 of this chapter shall apply if the proposed use is in the floodway district and section 11-12-5 of this chapter shall apply if
the proposed use is in the flood fringe district.
B. Procedures For Floodway And Flood Fringe Determinations Within The General Floodplain District:
1. Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within the general floodplain district, the applicant shall be required
to furnish such of the following information as is deemed necessary by the zoning administrator for the determination of the
regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the proposed use is within the floodway or flood fringe district.
a. A typical valley cross section(s) showing the channel of the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the
channel, cross sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high water information.
b. A surface view plan showing elevations or contours of the ground, pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations, the size,
location, and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site, and the location and elevations of
streets.
c. Photographs showing existing land uses, vegetation upstream and downstream, and soil types.
d. A profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream for at least five hundred feet (500') in either
direction from the proposed development.
2. The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above information to a designated engineer or other expert person
or agency for technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in the floodway or flood fringe district and to
determine the regulatory flood protection elevation. Procedures consistent with Minnesota rules, parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200
and 44 code of federal regulations part 65 shall be followed in this expert evaluation. The designated engineer or expert is
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 427/454
strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed technical evaluation methodology with the respective department of natural
resources area hydrologist prior to commencing the analysis. The designated engineer or expert shall:
a. Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.
b. Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank
areas.
c. Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional flood without increasing flood stages more than 0.5 foot. A
lesser stage increase than 0.5 foot shall be required if, as a result of the additional stage increase, increased flood damages
would result. An equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be assumed in computing
floodway boundaries.
3. The zoning administrator shall present the technical evaluation and findings of the designated engineer or expert to the city
council. The city council must formally accept the technical evaluation and the recommended floodway and/or flood fringe
district boundary or deny the permit application. The city council, prior to official action, may submit the application and all
supporting data and analyses to the federal emergency management agency, the department of natural resources or the
planning commission for review and comment. Once the floodway and flood fringe district boundaries have been determined,
the city council shall refer the matter back to the zoning administrator who shall process the permit application consistent with
the applicable provisions of sections 11-12-4 and 11-12-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 872, 2-3-2010)
11-12-7: SUBDIVISIONS:
A. Review Criteria: No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or
sewage treatment facilities. All lots within the floodplain districts shall be able to contain a building site outside of the floodway
district at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that
comply with the provisions of this chapter and have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no
lower than two feet (2') below the regulatory flood protection elevation. For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the floodway and
flood fringe district boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads shall be
clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
B. Floodway/Flood Fringe Determinations In The General Floodplain District: In the general floodplain district, applicants shall
provide the information required in subsection 11-12-6B of this chapter to determine the 100-year flood elevation, the floodway
and flood fringe district boundaries and the regulatory flood protection elevation for the subdivision site.
C. Removal Of Special Flood Hazard Area Designation: The federal emergency management agency (FEMA) has established
criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year
flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure
or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special
flood hazard area designation will be requested. (Ord. 872, 2-3-2010)
11-12-8: PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS, AND BRIDGES:
A. Public Utilities: All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the
floodplain shall be floodproofed in accordance with the state building code or elevated to above the regulatory flood protection
elevation.
B. Public Transportation Facilities: Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the floodplain shall comply with sections
11-12-4 and 11-12-5 of this chapter. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided where failure or
interruption of these transportation facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are
essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation
where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety.
C. On Site Sewage Treatment And Water Supply Systems: Where public utilities are not provided:
1. On site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and
2. New or replacement on site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters and they shall not be subject to impairment or
contamination during times of flooding.
Any sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the state's current statewide standards for on site sewage
treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this section. (Ord. 872, 2-3-2010)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 428/454
11-12-9: MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND PLACEMENT OF
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
A. New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on
subdivisions by section 11-12-7 of this chapter.
B. The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record
that are located in floodplain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only if elevated in compliance with
section 11-12-5 of this chapter. If vehicular road access for preexisting manufactured home parks is not provided in accordance
with subsection 11-12-5E1 of this chapter, then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the property owner(s)
develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the city council.
1. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation,
collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over the top or frame ties
to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
C. Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified in subsection C1 of this section shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter and as specifically spelled out in subsections C3 through C4 of this section.
1. Exemption: Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in
subsection C2 of this section and meet the following criteria:
a. Have current licenses required for highway use.
b. Are highway ready meaning that they are on wheels or an internal jacking system, are attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks, and the recreational vehicle has no
permanent structural type additions attached to it.
c. The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible in the underlying zoning district.
2. Areas Exempted For Placement Of Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles that meet the criteria in subsection C1 of this
section are exempt from the provisions of this chapter only if they are placed in one of the following locations:
a. Individual lots or parcels of record.
b. Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.
c. As part of an existing condominium type association.
3. Recreational Vehicles Exempted: Recreational vehicles exempted in subsection C1 of this section lose the exemption when
development occurs on the parcel exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a structural addition to the recreational vehicle
or exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for an accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The recreational
vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the
elevation/floodproofing requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in sections 11-12-4 and 11-12-5 of this chapter.
There shall be no development or improvement on the parcel or attachment to the recreational vehicle that hinders the removal
of the recreational vehicle to a flood free location should flooding occur.
4. New Recreational Vehicle Parks Or Campgrounds: New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and new
residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five (5)
units or dwelling sites shall be subject to the following:
a. Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in the floodway or flood fringe districts provided said recreational
vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection elevation and proper elevated road access to
the site exists in accordance with subsection 11-12-5E1 of this chapter. No fill placed in the floodway to meet the
requirements of this section shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or regional flood.
b. All new or replacement recreational vehicles not meeting the criteria of subsection C4a of this section may, as an alternative,
be allowed as a conditional use if in accordance with the following provisions and the provisions of subsection 11-12-10D of
this chapter. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-
year flood. Said plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual, shall demonstrate that adequate
time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation, and shall demonstrate the provisions of subsections C1a and C1b of
this section will be met. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement recreational vehicles must be
protected or constructed so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with subsection 11-
12-8C of this chapter. (Ord. 872, 2-3-2010)
11-12-10: ADMINISTRATION:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 429/454
A. Zoning Administrator: The zoning administrator shall administer and enforce this chapter. If the zoning administrator finds a
violation of the provisions of this chapter the zoning administrator shall notify the person responsible for such violation in
accordance with the procedures stated in section 11-12-12 of this chapter.
B. Permit Requirements:
1. Permit Required: A permit issued by the zoning administrator in conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall be secured
prior to the erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), or alteration of any
building, structure, or portion thereof; prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure, or land; prior to the construction
of a dam, fence, or on site septic system; prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a
structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source; and prior to the placement of fill, excavation of
materials, or the storage of materials or equipment within the floodplain.
2. Application For Permit: Application for a permit shall be made in duplicate to the zoning administrator on forms furnished by the
zoning administrator and shall include the following where applicable: plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of materials; and the location of
the foregoing in relation to the stream channel.
3. State And Federal Permits: Prior to granting a permit or processing an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the
zoning administrator shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits.
4. Certificate Of Zoning Compliance For A New, Altered, Or Nonconforming Use: It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the
use or occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, altered, or
enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the zoning administrator
stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
5. Construction And Use To Be As Provided On Applications, Plans, Permits, Variances And Certificates Of Zoning Compliance:
Permits, conditional use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of approved plans and applications
authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use,
arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter, and punishable as provided by section 11-12-12 of this chapter.
6. Certification: The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect,
or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. Floodproofing measures shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect.
7. Record Of First Floor Elevation: The zoning administrator shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the floodplain. The zoning administrator
shall also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are floodproofed.
8. Notifications For Watercourse Alterations: The zoning administrator shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and
the commissioner of the department of natural resources prior to the city authorizing any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to Minnesota statutes,
chapter 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the commissioner of natural resources. A copy of said notification shall
also be submitted to the Chicago regional office of the federal emergency management agency (FEMA).
9. Notification To FEMA When Physical Changes Increase Or Decrease The 100-Year Flood Elevation: As soon as is practicable,
but not later than six (6) months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the zoning administrator shall
notify the Chicago regional office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific data.
C. Board Of Zoning Appeals:
1. Rules: The board of zoning appeals shall adopt rules for the conduct of business and may exercise all of the powers conferred
on such boards by state law.
2. Administrative Review: The board of zoning appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
3. Variances: The board of zoning appeals may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of
this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such as hardship, practical difficulties
or circumstances unique to the property under consideration. In the granting of such variance, the board of zoning appeals
shall clearly identify in writing the specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in this chapter, other
zoning regulations in the city, and applicable state law, that justified the granting of the variance. No variance shall have the
effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood
protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than those required by state law. The following additional
variance criteria of the federal emergency management agency must be satisfied:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 430/454
a. Variances shall not be issued by a community within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge would result.
b. Variances shall only be issued by a community upon: 1) a showing of good and sufficient cause, 2) a determination that
failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and 3) a determination that the granting of a
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
c. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
4. Hearings: Upon filing with the board of zoning appeals of an appeal from a decision of the zoning administrator, or an
application for a variance, the board of zoning appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give due notice to the
parties in interest as specified by law. The board of adjustment shall submit by mail to the commissioner of natural resources a
copy of the application for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the commissioner will receive at least ten (10)
days' notice of the hearing.
5. Decisions: The board of zoning appeals shall arrive at a decision on such appeal or variance within the time required by law. In
passing upon an appeal, the board of zoning appeals may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning
administrator or other public official. It shall make its decision in writing setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its
decisions. In granting a variance the board of zoning appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards such as
those specified in subsection D7 of this section, which are in conformity with the purposes of this chapter. Violations of such
conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter punishable under section 11-12-12 of this chapter. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by
mail to the commissioner of the department of natural resources within ten (10) days of such action.
6. Appeals: Appeals from any decision of the board of zoning appeals may be made, and as specified in the city zoning code.
7. Flood Insurance Notice And Recordkeeping: The zoning administrator shall notify the applicant for a variance that: a) the
issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage and
b) such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions. The city shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the administrator of the national
flood insurance program.
D. Conditional Uses: The procedures in section 11-2-9 of this title shall apply to all applications for conditional use permits under this
chapter. The following additional provisions shall apply to such applications:
1. Copy Of Application: The zoning administrator shall mail to the commissioner of department of natural resources a copy of the
conditional use permit application sufficiently in advance so that the commissioner will receive at least ten (10) days' advance
notice of the public hearing on the application.
2. Copy Of Decisions Granted: The zoning administrator shall mail to the commissioner of the department of natural resources a
copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits within ten (10) days of such action.
3. Information Required For Applications: Applications for conditional use permits must include the following information:
a. Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, floodproofing measures, and the relationship of the above to the location of the stream
channel; and
b. Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage
of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
4. Copy Of Information To Designated Engineer: The zoning administrator will transmit one copy of the information described in
subsection D3 of this section to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical assistance, where
necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the
use, the adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical matters. Based upon the technical evaluation of the
designated engineer or expert, the city council shall determine the specific flood hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability of
the proposed use in relation to the flood hazard.
5. Factors Upon Which Decision Shall Be Based: In passing upon conditional use applications, the city council shall consider all
relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
a. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
b. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges,
culverts or other hydraulic structures.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 431/454
c. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and
unsanitary conditions.
d. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.
e. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
f. The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
g. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
h. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
i. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area.
j. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
k. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.
l. Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this chapter.
6. Time For Acting On Application: The city council shall act on an application in the manner described above within the time
required by law. The city council shall render a written decision on the application.
7. Conditions Attached To Conditional Use Permits: Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purpose of this
chapter, the city council shall attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill
the purposes of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
b. Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
c. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
d. Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective
measures.
e. Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the state building code and this chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or
document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the
regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area. (Ord. 872, 2-3-2010)
11-12-11: NONCONFORMING USES:
A. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following conditions. Historic structures, as
defined in section 11-1-3 of this title, shall be subject to the provisions of subsections A1 through A5 of this section.
1. No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity.
2. Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or nonconforming use which would result in increasing the
flood damage potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with
any of the elevation on fill or floodproofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 through FP-4 floodproofing classifications) allowable in the
state building code, except as further restricted in subsections A3 and A6 of this section. A structural addition to a
nonconforming structure must be located outside of the floodway and must be elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection
elevation in accordance with subsection 11-12-2C of this chapter.
3. The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this section are satisfied. The cost of all
structural alterations and additions must include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all
manpower or labor. If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market
value of the structure, then the structure must meet the standards of section 11-12-4 or 11-12-5 of this chapter for new
structures depending upon whether the structure is in the floodway or flood fringe district, respectively.
4. If any nonconforming use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall
conform to this chapter. The assessor shall notify the zoning administrator in writing of instances of nonconforming uses that
have been discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months.
5. If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as defined in section 11-1-3 of this title, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 432/454
new structures in section 11-12-4, 11-12-5 or 11-12-6 of this chapter will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is
in the floodway, flood fringe or general floodplain district, respectively.
6. If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in section 11-1-3 of this title, from any combination of a building addition to the
outside dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration, or other improvement to the inside
dimensions of an existing nonconforming structure, then the structural addition and the existing nonconforming structure must
meet the requirements of section 11-12-4 or 11-12-5 of this chapter for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is
in the floodway or flood fringe district, respectively. A nonconforming structure shall not be substantially improved if said
structure is located in the floodway. (Ord. 872, 2-3-2010)
11-12-12: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
A. Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable as defined by law.
B. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. Such actions may include, but are not limited to:
1. In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the city may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it
including, but not limited to, prosecution and fines, injunctions, after the fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the national flood insurance program for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The city will act in
good faith to enforce this chapter and to correct ordinance violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility
in the national flood insurance program.
2. When an ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to the attention of the zoning administrator, the zoning
administrator shall immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the violation. As soon as is
reasonably possible, this information will be submitted to the appropriate department of natural resources and federal
emergency management agency regional office along with the city's plan of action to correct the violation to the degree
possible.
3. The zoning administrator shall notify the suspected party of the requirements of this chapter and all other official controls and
the nature and extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or use is under construction or
development, the zoning administrator may order the construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or
approval is granted by the city. If the construction or development is already completed, then the zoning administrator may
either: a) issue an order identifying the corrective actions that must be made within a specified time period to bring the use or
structure into compliance with the official controls; or b) notify the responsible party to apply for an after the fact
permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days.
4. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the zoning administrator within the specified period of time, each
additional day that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter and shall be prosecuted accordingly. The zoning
administrator shall also upon the lapse of the specified response period notify the landowner to restore the land to the condition
which existed prior to the violation of this chapter. (Ord. 872, 2-3-2010)
11-12-13: AMENDMENTS:
A. The floodplain designation on the official zoning map shall not be removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the
designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is
contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the commissioner of natural
resources if he or she determines that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
B. All amendments to this chapter, including amendments to the official zoning map, must be submitted to and approved by the
commissioner of natural resources prior to adoption. Changes in the official zoning map must meet the federal emergency
management agency's (FEMA) technical conditions and criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The
commissioner of natural resources must be given ten (10) days' written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this
chapter and said notice shall include a draft of the ordinance amendment or technical study under consideration. (Ord. 872, 2-3-
2010)
Chapter 13
CD CONSERVANCY DISTRICT
11-13-1: PURPOSE:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 433/454
The purpose of this District is to establish provisions for areas containing valuable environmental qualities which, in order to conserve
the City's natural resources, preserve the amenities of its environment, prevent the overcrowding of land, avoid undue concentration
of population and alleviate severe flooding problems, have been determined to best be retained in substantially an undeveloped
state. (1971 Code § 28-68)
11-13-2: LANDS DESIGNATED:
A. Public Property: All public properties designated as parks or open space shall be placed in the Conservancy District.
B. Private Property: Property in private ownership, consisting of ten (10) acres or more, that meets the requirements, may also be
designated for the Conservancy District, but only upon acceptance of a petition from the property owner. (1971 Code § 28-68)
11-13-3: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
When uncertainty exists as to the Conservancy District boundaries, the following rules shall apply:
A. District boundaries along a stream are intended to represent the high water line of a regional flood; provided, however, that along
a stream, such line shall not be less than fifty feet (50') from the center of such stream.
B. District boundaries in a wetland area are intended to represent the edge of a swamp, marsh or other wetland area. The edge shall
be defined as the mark delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave
evidence upon the landscape. The edge is commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic
to predominantly terrestrial.
C. District boundaries in a public park or common open space are intended to represent the property lines of such area. (1971 Code
§ 28-68)
11-13-4: PETITION REQUIREMENTS:
Before any property in private ownership shall be accepted for inclusion in the Conservancy District, the petitioner shall provide the
following:
A. A survey of the property and a legal description of the property. Such survey shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor.
B. A topographic map with contour lines designated at an interval of five feet (5') or less.
C. A site plan indicating the location of all trees of fifteen inches (15") in diameter or more, as well as other environmentally
significant features.
D. An agreement, acceptable to the City Council, which specifies the length of time such petitioner wishes to have his/her property
remain in the Conservancy District. Under no circumstances shall the time period be less than five (5) years. (1971 Code § 28-68;
amd. 2000 Code)
11-13-5: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted as a right in the Conservancy District:
1. Agricultural uses.
2. Conservation uses, including drainage control, forestry, wildlife sanctuaries and facilities for making such uses available and useful
to the public.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 434/454
3. Nature study areas and arboretums.
4. Open space areas connected with residential, commercial and industrial planned unit developments.
5. Outdoor recreational uses operated by a governmental agency or conservation group, homeowners' or private associations and
facilities for making such uses useful to the public or to associations. (1971 Code § 28-68)
11-13-6: SPECIAL USES:
If, through good site and engineering designs, a development can be created which is compatible and harmonious with the natural
amenities of the Conservancy District area and with surrounding land uses, a request for a special use permit for such development
may be submitted. Such requests shall be accompanied by an overall plan of the entire area showing roads, parking areas, lot lines,
easements, the location of tree cover, including the designation of individual trees of fifteen inches (15") in diameter or more, the
location of other natural and biological features, such as wetlands and areas of valuable wildlife habitat, the locations of proposed
structures, existing contours and proposed grading, drainage, utilities and landscaping in such detail as the Director of Community
Development and City Engineer shall require before they may be reviewed by the Planning Commission. The approval of such a
request by the City Council shall require a finding that:
A. The development will not detrimentally affect or destroy natural features, such as ponds, streams, wetlands and forested areas,
but will preserve and incorporate such features into the development's site design.
B. The location of natural features and the site's topography have been considered in the designing and siting of all physical
improvements.
C. Adequate assurances have been received that the clearing of the site topsoil, trees and other natural features before the
commencement of building operations will not occur. Only those areas approved for placement of physical improvements may be
cleared.
D. The development will not substantially reduce the natural retention storage capacity of any watercourse, thereby increasing the
magnitude and column of flood at other locations.
E. The soil and subsoil conditions are suitable for excavation and site preparation, and the drainage is designed to prevent erosion
and environmentally deleterious surface runoff.
F. The development will be free from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust and other particulate matter, odorous matter, fumes,
water pollution and other objectionable influences.
G. The petitioner will be substantially damaged by being required to place the intended development outside the CD District. (1971
Code § 28-68; amd. 2000 Code)
11-13-7: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following standards for development of land located within the Conservancy District are required. They are not meant to abridge
or otherwise alter any regulations promulgated by the State Department of Natural Resources or watershed district authority:
A. Minimum Lot Area: Unless intended for a permitted use, the minimum lot area for a development shall be five (5) acres.
B. Lot Coverage: No more than ten percent (10%) of the lot area located in a CD District shall be occupied by structures, parking
facilities and roadways.
C. Location In Floodprone Areas: Areas of Conservancy Districts which are located in a flood plain or floodway shall be additionally
subject to the provisions of the Floodway and Flood Plain District. (1971 Code § 28-68)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 435/454
Chapter 14
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
11-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) District is to provide a district which will encourage the following:
A. Flexibility in land development and redevelopment in order to utilize new techniques of building design, construction and land
development;
B. Provision of lifecycle housing to all income and age groups;
C. Energy conservation through the use of more efficient building designs and sitings and the clustering of buildings and land uses;
D. Preservation of desirable site characteristics and open space and protection of sensitive environmental features, including, but not
limited to, steep slopes, trees and poor spoils;
E. More efficient and effective use of land, open space and public facilities through mixing of land uses and assembly and
development of land into larger parcels;
F. High quality of design and design compatible with surrounding land uses, including both existing and planned;
G. Sensitive development in transitional areas located between different land uses and along significant transportation or scenic
corridors within the City; and
H. Development which is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 644, 2-19-1997)
11-14-2: USES:
Within the PUD District, all uses must be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan designation for the property and consistent with
permitted uses and accessory uses allowed by this Title. Within the PUD District, all uses allowed by conditional use permit within
any other district are allowed by conditional use permit. Uses allowed by conditional use permit shall be reviewed for compliance with
the PUD master development plan and with the applicable conditional use permit standards specified in Sections 11-2-4 and 11-2-9
of this Title. (Ord. 644, 2-19-1997)
11-14-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Within the PUD District, all development shall be in compliance with the following:
A. Minimum Area: Each PUD shall have a minimum area of ten (10) acres, excluding areas within a designated wetlands, flood plain
or shoreland district or right of way, unless the applicant can demonstrate the existence of one of the following:
1. Unusual physical features of the property itself or of the surrounding neighborhood such that development as a PUD will
conserve a physical or topographic feature of importance to the neighborhood or community;
2. The property is directly adjacent to or across the right of way from property which has been developed previously as a PUD
and will appear as and will function as an extension of that previously approved development;
3. The property is located in a transitional area between different land use categories or on a principal or minor arterial as defined
in the Comprehensive Plan;
4. The property is proposed to be developed with cluster homes as defined in Section 11-14-4 of this Chapter.
B. Uses Other Than Designated Uses: The City may permit up to ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of all buildings in a PUD
to be used for land uses for which the site is not designated in the Comprehensive Plan if the City Council finds that such use is in
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 436/454
the best interests of the City and is consistent with the requirements of this Chapter. If nondesignated uses are to be incorporated
into a PUD, the City may forward a copy of the request to the Metropolitan Council for review.
C. More Than One Use: Where the site of a proposed PUD is designated for more than one land use in the Comprehensive Plan, the
City may require that the PUD include all the proposed land uses.
D. Density: Each residential PUD or the residential portion of each mixed use PUD shall have a density within the range specified in
the Comprehensive Plan for the PUD site. If the site is not designated in the Comprehensive Plan for residential use, the
appropriate density shall be determined by the City based upon the City Council's finding that such density is consistent with the
intent of the PUD and of the Comprehensive Plan.
E. Streets, Utilities, Public Facilities And Subdivisions: The City ordinances governing the specifications and standards for streets,
utilities, public facilities and subdivisions may be modified based upon the uniqueness of the PUD. The City Council may
therefore approve streets, utilities, public facilities and land subdivisions which are not in compliance with usual specifications or
ordinance requirements if it finds that strict adherence to such standards or requirements is not required to meet the intent of this
Chapter or to protect the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the PUD, the surrounding area or the City as a whole.
F. Building Setbacks:
1. Buildings shall set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from local streets and forty feet (40') from railroad lines or principal or
minor arterials, as designated in the Comprehensive Plan; except, that in no case shall the setback be less than the height of
the building not to exceed a maximum of one hundred feet (100').
2. The setback for all buildings from exterior PUD lot lines not abutting a public street shall be thirty feet (30'); except, that in no
case shall the setback be less than the height of the building not to exceed a maximum of one hundred feet (100').
3. Building setbacks from internal public streets shall be determined by the City based on characteristics of the specific PUD.
4. Parking lots and driving lanes shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from all exterior lot lines of a PUD.
5. Where industrial or commercial uses abut developed or platted single-family lots outside the PUD, greater exterior building and
parking setbacks may be required in order to provide effective screening. The City Council shall make a determination
regarding the adequacy of screening proposed by the applicant. Screening may include the use of natural topography or earth
berming, existing and proposed plantings and other features such as roadways and wetlands which provide separation of uses.
6. Areas within a PUD which are designated in the approved master development plan or final site plan for residential use shall
be considered a residential district for purposes of determining building and parking setback requirements on adjacent
commercial and industrial property outside the PUD.
G. More Than One Building Per Lot: More than one building may be placed on one platted or recorded lot in a PUD.
H. Single Land Use Or Housing Type: Any PUD which involves a single land use type or housing type shall be permitted; provided,
that it is otherwise consistent with the objectives of this Title and the Comprehensive Plan.
I. Private Recreational Uses: Each residential PUD comprised of units other than single-family detached housing or within a mixed
use PUD shall provide an area dedicated for private recreational uses for project residents. Such areas will be for active or
passive recreational uses suited for the needs of the residents of the project, including swimming pools, trails, nature areas,
picnic areas, tot lots and saunas.
J. Unified Ownership Or Control: All property to be included within a PUD shall be under unified ownership or control or subject to
such legal restrictions or covenants as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the approved master development plan and
final site and building plan.
K. Signs: Signs shall be restricted to those which are permitted in a sign plan approved by the City and shall be regulated by
permanent covenants.
L. Application Of Other Provisions: The requirements contained in sections of this Title pertaining to Chapter 3, General Zoning
Provisions, and Chapter 6, Performance Standards, shall apply to a PUD as deemed appropriate by the City.
M. Compliance With Provisions: No building or other permit shall be issued for any work on property included within a proposed or
approved PUD nor shall any work occur unless such work is in compliance with the proposed or approved PUD. (Ord. 644, 2-19-
1997)
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 437/454
11-14-4: CLUSTER HOUSING:
Each PUD developed for single-family detached dwellings on sites guided for low density residential development in the
Comprehensive Plan shall be subject to the following standards:
A. Minimum Size Of Parcel: Minimum size of entire parcel or parcels subject to the PUD: 10 acres;
B. Permitted Locations: In areas of the City where smaller lots will serve as a transition between low density residential areas and a
higher intensity use or because of unique physical or topographic constraints, the property could be more sensitively developed,
as determined by the City Council, as a small lot cluster home development;
C. Minimum Lot Size:
1. MUSA: 7,500 square feet;
2. Non-MUSA: 1.5 acres;
3. For cluster housing where lot areas are designed to be similar to the size of the dwelling unit and the surrounding property held
in common ownership, the 7,500 square foot lot size is waived as long as the average of all parcels is a minimum of 7,500
square feet;
D. Minimum Lot Width At ROW Line:
1. MUSA: 60 feet;
2. Non-MUSA: 180 feet;
E. Minimum Lot Depth: 125 feet;
F. Minimum Front Yard Setback:
1. MUSA: 20 feet on internal streets within the PUD. On exterior or through streets, a 30 foot setback must be provided on local
streets and a 40 foot setback on intermediate and minor arterial streets as defined by the Comprehensive Plan;
2. Non-MUSA: 100 feet on internal streets within the PUD;
G. Minimum Side Yard Setbacks:
1. MUSA: 10 feet with 5 feet on the garage side;
2. Non-MUSA: 25 feet;
H. Rear Yard Setback:
1. MUSA: 30 feet;
2. Non-MUSA: 50 feet;
I. Building Height: Maximum of 35 feet;
J. Dwellings:
1. All dwelling units shall have a depth of at least 20 feet for at least fifty percent (50%) of their width;
2. All dwellings shall have a permanent foundation in conformance with the Minnesota State Building Code;
K. Accessory Structures: Accessory structures shall conform to the setbacks and sizes established in Section 11-3-3 of this Title;
L. Covenants:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 438/454
1. MUSA: Where property is within the MUSA, a homeowners' association shall be established by the developer to oversee the
maintenance of commonly held properties and review of architectural modifications to the approved plans;
2. Non-MUSA: When property is outside the MUSA, the developer shall sign a restrictive covenant for land to be held as open
space or for agricultural purposes under this clustering provision. The restrictive covenant shall limit the use of the restricted
land to agricultural purposes or open space until the property is rezoned, or receives City sewer and water services;
M. Architectural And Landscape Design; Privacy: The applicant shall demonstrate that the architectural and landscape design being
proposed for cluster housing developments provide privacy for both internal and exterior living areas. This provision shall include,
but not be limited to, landscape and fence screens, location of HVAC equipment, and location of structures relative to adjacent
homes. Deviations from approved plans must be approved by both the City Council and by the established homeowners'
association;
N. Fire, Life And Safety Requirements: The applicant shall demonstrate that the platting, design and setback of structures will meet
City fire, life, and safety requirements and facilitate the maintenance of building exteriors, which may be accomplished by any
combination of structural setback requirements, provision of easements and/or incorporation of building code improvements
approved by the City. No intrusions of any kind will be permitted into approved setbacks unless it can be demonstrated that fire,
life, and safety requirements of the City can be met. These revised setbacks will specifically be designated in the PUD
agreement;
O. Compliance Required: All lots platted within a cluster housing development under this Chapter shall have a statement recorded in
the chain of title that states that any construction on the lot must be in compliance with the PUD development plan, final site plan,
and architectural drawings, as approved by the City; and
P. Lot Yield Plan: A lot yield plan must be submitted as part of the developer's proposal. The applicant shall demonstrate in the lot
yield plan the number of potential lots which could be developed under the existing zoning compared to the developer's proposal.
(Ord. 644, 2-19-1997)
11-14-5: REVIEW OF APPLICATION:
A. Concept Plan:
1. In order to receive guidance in the design of a PUD prior to submission of a formal application, an applicant may submit a
concept plan for review and comment by the Planning Commission and City Council. Submission of a concept plan is optional
but is highly recommended for large PUDs. In order for the review to be of most help to the applicant, the concept plan should
contain such specific information as is suggested by the City. Generally, this information should include the following:
a. Approximate building and road locations;
b. Height, bulk and square footage of buildings;
c. Type and square footage of specific land uses;
d. Number of dwelling units;
e. Generalized grading plan showing areas to be cut, filled and preserved; and
f. Staging and timing of the development.
2. The comments of the Planning Commission and City Council shall address the consistency of the concept plan with this
Chapter. The comments of the Planning Commission and City Council shall be for guidance only and shall not be considered
binding upon the City regarding approval of the formal PUD application when submitted.
B. Rezoning; Master Development Plan:
1. Approval of a rezoning to PUD and approval of a master development plan shall be subject to the procedures outlined in
Section 11-2-8 of this Title for a Zoning Map amendment. The master development plan shall contain the following:
a. Building location, height, bulk and square footage;
b. Type and square footage of specific land uses;
c. Number of dwelling units;
d. Detailed street and utility locations and sizes;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 439/454
e. Drainage plan, including location and size of pipes and water storage areas;
f. Grading plan;
g. Generalized landscape plan;
h. Generalized plan for uniform signs and lighting;
i. Plan for timing and phasing of the development;
j. Covenants or other restrictions proposed for the regulation of the development; and
k. Renderings or elevations of the entrance side of buildings to be constructed in the first phase of the development.
2. Approval of the master development plan shall indicate approval of the previously listed items and shall occur in conjunction
with rezoning of the property to PUD. After rezoning of the property to PUD, nothing shall be constructed on the PUD site
except in conformance with the approved plans and this Chapter.
C. Final Site And Building Plan:
1. Approval of a final site and building plan for the entire PUD or for specific parts of the PUD shall be subject to the procedures
outlined in Section 11-2-4 of this Title. The final site and building plan shall contain information as required by the City, including
the following:
a. Detailed utility, street, grading and drainage plans;
b. Detailed building elevations and floor plans; and
c. Detailed landscaping, sign and lighting plans.
2. The final site and building plan shall be in substantial compliance with the approved master development plan. Substantial
compliance shall mean:
a. Buildings, parking areas and roads are in substantially the same location as previously approved;
b. The number of residential living units has not increased or decreased by more than five percent (5%) from that approved in
the master development plan;
c. The floor area of nonresidential uses has not been increased by more than five percent (5%) nor has the gross floor area of
any individual building been increased by more than ten percent (10%) from that approved in the master development plan;
d. There has been no increase in the number of stories in any building;
e. Open space has not been decreased or altered to change its original design or intended use; and
f. All special conditions required on the master development plan by the City have been incorporated into the final site and
building plan. Approval of a final site and building plan shall signify approval of all plans necessary prior to application for a
building permit, subject to conformance with any conditions on the approval and subject to other necessary approvals by the
City.
D. Combining Final Site And Building Plan With Master Development Plan: Applicants may combine the final site and building plan
review with the master development plan review by submitting all information required for both stages simultaneously.
E. Recommendations And Actions:
1. The Planning Commission and City Council shall base their recommendations and actions regarding approval of a PUD on a
consideration of the following:
a. Compatibility of the proposed plan with this Chapter and the goals and policies proposals of the Comprehensive Plan;
b. Effect of the proposed plan on the neighborhood in which it is to be located;
c. Internal organization and adequacy of various uses or densities, circulation and parking facilities, public facilities, recreation
areas, open spaces, screening and landscaping;
d. Consistency with the standards of Section 11-2-4 of this Title pertaining to site and building plan review; and
e. Such other factors as the Planning Commission or City Council deems relevant.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 440/454
2. The Planning Commission and City Council may attach such conditions to their actions as they shall determine necessary or
convenient to better accomplish the purposes of this Chapter. (Ord. 644, 2-19-1997)
11-14-6: TERM OF APPROVAL:
If application has not been made for a final site and building plan approval pursuant to the approved master development plan for all
or a part of the property within a PUD or construction on the property has not been initiated in conformance with the approved site
and building plan by December 31 of the year following the date on which the PUD Zoning Map amendment became effective or if
within that period no extension of time has been granted, the City Council may rezone the property to the zoning classification at the
time of the PUD application or to a zoning classification consistent with the Comprehensive Plan designation for the property. In the
absence of a rezoning, the approved master development plan shall and approved site and building plan if applicable shall remain
the legal control governing development of the property included within the PUD. (Ord. 644, 2-19-1997)
11-14-7: AMENDMENTS:
A. Major amendments to an approved master development plan may be approved by the City Council after review by the Planning
Commission. The notification and public hearing procedure for such amendment shall be the same as for approval of the original
PUD. A major amendment is any amendment which:
1. Substantially alters the location of buildings, parking areas or roads;
2. Increases or decreases the number of residential dwelling units by more than five percent (5%);
3. Increases the gross floor area of nonresidential buildings by more than five percent (5%) or increases the gross floor area of
any individual building by more than ten percent (10%);
4. Increases the number of stories of any building;
5. Decreases the amount of open space by more than five percent (5%) or alters it in such a way as to change its original design
or intended use; or
6. Creates noncompliance with any special condition attached to the approval of the master development plan.
B. Any other amendment may be made administratively where the Director of Community Development determines that review and
approval by the Planning Commission and City Council of a detailed site plan is unnecessary to meet the objectives of this
Chapter. (Ord. 644, 2-19-1997)
11-14-8: EXEMPTIONS:
This Chapter shall not apply to any PUD which has received final approval by the City Council prior to the effective date of the
ordinance from which this Title is derived1 unless such is requested by the property owner and approved by the City Council. (Ord.
644, 2-19-1997)
ARTICLE A. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
11-14A-1: PURPOSE STATEMENT:
The purpose of the planned development overlay district is to promote creative and efficient use of land. This is accomplished by
providing flexibility in the design of land development than is presently possible through the strict interpretation of conventional
zoning and land division ordinances. A planned development overlay plan should be compatible with the established and proposed
surrounding land uses and should accrue benefits to the city and the general public in terms of need, convenience and service
sufficient to justify any necessary exceptions to the zoning and subdivision ordinances.
It is the applicant's responsibility to demonstrate that the proposed planned development overlay plan accomplishes one or more of
the following:
A. Introduce flexibility of site design and architecture for the conservation of land, natural features, and open space through clustering
of structures, facilities, amenities, and activities for public benefit;
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 441/454
B. Improve the efficiency of public streets and utilities through a more efficient and effective use of land, open space, and public
facilities through assembly and development of land in larger parcels;
C. Provide mixed land use and land use transitions in keeping with the character of adjacent land uses in harmony with the
comprehensive plan and the underlying zoning districts; and
D. Provide for the clustering of land parcels for development as an integrated, coordinated unit as opposed to a parcel by parcel,
piecemeal approach and to maintain these parcels by central management including integrated and joint use of parking,
maintenance of open space and similar features, and harmonious selection and efficient distribution of uses. (Ord. 796, 6-21-
2006)
11-14A-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this article apply to any zoning district established by section 11-1-5, "Zoning Districts Established", of this title.
Within the PDO district, uses are determined by the underlying zoning district and in harmony with the comprehensive plan. All
conditional uses must be considered permitted to eliminate the overlapping procedural requirements of individual conditional use
provisions. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
11-14A-3: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
All property within a planned development overlay requires a development plan. The development plan must be preceded by a
preliminary concept plan.
A. Preliminary Concept Plan: Applicants must submit to the planning division for review and comment a preliminary concept plan for
the affected property. The density of a planned development will be based on the density of the underlying zone. The
development standards of the underlying zone will provide a basic guide for the design of a planned development. The
preliminary concept plan must include the following information:
1. Proposed land uses, building locations and housing unit densities.
2. Proposed circulation patterns indicating the status of street ownership.
3. Proposed open space uses.
4. Proposed grading and drainage patterns.
5. Relationship of the proposed development to the surrounding area and the comprehensive plan.
B. Planned Development Overlay (PDO) Plan: Applicants must submit a PDO plan for the entire property proposed for development.
A request for a rezoning may be included in the development plan materials. Approval of a PDO plan is subject to the procedures
for submittal, notification, and public hearing defined in this code, except as modified in this section. No final approvals may be
granted by the city until all necessary approvals for an EIS, EAW or comprehensive plan amendment have been granted. The city
council may attach such conditions to their actions as they determine necessary or convenient to better accomplish the purpose
of this section.
C. Site Plan Review: All proposed uses are subject to the site plan review requirements found in section 11-2-4 of this title. For single
phase construction projects, site plan review may be combined with the PDO plan approval. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
11-14A-4: APPLICATION:
A. Amendment Procedure: All provisions of section 11-2-8, "Amendments", of this title will apply.
B. Contents: Each application of a PDO must include at least the following details:
1. A legal description of the area proposed for a PDO plan.
2. A map, drawn to scale showing the following:
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 442/454
a. The proposed boundaries of the PDO plan;
b. The present zoning classification(s) and use(s) within the proposed PDO district that is within five hundred feet (500') of the
proposed PDO plan area.
c. All public rights of way within the proposed PDO plan.
d. Other information as necessary to determine how the proposed PDO plan affects existing uses within the PDO plan
boundaries and within five hundred feet (500') of those PDO plan boundaries.
3. A written description of the specific restrictions, standards, or guidelines to be implemented by the PDO district and the effect
those restrictions, standards, or guidelines may have on development and performance standards for the underlying zoning
district.
4. A written statement generally describing how the proposed PDO will promote or implement the goals and objectives of the
city's comprehensive plan.
5. Evidence that all owners of land and structures within the proposed PDO who are not represented by the applicant have been
notified by mail of: The applicant's intent to request the development overlay district zoning; the application, review and
approval process for the PDO designation; and the specific effects of overlay district zoning on properties within the proposed
overlay district.
6. Summary sheet indicating the gross area in acres and square feet for each land use, the number of proposed dwelling units
per gross acre, number of any proposed dwelling units by type and density, amount of land in common open space, and
number of parking spaces provided.
7. A site plan showing lot lines, building locations, parking spaces, drives, common open space areas, recreation facilities and
development amenities.
8. Preliminary and final plat in accordance with the subdivision ordinance.
9. Sanitary sewer, water main, storm sewer, landscaping, grading and drainage pattern plans.
10. Lighting, mailbox, sign and entry monument and other plans as necessary.
11. Building elevations and colored plan renderings demonstrating architectural features and of the typical residences, community
buildings, and other structures proposed to be constructed on the site.
12. Proposed homeowners' association or condominium documents and declarations of covenants and restrictions.
13. Other information as determined necessary. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
11-14A-5: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY PLAN APPROVAL:
The planning commission must make a recommendation on the proposal to the city council. Upon receiving the planning
commission's recommendation, the city council will grant, subject to conditions, or deny the planned development overlay plan. The
findings necessary for approval must include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. The PDO plan is consistent with the intent of this chapter.
B. The PDO plan meets the standards required for a conditional use.
C. Each stage of the PDO plan can exist as an independent unit.
D. The area surrounding the PDO plan can be planned and developed in coordination and substantial compatibility with the
proposed PDO plan.
E. Any proposed density transfer is consistent with the preservation and enhancement of important natural features of the site.
F. Any density bonus is consistent with the density bonus criteria of this chapter.
G. Any variation of flexibility from zoning standards most similar in function to the proposed PDO plan must produce results equal to
or better than those achieved by the applicable zoning standard.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 443/454
H. Other factors related to the project as the planning commission and city council deem relevant. The planning commission and city
council may attach such conditions to their actions as they determine necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section. (Ord.
796, 6-21-2006)
11-14A-6: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY PLAN CHANGES:
Any significant changes in the approved PDO plan may be made only after a public hearing and recommendation to the city council
by the planning commission and approved by the city council. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
11-14A-7: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY PLAN TERMINATION:
Approval of a PDO plan will be effective for one year from the date approved by the city council. Upon written application by the
developer the city council, following review and recommendation by the planning commission, may extend PDO plan approval for
periods up to twelve (12) months each upon a finding that:
A. The proposed use, or uses, is consistent with the city's comprehensive land use plan current at the time the request for an
extension is considered; and
B. The project design meets the applicable city code standards in effect at the time the request for an extension is considered, or the
design is modified to satisfy those standards. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
11-14A-8: DEVELOPMENT STAGING:
Certain PDO plans may involve construction over an extended period of time. If it is proposed to develop a project during a period
exceeding two (2) years, the developer may request concept approval from the planning commission and city council for the entire
project and permission to submit application for PDO plan approval for the first stage of the project. A public hearing will be required
by the planning commission for consideration of concept approval as well as for each stage of development in the extended staged
PDO plan. Each stage of the PDO plan requires development plan approval. (Ord. 796, 6-21-2006)
Chapter 15
MISSISSIPPI RIVER CORRIDOR CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT
11-15-1: FINDINGS:
The City finds that the Mississippi River Corridor within the Metropolitan Area and the City is a unique and valuable local, State,
regional and national resource. The river is an essential element in the local, regional, State and national transportation, sewer and
water and recreational system and serves important biological and ecological functions. The prevention and mitigation of irreversible
damage to this resource and the preservation and enhancement of its natural, aesthetic, cultural and historic values is in furtherance
of the health, safety and general welfare of the City. (1971 Code § 28-69)
11-15-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to prevent and mitigate irreversible damage to this unique State, local, regional and
national resource to promote orderly development of the residential, commercial, industrial, recreational and public areas, to
preserve and enhance its values to the public and protect and preserve the system as an essential element in the City's
transportation, sewer and water and recreational systems in accordance with the following policies:
A. The Mississippi River Corridor shall be managed as a multi-purpose public resource by continuing use of the river channel for
transportation, continuing use of certain areas for fleeting for river transportation, conserving the scenic, environmental,
recreational, mineral, economic, cultural and historic resources and functions of the river corridor and providing for the
continuation of development of a variety of urban uses within the river corridor.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 444/454
B. The Mississippi River Corridor shall be managed in a manner consistent with its natural characteristics and its existing
development and in accordance with regional plans for the development of the Metropolitan Area.
C. The Mississippi River Corridor shall be managed in accordance with the Critical Areas Act of 19731, the Minnesota Environmental
Policy Act of 19732 and the Governor's Critical Area Designation Order dated November 23, 1976, and the applicable State and
Federal laws. (1971 Code § 28-69)
11-15-3: CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
A Critical Area Overlay District with its attendant regulations is hereby established as part of this Title. This District shall overlay the
zoning districts established by this Title so that any parcel of land lying in the Overlay District shall also lie in one or more of the
underlying established zoning districts. Territory within the Overlay District shall be subject to the requirements established in the
Overlay District in addition to restrictions and requirements established by other applicable ordinances and regulations of the City.
Within the Overlay District, all uses shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations for the underlying zoning district(s);
provided, that such uses shall not be entitled to or issued the appropriate development permit until they have first satisfied the
additional requirements established in this Chapter. (1971 Code § 28-69)
11-15-4: BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICT:
This Chapter shall apply to the area designated by the Governor's Critical Area Designation Order dated November 23, 1976, and
shown on Figure 3 of the Critical Area Plan. (1971 Code § 28-69)
11-15-5: PERMITTED USES:
The rural open space district classification of the Mississippi River Corridor Critical Area includes land uses which shall be used and
developed to preserve their open, scenic and natural characteristics and ecological and economic functions. The following land uses
shall be permitted within the boundaries of the River Corridor Overlay District:
1. Agricultural, except new feedlots.
2. Commercial and industrial facilities. Expansion of existing facilities only when they can be served by existing public or private
sewerage, water and transportation facilities, and where the expansion has been determined to have no impact on regional
systems.
3. Essential services, public safety facilities.
4. Mining and extraction, upon approval of either rezoning or conditional use permit, reclamation plan and conditions of excavation
regulations.
5. One-family detached dwellings restricted to areas where on-site wastewater disposal systems can be utilized.
6. Open space, including park reserves, recreational land and conservancy districts.
7. Transportation and utility facilities. (1971 Code § 28-70)
11-15-6: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses which are incidental to the permitted uses of the property are permitted. (1971 Code § 28-71)
11-15-7: EXISTING STRUCTURES AND USES:
A. Generally: Any existing structure or use of property which is inconsistent with this Chapter shall not be eligible for any permit
granted for expansion, change of use, renewal of existing permit or building permit, unless the following criteria are met.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 445/454
Residential and agricultural structures and uses shall be exempt from this provision:
1. The applicant shall provide and maintain adequate screening of the structure from the water through the use of natural
vegetative means.
2. Expansion of existing structures shall be in a direction away from the river front.
3. The public's ability to view the river and river corridor from existing public streets shall not be further degraded by the proposed
activity.
B. Signs:
1. Advertising signs are prohibited between the flood fringe borderline and all County, State or Federal highways located within
one thousand feet (1,000') of the line, except where the river cannot be viewed from the highway due to natural topography or
existing buildings.
2. All advertising signs permitted within the critical area outside the area set forth in subsection B1 of this Section shall conform
with the provisions of the Sign Ordinance or other appropriate applicable ordinances.
3. Views of the water from vistas and public roads shall not be impaired by the placement of business or advertising signs.
4. Advertising signs may be located only on the shore side of public transportation routes which are parallel and adjacent to the
river front.
C. Nonconforming Uses And Structures: Any structure or use existing upon the effective date of this Chapter3 which does not
conform to the use restrictions of a particular use district shall automatically continue as a nonconforming use or structure and
shall be regulated according to this Title. (1971 Code § 28-72)
11-15-8: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Objectives: The objectives of dimensional standards are to maintain the aesthetic integrity and natural environment of the
Mississippi River Corridor Critical Area. These standards are designed to protect and enhance the shoreline and bluff areas, as
well as provide sufficient setback for on-site sanitary facilities, to prevent erosion of bluffs, to minimize flood damage and to
prevent pollution of surface and ground water.
B. Lot Density And Size: Density of residential development in areas without sanitary sewer shall not exceed four (4) dwelling units
per quarter/quarter section, is permitted in the AG-2 Agricultural District, except the minimum lot size for a single-family structure
shall be at least three (3) acres, unless the lot is part of a planned cluster development as provided in subsection H3 of this
Section, or unless the lot was approved by the City and such lot was recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds prior
to April 25, 1975, and meets the criteria of Section 11-3-2 of this Title.
C. Structure Setbacks: All new structures shall meet the following minimum setbacks:
1. Setback From Bluff Line: No structure shall be constructed less than one hundred feet (100') landward from the bluff line of the
river.
2. Setback From Normal High Water Mark: No structure or road shall be constructed less than one hundred feet (100') from the
normal high water mark of any water body.
3. Exceptions: Exceptions to the setback provisions shall be:
a. Public safety facilities, public bridges and their roadway approaches, railroad sidings, public and private roadways serving
water-related uses on the river front.
b. Public recreation facilities, scenic overlooks, public observation platforms and the regional trail system, docks, and boat
launching facilities.
c. Approved river crossings of essential services distribution systems which are primarily underground except for terminal and
metering devices not exceeding six feet (6') in height, and support structures for transmission crossing spans.
d. The construction of aboveground pumping stations which shall be screened from view of the river.
e. The reconstruction or restoration of historical structures or sites on the inventory of the State Historical Society or the
National Register of Historic Places.
f. Aggregate processing and barge loading facilities as a replacement of existing facilities.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 446/454
g. Construction of a single-family dwelling on a lot approved by the City and recorded in the office of the County Register of
Deeds prior to April 25, 1975, and where the abutting lots have been developed prior to the establishment of these
regulations. In no case shall a dwelling be placed closer to the bluff line or normal high water mark than the average setback
of the structures on the adjacent lots.
D. Height Of Structures: All new structures shall be limited to thirty five feet (35'); except, that the following may be allowed:
1. Barns, silos and similar farm structures.
2. Essential service distribution systems.
3. Bridges, bridge approach roadways and transmission services.
4. Restoration and construction of historical sites and structures.
5. Structures associated with mining and excavation.
6. Expansion of existing industrial complexes.
E. Line Of Sight: Development of new and the expansion of existing water-related uses such as barge loading facilities shall be
screened by berms and natural vegetation where practical.
F. On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems:
1. Any premises intended for human occupancy must be provided with an adequate method of sewage disposal. Public or
Municipal collection and treatment facilities must be used where available and where feasible. Where public or Municipal
facilities are not available, all on-site individual sewage disposal systems shall conform to the minimum standards as set forth
in the standards of WPC-40 as interpreted by the State Pollution Control Agency and the on-site system management
provisions set forth in the Comprehensive Plan.
2. All parts of an on-site sewage disposal system shall be located at least one hundred fifty feet (150') from the normal high water
mark and from bluff lines.
3. No on-site sewage disposal system shall be placed within designated flood plains.
G. Uses Within Designated Flood Plains: All land in the Mississippi River Corridor Critical Area that is within the designated flood
plain shall comply with the standards of Chapter 12 of this Title.
H. Subdivision Of Property For Residential, Commercial And Industrial Development:
1. No land shall be subdivided which is found to be unsuitable for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock
formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply
or sewer disposal capabilities or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents of
the proposed subdivision or the community. The Planning Commission, in applying the provisions of this Section, shall in
writing cite the particular features upon which it bases its conclusions that the land is not suitable for the proposed use and
afford the subdivider an opportunity to present evidence regarding such suitability. Thereafter, the Commission may affirm,
modify or withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
2. All subdivisions shall comply with the applicable provisions of Title 10 of this Code.
3. For planned cluster developments, a pattern of residential subdivision development which places dwelling units into compact
groupings may be allowed when the proposed clustering provides a better means of preserving agricultural land, open space,
woods, scenic views, wetlands and other features of the natural environment than traditional subdivision development. Except
for minimum setbacks and height limits, altered dimensional standards may be allowed as exceptions for planned cluster
developments, provided:
a. The number of dwelling units allowed shall not exceed the total number of dwelling units allowed if the development was
based on the minimum lot size requirements for a single-family residential subdivision.
b. No lot shall be less than one and one-half (11/2) acres in a planned cluster development.
I. Protection Of Natural Features: The governing body may require the preservation of natural features such as large trees,
watercourses, scenic points, historical sites and similar community assets and may decline approval of a subdivision or other
development if provision is not made for preservation of these assets.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 447/454
J. Dedication Of River Front And Park Lands: In all subdivisions which embrace in whole or in part a proposed park, scenic overlook,
trail, drainageway, river front or other open space as shown in the Critical Area Plan, these areas shall be considered for
dedication to the public according to the procedures set forth in Title 10 of this Code. (1971 Code § 28-73; amd. 2000 Code)
11-15-9: SITE PLANNING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Site Plan Required; Exceptions: No building permit, zoning approval or subdivision approval permit or certificate shall be issued
for any action located in an area covered by this Chapter until a site plan has been prepared and approved in accordance with
the provisions of this Section. All or portions of the site planning requirements may be waived in the following cases:
1. The construction or alteration of a single-family detached dwelling and its associated accessory buildings on an individual lot.
2. Agricultural buildings.
3. Any other situation where the Director of Community Development determines that the preparation and review of a detailed site
plan is unnecessary to meet the objectives of this Section.
B. Application And Contents Of Plan: A written application for site plan approval and required site plans shall be submitted to the
Director of Community Development according to the procedures set forth in Section 11-2-4 of this Title. The site plan shall
contain the following information, in addition to those requirements listed in Section 11-2-4 of this Title:
1. The topography map shall clearly delineate any bluff line, all streams, including intermittent streams and swales, rivers, water
bodies and wetlands located on the site, including depth of water, bottom slope, a description of body materials and all
vegetation which may be found in the water body, a statement of water turbidity, a statement of water quality and a
classification given to the water body by the State Department of Natural Resources and the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency, if any. The topography map shall indicate the floodway and/or flood fringe lines and shall indicate the normal high
water mark of the river.
2. A plan delineating existing drainage of the water, setting forth in which direction the volume and at what rate storm water is
conveyed from the site and setting forth those areas of the site where storm water collects and is gradually percolated into the
ground or slowly released to a stream or lake.
3. A description of the soils of the site, including a map indicating soil types by areas to be disturbed as well as a soil report
prepared by a soil scientist containing information on the suitability of the soils for the type of development proposed and for the
type of sewage disposal proposed and describing any remedial steps to be taken by the developer to render the soils suitable.
All areas proposed for grading shall be identified by soil type, both as to soil type of existing topsoil and soil type of the new
contour. The location and extent of any erosion areas shall be indicated. The stability of rock units along bluff lines and faces
shall be included in the soils description.
4. A description of the flora and fauna which occupy the site or are occasionally found thereon, setting forth with detail those
areas where unique plant or animal species may be found on the site.
5. A description of any features, buildings or areas which are of historic significance.
6. A proposed drainage plan of the developed site delineating in which direction the volume and at what rate storm water will be
conveyed from the site and setting forth the areas of the site where storm water will be allowed to collect and gradually
percolate into the ground or be slowly released to a stream or lake. The plan shall also set forth hydraulic capacity of all
structures to be constructed or existing structures to be utilized, including volume of holding ponds and design storm.
7. An erosion and sedimentation control plan indicating the type, location and necessary technical information on control
measures to be taken both during and after construction, including a statement expressing the calculated anticipated gross soil
loss expressed in tons/acre/year both during and after construction.
8. A description of the method to be provided for vehicular and pedestrian access to the proposed development and public
access to the river and/or public river view opportunities both before and after development; a description of the development's
impact on existing views of and along the river.
9. A delineation of the areas to be dedicated for public use.
10. A delineation of the location and amounts of excavated soils to be stored on the site during construction.
11. Any other information pertinent to the particular project which, in the opinion of the inspector or applicant, is necessary or
helpful for the review of the project. (1971 Code § 28-74; amd. 2000 Code)
11-15-10: NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT:
The City hereby finds that uncontrolled and inadequately planned use of wetlands, woodlands, habitat areas, areas subject to soil
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 448/454
erosion and areas containing restrictive soils adversely affects the public health, safety and general welfare by contributing to
pollution and other environmental problems, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses of environmental resources and
hindering the ability of the City to provide adequate community services. Therefore, the following standards have been developed to
promote, preserve and enhance the natural resources within the corridor and to protect them from adverse effects by regulating
developments that would have a severe adverse and potentially irreversible impact on unique and fragile environmentally sensitive
land within the Mississippi River Corridor Critical Area:
A. Standards For Soil Erosion Control: Since certain areas within the corridor have steep slopes or unstable soils which may cause
ecological problems due to siltation and pollution of water bodies and streams, the following standards shall be applied to all
development within the corridor except certain areas designated for mining or excavation which shall comply with soil erosion
standards in the Mining Ordinance:
1. No development shall be permitted on slopes of eighteen percent (18%) or more.
2. No development shall be permitted on land having a slope before alteration in excess of twelve percent (12%) but less than
eighteen percent (18%), unless the applicant shall prove that the following conditions are met:
a. The foundation and underlying material of any structure, including roads, shall be adequate for the slope condition and soil
type.
b. Adequate controls and protections exist uphill from the proposed development such that there is no danger of structures or
roads being struck by falling rock, mud, uprooted trees or other materials.
c. The view of the developed slope from the river and opposite river bank is consistent with the natural appearance of the
undeveloped slope, consistent with any historic areas nearby, compatible with the view from historic areas and compatible
with surrounding architectural features. To the maximum extent possible, the use of natural devices, including vegetation
management, shall be preferred over the construction of artificial devices, including culverts, holding ponds, walls and
terracing.
d. All structures other than buildings and roadway surfaces, but including retaining walls, shall meet the following design
requirements:
(1) Retaining walls or terrace contours shall not exceed five feet (5') in height.
(2) Construction shall be of native stone or wood.
(3) The use of gavvions, pilings, tiebacks, metal retaining walls and precast or cast in place concrete retaining walls is
specifically prohibited.
(4) The minimum space between terraces and retaining walls shall be twenty feet (20').
e. Development activities shall be conducted and staged to minimize soil erosion. The smallest practical increment of land shall
be developed at any one time, and that increment shall be subjected to erosion for the shortest practical period of time, not to
exceed a single construction season.
f. Sufficient control measures and retention facilities shall be put in place prior to commencement of each development
increment to limit gross soil loss from the development site to no more than five (5) tons per acre per year during
development. Gross soil loss from construction sites adjacent to streams and lakes shall not exceed two (2) tons per acre per
year.
g. Conditions on the site shall be stabilized within thirty (30) days following completion of the work such that the yearly gross
soil loss from the site will be less than five-tenths (0.5) ton per acre.
B. Standards For Development On Restrictive Soils: Certain soils in the corridor, without proper management, are unsuitable for
development due to specific conditions which increase the probability of pollution of ground water, erosion or other problems
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. Therefore, the following standards shall be applied to any development
designated or identified as an area of restrictive or unsuitable soil:
1. Development of on-site waste disposal systems shall conform to the standards of the WPC-40 as interpreted by the State
Pollution Control Agency and the on-site system management provision set forth in the utilities element of the Comprehensive
Plan.
2. No residential development shall be permitted on soils which are susceptible to severe changes in physical volume when
moistened or are susceptible to changes in volume during periods of frost, unless the applicant proves that construction
techniques capable of overcoming the restrictive condition will be utilized.
3. Industrial uses requiring bulk storage of chemicals will not be allowed in wet soils, shallow soils or soils with permeability rates
faster than five-tenths (0.5) minutes per inch.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 449/454
4. No solid waste disposal shall be permitted in soils having a permeability rate between five-tenths (0.5) minutes per inch and
five (5.0) minutes per inch or soils over fractured carbonate bedrock within fifty feet (50') of the ground surface.
5. Development which will result in unusual road maintenance costs or utility line breakages due to soil limitations, including high
frost action, shall not be permitted.
6. The lowest floor elevation of buildings if used for living quarters or work area shall be at least three feet (3') above the seasonal
high water level of any wetland.
C. Standards For Wetland Protection: No area defined and designated as a wetland shall be developed without first obtaining a
conditional use permit. No permit shall be issued unless the proposed development complies with the following standards:
1. Filling: A minimum amount of filling may be allowed when necessary, but in no case shall the following restrictions on total
amount of filling be exceeded:
a. Total filling shall not cause the total natural flood storage capacity of the wetland to fall below the projected volume of runoff
from the whole developed watershed generated by a six inch (6") rainfall in twenty four (24) hours.
b. Filling in a wetland shall not exceed the excess storage and nutrient stripping capacities of the wetland based on the ultimate
projected development of the wetland watershed.
c. Only fill free of chemical pollutants and organic wastes may be used.
d. Wetlands shall not be used for solid waste disposal.
2. Vegetation: No wetland vegetation may be removed or altered except that reasonably required for the placement of
structures and use of property.
3. Use As Primary Sediment Traps: Wetlands and other water bodies shall not be used as primary sediment traps during or after
construction.
4. Dredging: Dredging may be allowed only when a boat channel is required for access to a navigable lake or for a marina or
when it will not have a substantial or significant adverse effect upon the ecological and hydrologic characteristics of the wetland
and is proposed for a purpose consistent with the critical area designation. Dredging, when allowed, shall be limited as follows:
a. It shall be located so as to maximize the activity in the areas of lowest vegetation density.
b. It shall not significantly change the water flow characteristics.
c. The size of the dredged area shall be limited to the absolute minimum.
d. Disposal of the dredged material shall not result in a significant change in the current flow or in substantial destruction of
vegetation, fish spawning areas or water pollution.
e. Work in the wetlands will not be performed during the breeding season of waterfowl or fish spawning season.
f. Only one boat channel or marina shall be allowed per large scale development.
g. In other residential developments, dredging shall be located so as to provide for the use of boat channels and marinas by
two (2) or more adjacent property owners.
h. The width of the boat channel to be dredged shall not be more than the minimum required for the safe operation of boats at
minimum operating speed.
D. Standards For Woodland Protection: No area defined and designated as a woodland area on Figure 8 of the Critical Area Plan
may be developed unless that development complies with the following standards, with the exception of trees seriously damaged
by storms or other natural causes or diseased trees:
1. Development shall be conducted so that the maximum number of trees are preserved by the clustering of structures in existing
cleared areas and natural clearings, and the utilization of other site design techniques.
2. Grading, contouring and paving shall not detrimentally affect the root zone aeration and stability of existing trees, and existing
trees shall be provided with a watering area equal to at least one-half (1/2) the crown cover.
3. When trees are removed, the permittee will restore the density of the trees, utilizing nursery stocks of a size generally accepted
as suitable for the purpose, to that which existed before the development; provided, that in no case need the density exceed
ten (10) trees per acre.
4. Development shall not reduce the existing crown cover greater than fifty percent (50%) and shall be conducted in such a
manner as to preserve the understory and litter, unless otherwise approved by the community.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 450/454
5. Trees used in reforestation or landscaping must be compatible with the local landscape and conditions and not presently under
disease epidemic.
E. Standards For Wildlife Habitat Protection: In order to protect and preserve unique resource areas and unique and/or endangered
species of plants or animals which populate these areas from the impact of unplanned development, and to manage such areas
and species for educational, recreational, scientific, aesthetic and conservation purposes, the following standards shall apply to
any development within an area defined or designated as a wildlife habitat area on Figure 9 of the Critical Area Plan:
1. Structures, including utilities and roadways, shall be sited so as to minimize the impact on natural areas and unique plant and
animal species within the District.
2. No substantial alteration of the natural environment or removal of vegetation may be permitted, when such alteration or
removal would significantly diminish the scientific, historical, educational, recreational or aesthetic value of the resource, or
where the alteration or removal would remove a unique or endangered plant species or the supporting environment or critical
habitat or a unique or endangered animal species, or where such activities would have a significant detrimental impact upon
the food supply, security and reproductive cycle of the species.
3. The vibration level, including the generation of vibrations during construction, shall not be allowed to reach a level which would
endanger fragile resources, including geological features.
4. Public access to historically significant natural resource areas or unique and endangered species of plants and animals should
be controlled and limited so as to minimize the intrusion and impact upon the resources.
5. No uses likely to generate air pollution which will be toxic to plants or animals or otherwise detrimental to the resource shall be
allowed.
6. Development shall not detrimentally affect the existing water quality, including the chemical, biological and turbidity
characteristics of the water body or watercourse.
7. Development shall not cause extreme fluctuations of water levels or unnatural changes in water temperature or changes in
water currents or movements which may have significant impact on endangered or unique species of the natural resource area.
F. Standards For Grading And Filling: With the exception of approved mining and mineral extraction operations, grading, filling,
excavating or otherwise changing the topography landward of the ordinary high water mark shall not be conducted without a
permit. A permit may be issued only if:
1. Earth moving, erosion, vegetative cutting and the destruction of natural amenities is minimized;
2. The smallest amount of ground is exposed for as short a time as feasible;
3. Temporary ground cover, such as mulch, is used and permanent ground cover, such as sod, is planted;
4. Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment are employed; and
5. Fill is established to accepted engineering standards.
G. Standards For Vegetation Management: The following standards shall apply for management of vegetation:
1. On developed islands and public recreation lands, the slope or face of bluffs within two hundred feet (200') of the normal high
water mark of the river and within the area forty feet (40') landward from bluff lines, clear cutting shall not be permitted except
for a view corridor as provided.
Twenty five percent (25%) of the width of a lot may be cleared to a depth sufficient to allow a view corridor. In the remaining
seventy five percent (75%) of this strip, cutting shall leave sufficient cover to screen cars, dwellings and other structures, except
boathouses, piers, docks and marinas, from the view of the water body.
2. On all other lands, clear cutting shall be allowed by conditional use permit and be guided by the following provisions:
a. The applicant shall demonstrate that there are no feasible or prudent alternatives to cutting trees on the site.
b. Clear cutting shall not be used where soil, slope or other watershed conditions are fragile and subject to injury.
c. Clear cutting shall be conducted only where clear-cut blocks, patches or strips are, in all cases, shaped and blended with the
natural terrain.
d. The size of clear-cut blocks, patches or strips shall be kept at the minimum necessary.
e. Where feasible, all clear cuts shall be conducted between September 15 and May 15. If natural regeneration will not result in
adequate vegetable cover, areas in which clear cutting is conducted shall be replanted to prevent erosion and to maintain the
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 451/454
aesthetic quality of the area where feasible; replanting shall be performed in the same spring or the following spring.
3. The selective cutting of trees greater than six inches (6") in diameter measured at a point two feet (2') above ground level shall
be allowed by permit when the cutting is appropriately spaced and staged so that a continuous natural cover is maintained.
4. These vegetative management standards shall not prevent the pruning and cutting of vegetation to the minimum amount
necessary for the construction of bridges and roadways and for the safe installation, maintenance and operation of essential
services and utility transmission services which are permitted uses.
H. Standards For Surface Water Runoff Management:
1. Raw sewage, seepage from on-site sewage disposal systems, pollutants and industrial wastes shall not be deposited into
public waters.
2. Withdrawal of ground water shall not result in reducing surface water levels.
3. Water released into the natural drainage system shall be directed so as not to travel over contaminated surfaces.
4. Storm water runoff may be directed to public water bodies or wetlands; provided, that storm water runoff is substantially free of
silt, debris and chemical pollutants, and only at rates which will not disturb vegetation or increase turbidity.
5. The quality of water runoff and water infiltrated to the water table or aquifer shall be as high as it was before development of
the site.
6. Development shall not increase the runoff rate or decrease the natural rate of absorption of storm water.
I. Noise Control In Public Open Space Areas: Noise levels within public open space areas shall not exceed those for nature exhibits
as set forth in Minnesota Regulations NPC-1, 2.
J. Management Of Undeveloped Islands: Existing undeveloped islands shall be managed under the provisions of the Conservancy
District and other provisions in the Critical Area Overlay District. These islands shall be considered open space areas, and no
structures except those provided for in subsection 11-15-8C3 of this Chapter shall be allowed. (1971 Code § 28-75)
11-15-11: RIVER SURFACE USE:
Due to problems with erosion of shore land and nuisances because of noise, the following standards for use of the surface waters
within the river corridor shall apply:
A. Water surface use on backwater areas and lakes shall be restricted to noncommercial navigation only and so as not to cause
unnecessary wakes.
B. Docks or piers may be allowed subject to approval by the applicable State or Federal agencies. (1971 Code § 28-76)
11-15-12: ROAD, UTILITY AND PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION AND ROUTING REGULATIONS:
A. Utility Facilities: Utility crossings of the Critical Area Corridor or routing within the corridor shall meet the following standards:
1. Underground placing of the utility facility shall be required unless economic, technological and land characteristic factors make
underground placement infeasible. Economic considerations alone shall not be made the major determinant regarding
feasibility.
2. Overhead crossings, if required, shall meet the following criteria:
a. The crossings shall be adjacent to or part of an existing utility corridor, including bridge or overhead utility lines.
b. All structures utilized shall be as compatible as practicable with land use, scenic views and existing transmission structures
in height, material, color and design.
c. Right-of-way clearance shall be kept to a minimum.
d. Vegetative screening shall be utilized to the maximum extent consistent with safety requirements.
e. Routing shall avoid unstable soils, bluff lines or high ridges. The alteration of the natural environment, including grading, shall
be minimized.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 452/454
f. The crossings shall be subject to the site planning requirements set forth in Section 11-15-9 of this Chapter.
3. Utility substations shall be subject to the following standards:
a. All substations shall be subject to the site planning requirements set forth in Section 11-15-9 of this Chapter.
b. New substations or refurbishment of existing substations shall be compatible in height, scale, building materials, landscaping
and signing with the surrounding natural environment or land uses. Screening by natural means is encouraged and should
be compatible with the surrounding environment.
4. Pipelines and underground utility facilities shall be subject to the following standards:
a. All pipelines and underground facilities shall be subject to the site planning requirements set forth in Section 11-15-9 of this
Chapter.
b. The facilities shall be located to avoid wetlands, woodlands and areas of unstable soils.
c. All underground placing of utility facilities and pipelines shall be followed by revegetation and rehabilitation to the conditions
which existed on-site prior to development.
B. Public And Private Roads And Railways: New roads and railways crossing the Critical Area Corridor or routed within the Critical
Area Corridor shall meet the following standards:
1. Roads and railways shall be constructed to minimize impacts on the natural terrain and natural landscape.
2. Cuts and fills are to be avoided.
3. All roads and railways shall be subject to the site planning requirements set forth in Section 11-15-9 of this Chapter.
4. New roads and railways shall not utilize the river corridor as a convenient right of way for new arterials or main lines.
5. New roads and railways shall be restricted to those facilities needed to access existing and planned residential, commercial
and industrial uses.
6. All new roads and railways shall provide safe pedestrian crossing points to allow access to the river front. Rest areas, vistas
and waysides shall be provided.
7. The grades of any streets shall not exceed ten percent (10%). (1971 Code § 28-77)
11-15-13: MARINAS; BARGE FLEETING AND LOADING FACILITIES:
A. Boat Launching Ramps:
1. Boat launching ramps may be located only where access streets are adequate to handle the traffic load generated by the
facility.
2. Shared or joint use accessory parking will be preferred. Loading will be permitted only at ramps. Parking areas must be
screened from the river and adjoining residential property and located at least one hundred feet (100') from the normal high
water mark.
3. The impact of the accessory parking must not adversely affect the environmental quality of the site or the surrounding
neighborhood.
4. Boat launching ramps and minor accessory buildings and haul-off facilities must be in character and scale with the surrounding
neighborhood.
B. Public Marinas: Public marinas shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions:
1. The marina must have lavatory facilities adequate to serve the marina clientele.
2. Off-street parking areas should be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth for boat launching ramps.
3. Areas for the winter storing of boats should be naturally screened from view from the river and from upland lots.
4. The marina shall be designed for and used only by pleasure craft.
5. Maximum height of any buildings or structures shall be thirty five feet (35').
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 453/454
6. Accessory uses customarily incidental to public marinas, including fueling stations, may be permitted, providing they are
consistent in scale and intensity with the marina and surrounding uses.
C. Barge Fleeting, Loading And Storage: Barge fleeting, loading and storage shall be permitted only in compliance with the following
provisions:
1. Any barge cleaning facilities must be serviced by public sewer.
2. Barge fleeting areas shall be located more than two hundred feet (200') from marina access and boat access points in order
to provide a clear line of site for boaters using these facilities.
3. Barge fleeting areas shall not be located immediately adjacent to park areas, unless it is shown that there is no conflict with the
park usage.
4. Existing trees shall not be utilized for tie-up facilities.
5. First priority for new barge fleeting sites shall be given to those sites adjoining industrial and commercial areas and where the
topography serves as a buffer from noise and visual obstructions.
D. Pilings, Dredging And Filling: No pilings shall be driven into the riverbed except as is necessarily incident to water-dependent
uses. Landfill and dredging shall not be permitted except as incident to a water-dependent use when no feasible alternative
exists. Dry land disposal of dredge spoils shall be authorized on shore sites which contain no unique or valuable resources. Dry
land disposal of dredge spoils shall be subject to the site planning requirements set forth in Section 11-15-9 of this Chapter. (1971
Code § 28-78)
11-15-14: RIVER FRONT USE AND ACCESS:
A. Public Access On Public Property: Public access shall be provided to the river front of developments on publicly-owned and
publicly-controlled river front property, whether leased to private lessees or not, except where:
1. Unavoidable hazards exist to the public.
2. Public pedestrian access at a particular location cannot be designed or developed to provide a pleasant view or recreational
experience.
B. Public Access On Private Property: Public access shall be provided to the river front for all nonwater-dependent uses which are
developed as a planned unit development or requiring subdivision approval.
C. Denial Of Access: Access to the river front may be denied to any person who creates a nuisance or who engages in illegal
conduct on the property. Public access may be temporarily or permanently closed upon a finding that such offensive conduct
cannot otherwise be reasonably controlled. (1971 Code § 28-79)
11-15-15: SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANTS, SEWAGE OUTFALLS AND WATER INTAKE FACILITIES:
The provision of sewage treatment plants, sewage outfalls and water intake facilities shall:
A. Wherever practicable, conform with the dimensional standards and criteria in Sections 11-15-8 and 11-15-9 of this Chapter.
B. Provide that in the case of public sewage treatment plants, the unused river frontage after construction shall be made available for
public access or recreation open space use if practical.
C. Not include new combined storm and sanitary sewer outfalls. (1971 Code § 28-80)
11-15-16: ADMINISTRATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Updating And Re-Evaluation Of Plans And Regulations:
1. The City may amend its plans and regulations that have been approved by the State Environmental Quality Board (EQB) by
resubmitting the plans and regulations with any recommended changes thereto to the EQB for consideration.
6/30/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=500 454/454
2. Two (2) years after the EQB's initial approval of the plans and regulations, the City shall resubmit its plans and regulations, with
any recommended changes thereto, for review and approval by the EQB.
3. Amendments to plans and regulations shall become effective only upon the approval thereof by the EQB.
B. Variances:
1. Variances from strict compliance with the setback, lot size, height restriction or line of site requirements contained in this
Chapter may be issued by the City Council following a procedure as required by Section 11-2-7 of this Title. Variances shall
only be granted where there are particular hardships which make the strict enforcement of this Chapter impractical. "Hardship"
means the proposed use of the property and associated structures in question cannot be established under the conditions
allowed by this Chapter; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to his/her property, not created by the
landowner after April 25, 1975; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. Economic
considerations alone shall not constitute a hardship for the reasonable use of the property and associated structures. In
addition, no variance shall be granted that would permit any use that is prohibited in the Critical Area River Corridor.
2. When considering a proposal for a variance or other applications within the Mississippi River Corridor Critical Area, the
Planning Commission and City Council shall address the following items in making their decision:
a. Preserving the scenic and recreational resources of the river corridor, especially in regard to the view from and use of the
river.
b. The maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
c. The prevention and control of water pollution, including sedimentation.
d. The location of the site with respect to floodways, flood plains, slopes and bluff lines.
e. The erosion potential of the site based on degree and direction of slope, soil type and vegetative cover.
f. Potential impact on game and fish habitat.
g. Location of the site with respect to existing or future access roads.
h. The amount of wastes to be generated and the adequacy of the proposed disposal systems.
i. The anticipated demand for police, fire, medical and school services and facilities.
j. The compatibility of the proposed development with uses on adjacent land.
C. Conditional Use Permits: Conditional use permits may be granted after an application process and a public hearing according to
the provisions of Section 11-2-9 of this Title. A conditional use permit may be granted only when the following findings are made:
1. It is consistent with the intent of the critical area order and the City's Comprehensive Plan;
2. It is compatible with uses in the immediate vicinity; and
3. It is permitted by the ordinances of the community.
D. Emergency Actions: A development permit may be issued when certified in writing by the local unit of government that the
development is essential to protect the public health, safety or welfare in an existing emergency and that a local ordinance or
State regulation was in effect immediately prior to April 25, 1975, and a development permit would have been granted thereunder
(1971 Code § 28-81; amd. 2000 Code)
Footnote 1: M.S.A. § 116G.01 et seq.
Footnote 2: M.S.A. § 116D.01 et seq.
Footnote 3: This Chapter is derived from Ordinance 379 which was adopted on August 4, 1982, to become effective after
publication according to law.