CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1 - CODE INTRODUCTION
Effective Date: March 7, 2006 330A
Amendments:
Section 1.1: General Provisions
1.1.01 Adoption of Code. The existing ordinances of the City of Cloquet are hereby replaced, revised and
codified. This codification is hereafter adopted as the "Municipal Code of Cloquet." References to the municipal
code of Cloquet shall include all additions and amendments to it. All unaffected ordinances including the existing
city zoning provisions, and ordinances pertaining to municipal platting and land subdivision shall remain in effect
until such time as they are specifically replaced by corresponding Code sections subsequently adopted by the City
Council.
State law references: Authority of city to codify, Minn. Stats. § 415.021.
1.1.02 Short Title. The Municipal Code of Cloquet may be referred to as the "Code", "this Code" or "the
Municipal Code."
1.1.03 Statutory Rules Adopted. The definitions and rules of construction, presumptions, and miscellaneous
provisions pertaining to construction as contained in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 645 are hereby adopted by
reference and are made a part of this Code. As so adopted, references in these chapters to laws and statutes mean
provisions of this Code or the laws of the State of Minnesota. References to the legislature mean the legislature of
the State of Minnesota and references to the Council refer to the City Council of the City of Cloquet.
State law references: Interpretation of statutes generally, Minn. Stats. ch. 645.
1.1.04 Existing Rights and Liabilities. The repeal of prior ordinances and the adoption of this Code shall not be
construed to affect, in any manner, rights and liabilities existing at the time of the repeal and the enactment of this
Code. Insofar as provisions in this Code are intended to be substantially the same as pre-existing ordinances, they
shall be considered as continuations and not as new enactments. Accordingly, any right or liability accruing or any
act done, offense committed, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred or assessed prior to the effective date of this
Code shall not be affected by the enactment of the Code.
1.1.05 Preservation of Past Acts and Rights. The repeal of any ordinance or portion thereof by the adoption of
this Code shall not affect or impair any act done or right vested or accrued or any proceeding, suit or prosecution
which existed or had commenced in any cause before such repeal took effect; but every such act done or right vested
or accrued or proceeding, suit or prosecution had or commenced shall remain in full force and effect to all intents
and purposes as if such repeal had not taken place. No offense committed and no liability, penalty or forfeiture,
either civilly or criminally incurred prior to the time when such ordinance or part thereof shall be repealed by the
adoption of this Code, shall be discharged or affected by such repeal. Prosecution and suits for such offenses,
liabilities, penalties or forfeitures shall be instituted and proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance or
part thereof had not been repealed.
State law references: Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. §§ 645.35, 645.36.
1.1.06 Repeal of Ordinances. All ordinances passed by the City of Cloquet up to the time of adoption of this
Code are hereby repealed except those ordinances otherwise provided for in this Code.
1.1.07 Subsequent Ordinances. Ordinances passed by the City of Cloquet after the effective date of this Code
shall be passed as amendments or additions to this Code (unless they are of limited or special application or are
otherwise deemed to be not a part of this Code.)
1.1.08 Consecutive Numbering to Continue. Consecutive chronological numbering of all ordinances as passed
shall continue.
State law references: Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. §§ 645.13-645.151.
Section 1.1 General Provisions 1
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1 - CODE INTRODUCTION
1.1.09 Additions. New ordinances proposing amendments or additions to the Code shall be assigned appropriate
code numbers and shall be incorporated into the Code as of their effective date. Reference or citation to the Code
shall be deemed to include such amendments and additions. When an ordinance is integrated into the Code, there
may be omitted from the ordinance the title, the enacting clause, section numbers, definitions of terms identical to
those contained in this Code, the clause indicating date of adoption, and the validating signatures and dates. In
integrating ordinances into the Code, the City Administrator, in cooperation with the City Attorney, may correct
obvious grammatical, punctuation, and spelling errors; they may change reference numbers to conform with
sections, articles, and chapters of the Code; they may substitute figures for written words and vice versa; they may
substitute dates for the words "the effective date of this ordinance"; and they may perform like actions to insure a
uniform code of ordinances without, however, altering the intended meaning of the ordinances enacted.
1.1.10 Updating. This Code shall be printed in loose-leaf form so that it may be kept up to date regularly by the
insertion of revised or additional pages.
1.1.11 Separability/Severability. If any chapter, section, sentence, clause or other part of the Municipal Code of
Cloquet shall be adjudged void or of no effect by any Court or by a change of law or for any reason whatsoever,
such decisions or determinations shall not affect the validity of any of the other portions of the Code not so affected
and it is the specific intent that they will remain valid.
1.1.12 Copies. Copies of this Code shall be maintained by the City Administrator and the City Attorney and at
least one copy will be kept in the office of the City Administrator for public inspection or sale for a reasonable
charge.
Section 1.1 General Provisions 2
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1 - CODE INTRODUCTION
Section 1.2: Rules of Construction
1.2.01 General. Words and phrases used in this Code shall be construed in their plain, ordinary and usual sense,
except that technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.
1.2.02 Masculine, Feminine or Neuter. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the use of masculine,
feminine, or neuter gender terms shall be intended to include the other genders.
1.2.03 Singular or Plural. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the use of either singular or plural
numbers shall include the other number.
1.2.04 Past, Present or Future. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the use of the past, present or
future tense shall include the other tenses.
1.2.05 Joint Authority. Words importing joint authority to three or more persons shall be construed as authority
to a majority of such persons.
1.2.06 Computation of Time. The time within which an act shall be done shall be computed by excluding the
first and including the last day listed. If the last day is a Sunday or legal holiday, such day shall be excluded and the
day following included.
1.2.07 Agents. Whenever the Municipal Code requires an act to be done, which act may legally be done by an
agent or employee as well as by the principal, such requirement shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by
an authorized agent or employee.
1.2.08 Conjunctions. The words "or" and "and" may be read interchangeably in situations where the context
requires it.
1.2.09 Catch Lines, Titles, Headings. The catch lines, titles, or headings of the various sections of the Municipal
Code printed in bold type are intended to indicate the contents of the section for the convenience of the reader, but
shall not be construed as a part of the section.
State law references: Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 645.49.
1.2.10 Substantive Changes Not Intended. The Municipal Code is intended as a Codification of the existing law,
and shall be construed in accordance with such intent.
1.2.11 Minnesota Rules of Construction to Apply. Unless clearly in conflict with the provisions of this Code, or
otherwise clearly inapplicable, rules of construction established for the State of Minnesota by statues or case law
shall apply in the construction of this Code.
Section 1.2 Rules of Construction 3
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1 - CODE INTRODUCTION
Section 1.3: Definitions
1.3.01 Certain Terms Defined. As used in the Municipal Code of Cloquet, unless the particular context shall
clearly require some other meaning, the following terms shall mean:
Subd. 1 City. "City" shall mean the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 2 City Administrator. "City Administrator" shall mean the person appointed by the Council to
perform the duties of City Clerk, Treasurer, and City Administrator. References to "Clerk",
"Administrator", "City Administrator", "Treasurer", "Clerk-Treasurer" or similar designation shall mean the
City Administrator.
Subd. 3 City Plan. "City Plan" shall mean the comprehensive City plan adopted by the City Council.
Subd. 4 Code. "Code" shall mean the Municipal Code of Cloquet.
Subd. 5 Council. "Council" shall mean the City Council of Cloquet.
Subd. 6 Governing Body. "Governing Body" shall mean the City Council of Cloquet.
Subd. 7 Person. "Person" shall mean any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization or other group acting as a unit. It also includes any executor, administrator, trustee, receiver
or other representative appointed by law. Whenever the word "person" is used in any section prescribing a
penalty or fine, it shall include the partners or members of any partnership or corporation, and, as to
corporation, the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible for the violation.
Subd. 8 Property. "Property" shall mean tangible or intangible, real, personal or mixed property.
Subd. 9 Sidewalk. "Sidewalk" shall mean that portion of the street between the curbline and the
adjacent property line, intended for the use by pedestrians.
Subd. 10 State. "State" shall mean the State of Minnesota.
Subd. 11 Street. "Street" shall mean any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, alley or other
public thoroughfare. Each of said words shall include the others, and, if the context permits, shall also
include "sidewalks."
1.3.02 Other Definitions. Certain chapters of this Code contain other definitions applicable particularly to that
Chapter. In case of any conflict between the definitions in this Section and other definitions, the other definitions
shall prevail in the Chapters where applicable.
1.3.03 Minnesota Definitions to Apply. Unless clearly in conflict with definitions or other provisions of this
Code, or otherwise clearly inapplicable, definitions established for the State of Minnesota by statues or case law
shall apply to this Code.
Section 1.3 Definitions 4
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1 - CODE INTRODUCTION
Section 1.4: Violations and Penalties Provided in Code
1.4.01 Petty Misdemeanor. Whenever an act or omission is declared by this Code to be a petty misdemeanor,
any person violating the provision shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed the maximum allowed
under State law for a petty misdemeanor at the time of the act or omission so committed.
(Ordinance 114A, 46A, 279, 277, 245)
State law references: Increased maximum penalties for petty misdemeanors, Minn. Stats.
§ 609.0331.
1.4.02 Misdemeanors. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for in this Code, any person violating any
provision of this Code, or any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance thereof, or any other provision of any code
adopted in this Code by reference, including any provision declaring an act or omission to be a misdemeanor, shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in an amount or for a term not to exceed the maximums
allowed by State law for a misdemeanor plus, in either case, the costs of prosecution or any restitution ordered by
the Court.
State law references: Increased maximum penalty for ordinance violations, Minn. Stats. § 609.034.
1.4.03 Separate Violations. Unless otherwise provided, each act of violation and every day on which a violation
occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense.
1.4.04 City Personnel Liability. The failure of any officer or employee of the City to perform any official duty
imposed by this Code shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for violation unless a penalty
is specifically provided for such failure.
Section 1.4 Violations and Penalties Provided in Code 5
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1 - CODE INTRODUCTION
Section 1.5: Recommended Fine Schedule
1.5.01 Fine Schedule. The City Council may, from time to time as necessary, adopt and approve by resolution a
comprehensive recommended fine schedule for single or multiple occurrence offenses of violations of various
provisions of this Code. That fine schedule is intended to be incorporated into the Code as adopted by the Council
from time to time.
1.5.02 Notification to Court Personnel. The City Administrator shall transmit a copy of any fine schedule
adopted by the Council to the City Attorney and Carlton County Court Administration so that it is available to the
Court in addressing violations of the Code.
1.5.03 Payment of Fines, Penalties. All fines, forfeitures and penalties recovered for the violation of any
ordinance of the City shall be paid into the City General Fund by the Court or officers thereof receiving the moneys
on behalf of the City. Payment shall be made in the manner and at the time provided by law.
State law references: Authorized penalty for ordinance violations, Minn. Stats. § 412.231.
Section 1.5 Recommended Fine Schedule 6
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Effective Date: March 7, 2006
Amendments: 10-07-08 349A / 02-03-09 356A / 04-07-09 358A / 01-05-10 371A / 12-21-10 385A / 01-18-11 -
386A / 06-19-12 410A / 05-03-16 455A / 11-07-19 484A
Section 2.1 Government Officials 1
2.1 Government Officials
I. Elected City Officials
2.1.01 Introduction to Elected City Officials. The elective officers of the City shall be a Mayor and six (6)
members of the City Council (who shall be known as Council Members). The City Council will consist of a Mayor
and Council Members from each of five wards. One Council Member will be elected by the voters of each of the
respective five wards. The Mayor and one Council Member at large shall be elected by the voters of the entire City.
2.1.02 Mayor. The Mayor is the presiding officer of the Council and is a regular member of the City Council. The
Mayor is the highest-ranking elected official in the City. In fulfilling the duties and responsibilities of the office of
Mayor, the Mayor shall be empowered and required to do the following:
Subd. 1 Functions and Duties. The Mayor has all of the duties and powers of a Council Member in
addition to those as Mayor. In fulfilling the duties and responsibilities of the office of Mayor, the Mayor
shall be empowered and required to do as follows:
A. In conjunction with the City Administrator serve as the City's representative before the
Minnesota Legislature, federal agencies, and other local governments.
B. Perform ceremonial duties on behalf of the City and promote and represent the
community as required.
C. Enforce all laws, City Code provisions, and resolutions of the City and, as necessary,
make and adopt recommendations for revisions or additions to existing ordinances as
codified in this Code, and the City’s rules and regulations.
D. In conjunction with the Council, make such appointments as authorized to promote the
smooth administration and operation of the City.
E. Attend and participate in discussions at all meetings of the Council and other bodies as
required.
F. Fulfill the responsibilities of the office of Mayor where statutory reference is made to the
position.
G. Perform such other duties as may be placed under the Mayor jurisdiction by Council
action or as required by law.
Subd. 2 Term of Office. Pursuant to the authority vested in the Council by Minn. Stat., Chapter 412, the
term of office of the Mayor of the City shall be four years.
(Ordinance 157A)
State law references: Authority to provide for four-year term, Minn. Stats. § 412.022.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2.1 Government Officials 2
Subd. 3 Salary. The salary of the Mayor of the City of Cloquet will be $6,000 per year payable at the rate
of $500 per month. The compensation for the Mayor will not include benefits for health care, life
insurance or dental insurance. In addition, the Mayor will be paid $150 per meeting for each regularly
scheduled Council meeting actually attended, up to a maximum of an additional $300 per month. The
Mayor will be allowed up to a maximum of two approved absences per calendar year from regularly
scheduled meetings before the Mayor will suffer any reduction in supplemental pay for attendance of such
meetings as provided herein. All absences from meetings must be approved and any absences not approved
or excess of the two absences permitted herein will result in a reduction in supplemental pay for nonattendance.
The salary and compensation of the Mayor may be adjusted as permitted by ordinance from
time to time by the City Council.
2.1.03 Council Member. There will be six (6) council members on the City Council. There will be one council
member who resides in and is elected from each of the five (5) city wards, and one additional councilor who resides
in the City and is elected at large.
Subd. 1 Functions and Duties. Council Members are elected by and represent their respective wards as
representatives on the City Council. In fulfilling the duties and responsibilities of the office of council
member, each shall be empowered and required to do as follows:
A. Formulate policies, adopt ordinances and exercise city powers as a member of the City
Council.
B. Act as liaisons between city government and the general citizens of the City and the
people they represent.
C. Enforce all laws, City Code provisions, and resolutions of the City and, as necessary,
make and adopt recommendations for revisions or additions to existing ordinances, rules
and regulations.
D. In conjunction with the entire Council, make such appointments as authorized to promote
the smooth administration and operation of the City.
E. Attend and participate in discussions at all meetings of the Council and other bodies as
required.
F. Fulfill the responsibilities of the office of council member where statutory reference is
made to the position.
G. Provide guidance to the City Administrator with regard to City matters and provide input
regarding the future development of the City.
Subd. 2 Term of Office. The term of office for Council Members shall be four years.
State law references: Authority to provide for four-year term, Minn. Stats.
§ 412.022.
Subd. 3 Salary. The salary of Council members for the City of Cloquet will be $4,800 per year, payable
at a rate of $400 per month. The compensation for members of the City Council will not include benefits
for health care, life insurance or dental insurance. In addition, each member of the City Council will
receive $100 per regularly scheduled Council meeting actually attended up to a maximum of $200 per
month. Each Council member will be allowed up to a maximum of two approved absences per calendar
year from regularly scheduled meetings before the Council member will suffer any reduction in
supplemental pay for attendance of such meetings as provided herein. All absences from meetings must be
approved and any absences not approved or excess of the two absences permitted herein will result in a
reduction in supplemental pay for non-attendance. The salary and compensation of members of the City
Council may be adjusted as permitted by ordinance from time to time by the City Council.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2.1 Government Officials 3
II. Non-elected City Officials
2.1.04 City Administrator. The combined positions of City Treasurer and City Clerk shall be known as the City
Administrator. The City Administrator shall be appointed by and be responsible to the Council.
Subd. 1 Appointment and Removal. The City Administrator shall be appointed by a majority of the
Council for an indefinite term and may be removed from the office by affirmative action by a majority of
the full Council with or without cause, subject to the terms of any applicable employment contract executed
between the Council and the City Administrator.
Subd. 2 Qualifications. The City Administrator shall be selected solely on the basis of the person's
executive and administrative qualifications, experience, formal education, and knowledge of accepted
practices pertaining to the duties of the office.
Subd. 3 Direction. The City Administrator shall be subject to the supervision and direction of the Mayor
and the Council as a collective body pursuant to Minnesota Statutes and consistent with applicable laws.
The Council shall, at least once annually, undertake a review of the City Administrator's performance.
Subd. 4 Functions and Duties. The City Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the
City, and shall be responsible for the proper administration of all affairs of the City; shall oversee and direct
the operation of all Departments, Divisions, and Offices of the City except as otherwise provided by law.
In fulfilling the duties and responsibilities of the office of the City Administrator, the City Administrator
shall be empowered and required to do as follows:
A. Supervise and direct the administration of all Departments, Divisions, Offices, municipal
functions, and services under the control of the Council, except as otherwise provided by
law.
B. Develop and issue administrative policies, rules, regulations, and procedures necessary to
ensure the proper management of all Departments, Divisions, and Offices.
C. Enforce all laws, City Code provisions, and resolutions of the City and, as necessary,
make recommendations for revisions or additions.
D. Attend and participate in discussions at all meetings of the Council and other bodies as
required. The City Administrator shall represent the City at all functions as appropriate
and in keeping with the prerogatives of the Mayor and the Council.
E. Prepare and submit an annual budget to the Council and administer it after receiving
Council approval.
F. Administer and manage the finances of the City subject to Council approval.
G. Advise the Council as to the financial condition of the City.
H. Recommend and submit for Council approval or disapproval the employment, promotion
or removal of all City personnel. Undertake the recruitment, screening, and interviewing
of prospective employees.
I. Make recommendations to the Council as to wages, salaries and employee benefits of all
City employees.
J. Direct all personnel matters as provided for by the personnel policies established by the
Council with the authority to assign or transfer personnel, suspend for up to 30 days,
subject to approval of the Council, assist the City Council negotiating committee in all
negotiations of employee labor contracts for approval by the Council; provide system for
annual employee performance appraisals and directly evaluate Department Heads.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2.1 Government Officials 4
K. Supervise purchasing, including the making or letting of purchases and contracts in
accordance with policies established by the Council and applicable laws; provide for the
receipt of estimates, quotations, and sealed bids and submit to the Council as appropriate.
L. Monitor all consultant and contract work performed for the City.
M. Coordinate the City Attorney's activities on behalf of the City.
N. Recommend the adoption of such measures as may be necessary or expedient for the
health, safety, and welfare of the community or for the improvement of the organization
and operation of municipal government.
O. Prepare and/or provide periodic reports, summaries, information, and recommendations
to the Council relating to municipal services, projects, and issues for consideration by the
Council.
P. Fulfill the responsibilities of the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer where statutory
reference is made to the position.
Q. Perform such other duties as may be placed under the City Administrator's jurisdiction by
Council action or as required law.
Subd. 5 General Supervision. No member of the Council, including the Mayor, shall in any manner
interfere with, or prevent the City Administrator from exercising the City Administrator's own judgment in
the administration of the City. Except for the purpose of inquiry, no member of the Council or the Mayor
shall dictate to or exercise control over the administration of the City, and no member shall give orders to
any Department Head or employee except through the City Administrator upon a majority vote of the
Council.
Subd. 6 Administrative Appeal. If any person shall be aggrieved by any administrative decision of the
City Administrator, such aggrieved person may request a full hearing before the Council upon serving a
written request therefore upon the Mayor and City Administrator at least five days prior to any regular
Council Meeting. Such request shall contain a general statement setting forth the administrative decision to
be challenged. The Council may direct the appeal to an appropriate committee of the Council for a review
of the administrative decision and for findings of fact for review by the Council. At such hearing before
the committee or Council, the appellant may present any evidence deemed pertinent to the appeal. The
right to an administrative appeal shall not apply to personnel matters, which shall be handled in accordance
with grievance procedures contained in the personnel policies adopted by the Council or by applicable
collective bargaining agreements.
Subd. 7 Annual Audits. The City Administrator shall have an annual audit of the City's financial affairs
performed in accordance with Laws of Minnesota.
Subd. 8 Salary. The salary and benefits for the City Administrator shall be as set forth from time to time
by the Council by resolution and shall be consistent with any employment contract executed between the
Council and the City Administrator.
(Ordinance 231A, 152A, 284)
2.1.05 Director of Public Works/City Engineer. The City may employ a Director of Public Works/City Engineer
who will be appointed by the City Council. The Director of Public Works/City Engineer will report to the City
Administrator. The Director of Public Works/City Engineer may, with the consent of the City Council, employ such
assistants and employees as may be necessary to perform his/her responsibilities. The Director of Public
Works/City Engineer will perform all of the job duties clearly delineated in the job description on file with the City
Administrator.
2.1.06 City Attorney. The City Council shall appoint a City Attorney who shall be an attorney licensed to practice
law within the State of Minnesota.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2.1 Government Officials 5
Subd. 1 Functions and Duties. In fulfilling the duties and responsibilities of the office of City Attorney,
the City Attorney shall be empowered and required to do as follows:
A. Have charge of all legal matters connected with the city government as directed by the
City Administrator and City Council.
B. Shall act as legal advisor to the Mayor, City Council, its committees, and all other
officers of the City and of its boards.
C. When requested, the City Attorney will furnish legal opinions on behalf of the City and
shall be authorized to sign all plats and legal documents as required and directed.
D. Attend those meetings of the City Council, City boards or committees pertaining to city
business when requested.
E. Perform such other duties as may be placed under the City Attorney's jurisdiction by
Council action or as required by law.
2.1.07 Police Chief. In fulfilling the duties and responsibilities of the position of Police Chief, the Chief will
report to the City Administrator and shall be responsible to the City Council for law enforcement within the City. In
addition, the Chief will be responsible for the property of the City used by the Police Department and will perform
all of the job duties clearly delineated in the job description on file with the City Administrator.
2.1.08 (Section deleted per Ordinance No. 410A adopted 6/19/12)
2.1.09 Library Director. The Library Director has responsibility for the management and operation of the City
Library. The Library Director is responsible to the Library Board which reports to the Council. The Library
Director has final authority over all matters involving the day to day operation of the City Library and is responsible
for the property of the City used by the Library. The Library Director will perform all of the job duties clearly
delineated in the job description on file with the City Administrator.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2.2 Statutory Boards, Commissions and Committees 6
Section 2.2: Statutory Boards, Commissions and Committees
2.2.01 City Planning Commission
Subd. 1 Establishment of Commission. Consistent with the authority extended pursuant to Minn. Stat. §
462.354 a City Planning Commission for the City shall be continued.
State law references: Planning commission authorized, Minn. Stats.
§ 462.354, subd. 1(1).
Subd. 2 Composition. The planning commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the Council. Commission members shall be appointed for terms of three years each.
Each appointed member shall serve until his or her successor shall be appointed and qualified. Interim
vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor upon approval of the Council for unexpired terms.
The terms of the ex-officio members shall correspond to their respective official tenures. Every appointed
member shall, before assuming the office, take an oath that he or she shall faithfully discharge the duties of
his or her office. All members shall serve without compensation.
Subd. 3 Organization, Meeting, Other. The Planning Commission shall elect a chairperson and the
commission may create and fill other offices as it may determine. It may select a secretary from within or
from without the commission membership. The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each
month. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions,
transactions and findings, which shall be a public record. On or before February first of each year, the
commission shall submit to the City Council a report of its work during the preceding year. The
commission may employ City planning, engineering, architectural and such other services as it may
require. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated
for that purpose by the City Council.
Subd. 4 Adoption of Program of Work. Upon the appointment and organization of the commission, it
shall proceed with the preparation and adoption by resolution of a program of work, outlining activities
proposed to be undertaken in the exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties. This program
shall include:
A. An outline of data and information to be assembled as a basis for the City plan;
B. An outline of subjects to be covered by the City plan;
C. An outline of types of procedure necessary to make the City plan effective. The planning
commission may, by resolution, revise its program of work from time to time.
Subd. 5 Preparation of City Plan. It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to
prepare and adopt a comprehensive City plan for the physical development of the City, including proposed
public buildings, street arrangements and improvements, public utility services, parks, playgrounds, and
other similar development, the use of property, the density of population, and other matters relating to the
physical development of the City. The plan may be prepared in sections, each of which shall relate to a
major subject of the plan, as outlined in the commission's program of work.
Subd. 6 Procedure for Adoption of Plan. Before adopting the City plan or any section of it or any
substantial amendment thereof, the commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon. Notice of the
time and place of that meeting shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation at least
five days before the day of the hearing. The adoption of the City plan or any section or amendment thereof
shall be by resolution of the commission, approved by the affirmative votes of not less that five/sevenths
(5/7) of its total membership. The Commission may from time to time amend or add to the City plan or
any section thereof as provided in this Section for the adoption of the original plan whenever changed
conditions or further studies by the commission indicate that an amendment or addition shall be necessary.
An attested copy of the plan or any section, amendment, or addition to the City plan adopted by the
planning commission shall be certified to the City Council subject to final approval.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2.2 Statutory Boards, Commissions and Committees 7
Subd. 7 Means of Executing Plan. Upon the adoption of the City plan or any section thereof, it shall be
the duty of the planning commission to recommend to the City Council reasonable and practicable means
for putting into effect the plan or any section thereof in order that the plan shall serve as a pattern and guide
for the orderly physical development of the City and as a basis for the efficient expenditure of the funds
thereof relating to the subjects of the City plan. These means shall consist of a zoning plan, the control of
subdivision plats, a plan of future streets, coordination of the normal public improvement of the City, a
long term program of capital expenditures and such other matters as shall accomplish the purposes of this
Section.
Subd. 8 Zoning Plan. In harmony with existing official arrangements by the City for the preparation or
maintenance of a zoning code and ordinances, the planning commission shall prepare and administer a
zoning plan for the City. Before recommending any substantive changes to that plan, the planning
commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon after a notice similar to that required by Subd. 6.
The same procedure shall apply for the preparation of any plan of proposed rights-of-way for future streets
or highways, or the future widening of existing streets or highways, or for the reservation of lands for other
public purposes. Thereafter, any changes must be referred to the Council for final approval.
Subd. 9 Official Map of the Street Extensions. The planning commission may and upon instruction by
the City Council shall prepare an official map of the platted and un-platted portions of the City and
adjoining territory, or portions thereof, indicating upon the map the proposed future extension or widening
of streets of the City within the existing platted and developed territory or across the un-platted territory.
After the map has been prepared and a hearing on it has been held as provided in Subd. 8, it shall be
submitted to the City Council, which shall then consider the map and may adopt it or any part of it with
such amendments as it shall deem advisable. Before adoption by the Council, a public hearing shall be
held upon the proposal at least five days after a notice thereof has been published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City. After the map has been adopted by the Council, whenever any existing street or
highway is widened or improved, or whenever any new street is opened or acquired by action of the City, it
shall not be required in the proceedings to pay for any building or structure whatsoever constructed upon a
mapped street, or situated outside of any building line that may have been established upon the existing
street, or within any area thus reserved by the map for public purposes, if the building or structure has been
placed there after the adoption and publication of the map.
Subd. 10 Plats. Every plat of land proposed within the City limits of the City shall be submitted to the
City Council before being filed and no plat of land shall be filed unless and until the same shall first have
been approved by the City Council. Any person who violates this provision or who sells land or offers land
for sale or contracts for the sale of land by reference to or other use of any plat, before the plat has been
approved by the planning commission and the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this
Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Before acting on the plat, the City Council shall submit the plat
to the planning commission for its recommendations. The planning commission, within sixty (60) days
after any such plat has been referred to it by the City Council, shall act on the plat and shall make its
recommendations with respect thereto.
The recommendations may consist of:
A. Recommendation that the City Council approve the plat; or
B. Recommendation that, the City Council disapprove the plat, in which case the
recommendation shall include a statement of the specific reasons for the
recommendation; or
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2.2 Statutory Boards, Commissions and Committees 8
C. Recommendation that the City Council approve the plat after specified changes or
revisions shall be made therein. These recommendations may include the condition that
a revised plat, containing many changes or revisions, be submitted to the planning
commission, in which case such revised plat shall be so submitted to the planning
commission for its further consideration and recommendations before action thereon by
the City Council. The City Council shall not overrule the recommendations of the
planning commission except by a vote of not less than a majority (4/7)of all its members.
The planning commission shall prepare and recommend to the City Council for adoption
regulations governing the platting of lands.
Subd. 11 Procedure of Changes. No change shall be made in the zoning plan, future street and public
lands plan, or regulations governing the platting of land after these plans or regulations have been adopted
by the City Council, until the proposed change shall have been referred to the planning commission for
report thereon and an attested copy of the report shall have been filed with the Council; and no ordinance
or resolution establishing any such plans or regulations shall be adopted by the City Council until the
ordinance or resolution shall have been referred to the planning commission for a report thereon and an
attested copy of the report shall have been filed with the Council. Failure of the planning commission to
report within sixty (60) days after the reference, or such longer period as the Council may designate, shall
be deemed to be approval of the proposed change.
2.2.02 (Section deleted per Ordinance No. 349A adopted 10/7/08.)
2.2.03 Library Board
Subd. 1 Membership. The Library Board shall consist of seven (7) members, who shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. Members shall be residents of the City. Not more than
one (1) member of the Council shall at any one time be a member of the Library Board.
Subd. 2. Terms. Upon their first appointment, the members shall be divided as nearly as practicable into
three equal groups to serve for one-, two-, and three-year terms, respectively. Thereafter, each regular
appointment shall be for a term of three years. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in the same
manner as regular appointments are made. Terms shall commence on January 1st the year of appointment
and no library board member is eligible to serve more than three (3) consecutive three year terms.
Subd. 3. Compensation. No compensation shall be paid to the members of the library board except as
provided under Minnesota Statutes §134.09 and §375.47.
State law references: Expense allowances for members of boards and agencies, Minn. Stats.
§134.09 and §375.47.
Subd. 4. Organization. As soon as practicable after the first appointments, at a date and place fixed by the
appointment officer, and annually thereafter within thirty (30) days after January 1st, the members of the
library board shall organize by the election, from among their number, of a president and such other
officers as they deem necessary.
Subd. 5. Powers. The library board shall have those powers, duties, and obligations as are enumerated in
the Minnesota Statutes Chapter 134.
Subd. 6. Claims. Any person having any claim or demand against the municipality growing out of any act
or omission of the library board shall file with the board a written statement thereof and, if such claim or
demand or any part thereof be disallowed, the claimant may bring an action against the municipality in the
manner that an action may be brought after the disallowance of a claim by the council of a city.
Subd. 7 Rules or Bylaws. The Board shall have the authority to adopt its own rules of procedures or
bylaws and to change the same by a majority vote of the members of the Board.
2.2.04. (Section deleted per Ordinance No. 386A adopted 01/18/11)
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2.2 Statutory Boards, Commissions and Committees 9
2.2.05 Housing and Redevelopment Authority
Subd. 1. Membership. The Housing and Redevelopment Authority board shall consist of five (5)
Commissioners who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council.
Commissioners shall be residents of the city and may also be members of the City Council.
Subd. 2. Terms. Upon their first appointment, the members shall be appointed to one-, two-, three-, four-,
and five-year terms, and thereafter, all commission members will be appointed to five year terms.
Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in the same manner as regular appointments are made. Terms
shall commence on January 1st the year of appointment and the City Council may set the terms of the
Mayor or any Council Members serving on the board to coincide with their respective terms of office on
the council.
Subd. 3. Compensation. No compensation shall be paid to the members of the board.
Subd. 4. Organization. As soon as practicable after the first appointments, at a date and place fixed by the
appointment officer, and annually thereafter within thirty (30) days after January 1st, the members of the
board shall organize by the election, from among their number, of a president and such other officers as
they deem necessary.
Subd. 5. Powers. The Housing and Redevelopment Authority shall have those powers, duties, and
obligations as are enumerated in the Minnesota Statutes Chapter 469.001 to 469.047. State law
references: Economic Development; Minn. Stats. §469.001 to §469.047.
Subd. 6. Claims. Any person having any claim or demand against the municipality growing out of any act
or omission of the Housing and Redevelopment Authority shall file with the board a written statement
thereof and, if such claim or demand or any part thereof be disallowed, the claimant may bring an action
against the municipality in the manner that an action may be brought after the disallowance of a claim by
the council of a city.
Subd. 7. Rules. The board shall have the authority to adopt its own rules of procedure and to change the
same by majority vote of the members of the board.
Subd. 8. Housing and Redevelopment Authority functions. The board shall develop and implement
programs to strengthen the city's neighborhoods. The mission of the Housing and Redevelopment
Development Authority is to improve the quality of life in the city by:
1. Work with the City, County and other neighborhood-based organizations and for-profit
and nonprofit developers to implement the city's adopted housing plan, redevelopment
plans and small area plans.
2. Manage housing-related activities for federal, state and locally funded programs,
including acquisition, relocation, rehabilitation and new construction.
3. Maintain and improve the existing housing stock through rehabilitation and development
of single-family and multifamily housing units in accordance with city adopted policies.
4. Manage the development of new or substantially rehabilitated rental housing for lowerincome
families and individuals and other populations in need of affordable housing.
5. Provide homeownership opportunities for first-time homebuyers including the origination
of mortgage loans by the Home Loan Fund and the provision of related services with
other departments and agencies, with a special emphasis on increasing owner-occupancy
levels in identified neighborhoods and in duplex structures.
6. Work with community services department and economic development division to return
vacant residential properties to habitation.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2.2 Statutory Boards, Commissions and Committees 10
7. Provide real estate and project services to all PED divisions, other city departments and
agencies, including acquisition, disposition and management of properties, relocation of
owners and tenants, and housing and job impact analysis.
8. Work with utilities and nonprofit organizations to provide financing for residential
energy conservation.
9. Work with other departments, agencies and social service providers to provide housing
and other related services for the homeless and to provide housing for other identified
special need populations.
10. Identify and obtain additional sources of financing for housing programs.
11. Take appropriate actions both to maintain needed low-income units in properties
currently receiving federal rental subsidies, and to minimize the displacement of lowincome
residents from them as the rental subsidies expire.
12. Work with neighborhood organizations and other housing interest groups to develop and
implement a neighborhood marketing program.
13. Provide staff services, along with the staff of the economic development division,
necessary to carry out the duties and functions of the housing and redevelopment
authority board, except those which may be assigned to other city departments or
divisions or other public agencies by state law or council resolution.
14. Carry out and discharge such other duties and powers as may be reasonably necessary to
achieve the functions of the department of planning and economic development.
2.2.06 (Reserved) Utility Commission
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2.3 Non-Statutory Citizen Boards, Commissions and Committees 11
Section 2.3: Non-Statutory Citizen Boards, Commissions and Committees
2.3.01 Cable TV Commission.
Subd. 1 Creation. There shall be continued a permanent committee to be known as the Cable TV
Commission. This committee shall consist of six (6) members, with a minimum of three (3) whom shall be
residents of the City of Cloquet, and up to three (3) members, maximum of one (1) member per
community, for those communities that by reason of extension permits are served under the terms and
conditions of this franchise. All Cloquet members shall be appointed by the Mayor of Cloquet with the
advice and consent of the Cloquet City Council and shall serve without compensation. Non-Cloquet
members are to be appointed by their governing body.
Subd. 2 Terms. Each Cloquet member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. Each Cloquet
member shall serve his or her appointed term until his or her successor is appointed and qualifies. Non-
Cloquet members shall serve for terms of three (3) years as designated by their governing body.
Subd. 3 Vacancies. Vacancies occurring in the Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by an
appointment by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. Vacancies of non-Cloquet members
shall be filled through appointments by the appropriate governing body.
Subd. 4 Removal. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, may remove any member of
the Commission whenever he or she determines the best interests of the City shall be served. Removal of
the non-Cloquet members shall be by the appropriate governing body.
Subd. 5 Rules and Procedures. The Commission shall adopt a set of rules to govern its meetings and
proceedings. The rules shall be in accordance with the rules of the operation of the Council. The rules may
be amended from time to time but only upon notice to all members that the proposed amendment shall be
acted upon at a special meeting.
Subd. 6 Powers and Duties. The Commission shall:
A. Review all rate requests by the Franchisee;
B. Provide reports and studies to the Council as provided for by this section;
C. Monitor the performance of the Franchisee in executing the provisions of the Franchise;
D. Review reports of auditors, including periodic System evaluation reports; and
E. Working in conjunction with the City Administrator, submit an annual report to the
Council and Franchisee assessing the Franchisee's performance according to the terms of
the Franchise and make recommendations to the Council regarding the same.
(Ordinances 228A, 223A, 219A, 214A, 207A, 199A,142A, 141A, 128A, 124A, 111A,
95A, 87A)
2.3.02 Citizen Advisory Board (formerly “Joint Civil Service Commission.)
On October 2, 2007, the City Council voted to abolish the Joint Police/Fire Civil Service Commission consistent
with Minn. Stat. §419.16. The Civil Service Commission was replaced by the Citizen Advisory Board and the
provisions applicable to the Citizen Advisory Board can be found in Chapter 4 pertaining to “Public Safety.”
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2.4 Code of Ethics 12
Section 2.4: Code of Ethics
2.4.01 Declaration of policy. The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and
employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in
proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public
have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is established a code of ethics
for all city officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, including members of boards
committees and commissions of the city. The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines for ethical standards
of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting best interests of the city and by directing disclosure by
such officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the city. The provisions and
purpose of this chapter and such rules and regulations as may be established are declared to be in the best interests of
the city
2.4.02 Responsibility of public office. Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office
for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the constitution of
this state and carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state and city and to observe in their official acts the
highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal
considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their prime concern. Their conduct in both their official
and private affairs should be above reproach so as to foster respect for all government.
2.4.03 Dedicated service.
A. All officials and employees of the city shall be loyal to the objectives expressed by the
electorate and the programs developed to attain these objectives. Appointive officials and
employees shall adhere to the rules of work and performance established as the standard
for their positions by the appropriate authority.
B. Officials and employees shall not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to
do so and they shall work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees
unless prohibited from so doing by law or by official recognized confidentiality of their
work.
2.4.04 Fair and equal treatment.
A. Use of Public Property. No official or employee shall request or permit the unauthorized
use of city-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or
profit.
B. Obligations to Citizens. No official or employee shall grant any special consideration,
treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other
citizen.
2.4.05 Conflict of interest.
A. Financial and Personal Interest Prohibited. No official or employee, whether paid or
unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction, nor shall such official or employee
act in regard to financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, when such actions
are incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or when such
actions impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or
her official duties.
B. Definitions.
1. "Financial interest" means any interest which shall yield, directly or indirectly,
a monetary or other material benefit to the officer or employee or to any person
employing or retaining the services of the officer or employee.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2.4 Code of Ethics 13
2. "Personal Interest" means any interest arising from blood or marital
relationships or from business or political associations, whether or not any
financial interest is involved.
3. "Person" means any person, corporation, partnership or joint venture.
C. Specific Conflicts Enumerated.
1. Incompatible Employment. No official or employee shall engage in or accept
private employment or render service for private interest when such employment
or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties
or would tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the
performance of his or her official duties, unless otherwise permitted by law and
unless disclosure is made as herein provided.
2. Disclosure of Confidential Information. No official or employee shall disclose
confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the
city nor shall he or she use such information to advance the financial or other
private interest of himself or herself or other.
3. Representing Private Interests Before City Agencies or Courts. No officer or
employee shall appear on behalf of any private person, other than himself or
herself, his or her spouse or minor children, before any city agency or municipal
court. However, a member of the council may appear before city agencies on
behalf of his or her constituents in the course of his or her duties as a
representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic
obligations.
State law references: Prohibited interests in contracts, Minn. Stats.
§471.87 et seq.
2.4.06 Disclosure of interest in legislation.
A. Any member of the city council who has a financial or personal interest in any proposed
legislation before the council shall disclose on the records of the council the nature and
extent of such interest.
B. Any other official or employee who has a financial or personal interest in any proposed
legislative action of the council and who participates in discussion with or gives an
official opinion or recommendation to the council shall disclose on the records of the
council the nature and extent of such interest.
2.4.07 Penalty and sanctions. Violation of any provision of this chapter may constitute a cause for suspension,
removal from office or employment or censure and may also be punishable under the provisions of this municipal
code.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2.5 Incompatible City Offices 14
Section 2.5 Incompatible City Offices
2.5.01 Incompatible Offices. No member of the City Council or any elected officer of the City shall be appointed
City Administrator, nor shall he/she hold any other paid municipal office or paid employment with the City while
serving upon as Mayor or as a member of the City Council.
2.5.02 Right to Seek Office. Notwithstanding the prohibition above, nothing in this section is intended to prevent a
paid City employee or paid officer from running for public office or from seeking a position on the City Council or
as Mayor. An individual may run for election to a position that is incompatible under this Section, or otherwise
under law, without first resigning from the employment or position held with the City. However, upon election and
qualification for a second, and incompatible position under this Section (or as otherwise provided by law), he/she is
deemed to have automatically resigned from the first position effective at the time he/she is seated as Mayor or upon
the City Council.
2.5.03 Prospective Application of Policy. Any City employee or officer that already holds a position as Mayor or
City Councilor at the time of the adoption of this policy will be permitted to retain their employment with the City,
as well as the office to which they were elected, until the expiration of the term to which they were elected.
However, thereafter, the limitations and prohibitions of this Section will apply in each and every subsequent
election.
2.5.04 Penalty and Sanctions. A violation of any provision of this Section may constitute a cause for suspension,
removal from office, termination of employment or censure in the sole discretion of the remaining members of the
City Council sitting en banc.
2.5.05 Nepotism Prohibited. Members of the same family or household are eligible for employment with the City.
However, except as provided herein, a direct supervisory relationship shall not exist between family or household
members, nor shall one member of a family or household assume the role of investigator or decision-maker with
respect to 1) processing complaints or allegations against, or 2) making decisions on personnel matters, concerning
the performance or continued employment or promotion of a family or household member. This prohibition does
not limit the right of an employee to make a recommendation on a personnel matter concerning a family or
household member where the right to make such recommendations is explicitly provided for in an applicable
collective bargaining agreement.
A. Exceptions. In exceptional circumstances, or in situations of temporary employment, a direct
supervisory relationship may exist between employees who are family or household members. Such
circumstances may be necessitated by factors such as the unique qualifications or responsibilities of
the individuals, the limited scope and duration of their duties, or the lack of other available
appropriate supervisory personnel. However, any exception must be approved by the City
Administrator.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2.6 Background Checks 15
Section 2.6 Background Checks
2.6.01 General Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations that will allow law
enforcement (Cloquet Police Department) access to Minnesota’s Computerized Criminal History information for
specified non-criminal purposes of employment background checks and for purposes conducting licensing
background checks for screening applicants for city licenses.
2.6.02 Employment Background Checks.
Subd. 1 Criminal History Employment Investigations. The Cloquet Police Department is hereby
required, as the executive entity within the City, to conduct criminal history background investigations at
the request of the hiring authority on the following individuals: Applicants for the following positions
within the City, unless the City’s hiring authority concludes that a background investigation is not needed;
finalists for City positions of employment; volunteers who are expected to work alone with minors or
vulnerable adults; and persons volunteering in the police or fire departments.
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen employment applicants, the
Police Department is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal
Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any
data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police Department under the care and custody
of the chief law enforcement official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized
Criminal History data may be released by the Police Department to the hiring authority, including the City
Council, the City Administrator or other City staff involved in the hiring process.
A. Authorization Required. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The
written consent must fully comply with the provisions of Minn. Stat. Chap. 13 regarding
the collection, maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth
in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.09, the City will not reject an applicant for
employment on the basis of the applicant’s prior convictions unless the crime is directly
related to the position of employment sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross
misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the City rejects the applicant’s
request on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
1. The grounds and reason for the denial.
2. The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota Statutes
Section 364.09.
3. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment.
4. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication.
2.6.03 License Background Checks.
Subd. 1 Criminal History License Investigations. The Cloquet Police Department is hereby required, as
the exclusive entity within the City, to conduct criminal history background investigations on the applicants
for the following licenses within the City of Cloquet:
1. Alcoholic Beverage Licenses
2. Licensing of Taxi Cabs
3. Licensing of Tobacco Sales
4. Licensing of Gambling
5. Licensing of Peddlers, Solicitors, Itinerant Businesses and Transient Merchants
6. Professional Therapeutic Massage Licenses
7. Licensing of Sexually Oriented Businesses
8. Licensing of Pawn Brokers
9. Licensing or Authorization of the Carrying of Weapons or Firearms
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2.6 Background Checks 16
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen license applicants, the Police
Department is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions
Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and
acquired shall be maintained at the Police Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement
official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal History data may be released
by the Police Department to the licensing authority, including the City Council, the City Administrator or other city
staff involved in the licensing approval/denial process.
A. Authorization Required. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the
Police Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must
fully comply with the provisions of Minn. Stat. Chap. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance
and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.09,
the city will not reject an applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction
unless the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If
the City rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in writing
of the following:
1. The grounds and reason for the denial.
2. The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota Statutes
Section 364.09.
3. The earliest date the applicant may re-apply for a license.
4. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication
for a license.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 3 - GOVERNING BODY AND ADMINISTRATION
Effective Date: March 7, 2006
Amendments: 04-03-12 409A / 01-02-13 418A / 07-16-19 483A /
Section 3.1 City Council 1
Section 3.1: City Council
3.1.01 Meetings.
Subd. 1. General. The regular City Council meeting shall be held at 7:00 p.m. on the first and third
Tuesday of each month, unless that day is a legal holiday, in which case no meeting shall be held.
State law references: Authority to determine time of regular meetings, Minn. Stats. §412.191,
subd. 2.
Subd. 2. Special Meetings. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by three Council members.
Notice shall be provided as required by law.
State law references: Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 412.191, subd. 2.
Subd. 3. Emergency Meetings. Emergency meetings may be called as authorized by statute whenever it is
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare from harm that would be caused by delay.
Subd. 4. Open Meeting Law. All meetings shall be held in accordance with the Open Meeting Law, as it
may be amended from time to time.
State law references: Meetings must be open to the public; exceptions, Minn. Stats.
§13D.01.
Subd. 5. Selection of Mayor or City Council Member to Fill Vacancy When No Special Election is
Required.
A. In the event a vacancy in the office of Mayor occurs for a person with less than two years
remaining on the term, the City Council will appoint one of the remaining City
Councilors then serving to act as Mayor for the remaining term of the vacancy.
B. In the event a vacancy in the office of City Councilor occurs for a person with less than
two years remaining on the term, the City Council may appoint a person qualified to run
for the City Council for the seat vacated to serve out the remainder of that term. The City
Council should attempt to fill the vacancy as soon as possible.
3.1.02 Roll Call - Quorum
A. Procedure When Quorum not in Attendance. As soon as the Council is called to order,
the City Administrator shall proceed to call the names of the members in alphabetical
order, noting who are present and who are absent and record the same in the proceedings
of the council. If there is not a quorum present, the fact shall be entered on the journal
and the council may adjourn or the mayor or, in his or her absence, the City
Administrator, may issue a process to any constable or policeman commanding him or
her forthwith to summon the absentees.
B. Quorum. Four members of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. The mayor shall be counted in determining whether a quorum is present and
may vote on all matters. A majority of all members of the council must vote in favor of
the following for such actions to be binding on the entire council:
1. A confirmation;
2. Ordinances and resolutions;
3. Real estate transactions;
4. Appropriating and/or obligating the city.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 3 - GOVERNING BODY AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 3.1 City Council 2
State law references: Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 412.191, subd. 1; Vote required for ordinance
adoption, Minn. Stats. § 412.191, subd. 4.
3.1.03 Ordinances.
A. Every ordinance shall be presented in writing to the Council prior to consideration for
passage. Reading of the title shall be sufficient unless full reading is demanded by any
member of the Council present, in which case a full reading shall be given. Each member
of the Council shall be furnished with a copy of the proposed ordinance at or before
consideration by the full Council.
B. Every ordinance passed by the Council shall be filed with the City Administrator and
shall remain on file, open to public inspection and it shall become and remain a part of
the permanent files of the city and shall be incorporated into this Code.
Subd. 1 Emergency ordinances.
A. Emergency ordinances are for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or
safety in which the emergency is defined or declared in a preamble thereto and is adopted
by unanimous vote of the council members present.
B. No prosecution shall be based upon the provisions of any emergency ordinance until
midnight on the day of publication. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand
repealed as of the sixty-first day following the date on which it was adopted, but this shall
not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified herein if the emergency
still exists or as provided for regular ordinances.
Subd. 2. Publication and effect of ordinances. All general ordinances of the City, or a summary thereof
as permitted by statute, and all regulations imposing a penalty shall be published in the official paper of the
City once within fifteen (15) days of passage and shall take effect on the day after its publication or at a
later date if expressly prescribed. The City Administrator or designee shall immediately record such
ordinance or resolution, with the affidavit of publication, in a book kept for that purpose. A printed copy of
such ordinance or resolution in any book, pamphlet or newspaper, and published or purporting to be
published therein by direction of the City Council, shall be prima facie proof of due passage, publication
and recording thereof.
3.1.04 Resolutions and Motions.
A. Every resolution shall be presented and shall be read in full before a vote is taken thereon
unless the reading of the resolution is dispensed with by unanimous consent. All other
motions shall be stated in full by the presiding officer before they are submitted to the
vote of the Council. Motions shall be recorded in full in the minutes of the council
meeting except that where a resolution has been formally introduced in writing, it may be
referred to by title only and provided that the resolution be numbered and filed in the City
Administrator’s office as part of the permanent records of the city.
B. Petitions addressed to the council shall be in writing and be read in full upon
presentation. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit citizens from appearing before
the Council to comment and provide information to the Council should they be
recognized by the presiding officer. In addition, citizens will be allowed to present their
petitions or communications directly to the Council upon proper notice.
State law references: Ordinance adoption procedures, Minn. Stats. §412.191,
subd. 4.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 3 - GOVERNING BODY AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 3.2 Elections 3
Section 3.2 Elections
3.2.01 Date of Election. City elections shall be held consistent with the provisions of Minnesota Statute which
provides that regular city elections of the City shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November
of each even-numbered year.
(Ordinance - 156A, 139A, 121A)
State law references: City General Election -Date of Election, Minn. Stats. §205.07,
subd. 1.
State law references: Elections generally, Minn. Stats. chs. 200-211C; municipal
elections, Minn. Stats. ch. 205; city elections generally, Minn. Stats. § 412.02
3.2.02 Primary Election Date. To the extent necessary, the City shall hold a primary election for all City elections
on the same day as the State primary election of any year in which a municipal general election is to be held.
3.2.03 Wards. That the City of Cloquet shall be divided into five election wards more particularly described as
follows, to-wit:
A. Ward 1. The external boundary lines of Ward One are as follows:
Commencing at the Southeast corner of the City limits of the City of Cloquet; thence
Northerly along the Easterly boundary line of the City of Cloquet to the Southerly
boundary line of the City of Scanlon; thence Westerly along the Southerly boundary line
of the City of Scanlon to the Southwest corner of the City of Scanlon; thence Northerly
along the Westerly boundary line of the City of Scanlon to the intersection of 22nd Street
and Washington Avenue; thence Westerly along the centerline of Washington Avenue to
the intersection of Washington Avenue and 14th Street; thence Northerly along the
centerline of 14th Street to the intersection of 14th Street and Doddridge Avenue; thence
Westerly along the centerline of Doddridge Avenue to the intersection of Doddridge
Avenue and County State Aid Highway No. 7 and Highway 33; thence Westerly along
the centerline of County State Aid Highway No. 7 to the intersection of County State Aid
Highway No. 7 and Pinewood Drive; thence Southerly along the centerline of Pinewood
Drive extended Southerly to the intersection of White Pine Trail and the extension of
Pinewood Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of White Pine Trail to the
intersection of White Pine Trail and Spring Lake Road; thence Southerly along the
centerline of Spring Lake Road extended in a straight line to the centerline of Otter
Creek; thence Southerly along the centerline of Otter Creek to the Southerly boundary
line of the City of Cloquet; thence Easterly along the Southerly boundary line of the City
of Cloquet to the point of beginning, the Southeast corner of the City limits of the City of
Cloquet.
B. Ward 2. The external boundary lines of Ward Two are as follows:
Commencing at the intersection of Washington Avenue and 22nd Street; thence Westerly
along the centerline of Washington Avenue to the intersection of Washington Avenue
and 14th Street; thence Northerly along the centerline of 14th Street to the intersection of
14th Street and Avenue B; thence Westerly along the centerline of Avenue B to the
intersection of Avenue B and Broadway Street; thence Northerly along the centerline of
Broadway Street extended Northerly to the intersection of the centerline of Broadway
Street extended Northerly and the Southerly boundary line of the St. Louis River; thence
Easterly along the Southerly boundary line of the St. Louis River to the intersection of the
centerline of Prospect Avenue extended in a straight line Easterly to the St. Louis River;
thence Westerly along the extended centerline of Prospect Avenue to the intersection of
the extended centerline of Prospect Avenue and 22nd Street; thence Southerly along the
centerline of 22nd Street to the point of beginning, the intersection of Washington
Avenue and 22nd Street.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 3 - GOVERNING BODY AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 3.2 Elections 4
C. Ward 3. The external boundary lines of Ward Three are as follows:
Commencing at the intersection of 14th Street and Doddridge Avenue; thence Northerly
along the centerline of 14th Street to the intersection of 14th Street and Avenue B; thence
Westerly along the centerline of Avenue B to the intersection of Avenue B and Broadway
Street; thence Southerly along the centerline of Broadway Street to the intersection of
Broadway Street and Cloquet Avenue; thence Easterly along Cloquet Avenue to the
intersection of Cloquet Avenue and Highway 33; thence Southerly along the centerline of
Highway 33 to the intersection of Highway 33 and Doddridge Avenue; thence easterly
along the centerline of Doddridge Avenue to the point of beginning, the intersection of
14th Street and Doddridge Avenue.
D. Ward 4. The external boundary lines of Ward Four are as follows:
Commencing at the intersection of County State Aid Highway No. 7 and Highway 33;
thence Northerly along the centerline of Highway 33 to the intersection of Highway 33
and Cloquet Avenue; thence Westerly along the centerline of Cloquet Avenue to the
intersection of Cloquet Avenue and Broadway Street; thence Northerly along the
centerline of Broadway Street extended Northerly to the intersection of the centerline of
Broadway Street extended Northerly and the Northerly boundary line of the St. Louis
River; thence Northwesterly along the Northerly boundary line of the St. Louis River to
the intersection of the Northerly boundary line of the St. Louis River and the intersection
of the centerline of the Jarvi Road extended in a straight line Easterly to the Northerly
boundary line of the St. Louis River; thence Westerly along the extended centerline of the
Jarvi Road to the intersection of the Jarvi Road and the Brevator Road; thence Southerly
along the centerline of the Brevator Road to the intersection of the Brevator Road and
County State Aid Highway No. 7; thence Southerly along the centerline of University
Road to its intersection with Airport Road; thence Southerly along the centerline of
Cartwright Road to the intersection of Cartwright Road and the Moorhead Road; thence
Easterly along the centerline of the Moorhead Road to the centerline of Otter Creek;
thence Northerly along the centerline of Otter Creek to the intersection of the centerline
of Spring Lake Road extended in a straight line to the centerline of Otter Creek; thence
Northerly along the centerline of Spring Lake Road to the intersection of Spring Lake
Road and White Pine Trail; thence Westerly along the centerline of White Pine Trail to
the intersection of White Pine Trail and the centerline of Pinewood Drive extended;
thence in a straight line northerly along the centerline of Pinewood Drive extended to the
intersection of Pinewood Drive and County State Aid Highway No. 7; thence Easterly
along the centerline of County State Aid Highway No. 7 to the point of beginning, the
intersection of County State Aid Highway No. 7 and Highway 33.
E. Ward 5. The external boundary lines of Ward Five are as follows:
Ward Five shall consist of all the remaining portion of the City of Cloquet, excluding
therefrom Wards 1, 2, 3 and 4.
(Ordinances, 188A, 189A, 132A, 100A, 215)
State law references: Wards, Minn. Stats. § 205.84.
3.2.04 Special Elections Definitions. The following terms shall have the following meanings:
A. City. The City of Cloquet, County of Carlton, State of Minnesota.
B. General Election. A “general election” is an election held at regular intervals on a day
determined by law or charter at which the voters of the state or any of its subdivisions
choose by ballot public officials or presidential electors.
C. Special Election. A “special election” is an election held at any other time permitted by
statue to fill vacancies in municipal public offices which are the following:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 3 - GOVERNING BODY AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 3.2 Elections 5
• Second Tuesday in February
• Second Tuesday in April
• Second Tuesday in May
• Second Tuesday in August
• First Tuesday after the first Monday in November
D. Vacancy. A vacancy occurs for the reasons stated in Minnesota Statute Section 351.02
or other state law.
3.2.05 Appointment to Vacancy. Pursuant to Minnesota Statute 412.02, subd. 2a, a person shall be appointed by
the Mayor and City Council to fill the vacancy until the special election is held and the winner of the special election
is qualified to take office.
3.2.06 Special Election Timing. If a vacancy occurs and a special election to fill the unexpired term is required
pursuant to Minnesota Statute Section 412.02, subd. 2a, or it is more than one year until the next regular city general
election, then a special election to fill the vacancy shall be held prior to the next regular city general election. The
special election will be held on one of the days permitted by statute as set forth in Section 1 but no later than one
hundred and eighty (180) days after the date of the vacancy.
3.2.07 No Requirement of Primary in Special Elections. The City Council maintains it is important that the
voters be permitted to fill a vacancy as soon as practicable after a vacancy is created. Therefore, in instances where
it is necessary to conduct a special election as provided herein, no separate primary will be required and the person
receiving the highest number of votes in the special election will be deemed the winner of the special election
regardless of the number of candidates filing.
3.2.08 Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is found to be invalid for any reason by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the validity of the remaining provisions shall not be affected.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 3 - GOVERNING BODY AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 3.3 General Provisions Applicable to Officials 6
Section 3.3: General Provisions Applicable to Officials
3.3.01 Elected Officials. The elected officials of the city shall be the mayor and six council members all who shall
be elected to four-year terms as otherwise prescribed in Chapter Two of this Code.
3.3.02 Appointed Officials. The following shall be the appointed officials of the City who shall be appointed in a
manner prescribed by the city council and for the term indicated:
Official How Appointed Term
City Attorney City Council Annual
City Engineer City Council Indefinite
City Assessor City Council Indefinite
Chief of Police City Council Indefinite
Chief of Fire Dept. City Council Indefinite
City Administrator City Council Indefinite
City Auditor City Council Annual
Affirmative Action Officer City Council Indefinite
Finance Director City Council Indefinite
3.3.03 Oaths and Bonds. Elected and appointed officials shall take and file the official oath within ten (10) days
after notice of their election or appointment as provided by Minnesota Statute, and shall execute and file the official
bond as required by Statutes and this municipal code.
3.3.04 Removals
A. Elected Officials. Elected officials may be removed by the City Council as provided by
Minnesota Statute Chapter 351 or any subsequently adopted state statute addressing this
issue.
B. Appointed Officials. Appointed officials may be removed as provided in this Code and
consistent with Minnesota Statute Chapter 351 or any subsequently adopted provisions.
3.3.05 Vacancies
A. How Occurring. Vacancies in elective and appointive positions are caused as provided
in Minnesota Statute Chapter 351 and are addressed by those provisions or any
subsequently adopted provisions.
State law reference: Minnesota Statutes 412.02.
B. How Filled. Vacancies in elective and appointive offices shall be filled as provided in
Chapter 351 of the Minnesota Statutes or any subsequently adopted provisions.
State law reference: Minnesota Statutes 412.02.
3.3.06 Receipt of Gifts and Gratuities
A. Restricted. No city employee or official shall receive or offer to receive, either directly
or indirectly, any gift, gratuity or other thing of value which he or she is not authorized to
receive from any person who:
1. Has or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or financial
relationships with the City or City Council;
2. Conducts operations or activities which are regulated by the City or City
Council; or
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 3 - GOVERNING BODY AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 3.3 General Provisions Applicable to Officials 7
3. Has interests which may be substantially affected by the City or City council.
While city policy actively discourages blood relatives of existing city officials
and full-time employees from being hired or appointed in a full-time working
capacity for the city, nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit or
discourage the hiring of blood relatives of existing appointed officials or fulltime
employees, so long as such hiring is for a temporary or part-time position
with the City and the applicant is deemed qualified for the position.
B. Penalty. The receipt of any gift, gratuity or other thing of value as denoted above is
contrary to the public policy of the city and is punishable as provided by Minnesota
Statutes and shall also be punishable under this municipal code as a misdemeanor.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 3 - GOVERNING BODY AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 3.4 Special Taxes 8
Section 3.4: Special Taxes
3.4.01 City Lodging Tax.
Subd. 1 Establishment. The City hereby imposes a tax of three percent (3%) on the gross receipts from
the furnishing for consideration of lodging at a motel, hotel, tourist court or other use of space by a
transient within the City other than the renting or leasing of the space for a continuous period of thirty (30)
days or more.
Subd. 2 Personal Obligation. The tax authorized herewith shall be the personal obligation of the operator
of any such motel, hotel, or other space used by a transient and shall constitute a debt owed to the City by
the operator extinguishable only by payment to the City. The operator shall be defined to be the person
who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, licensee, or any other
capacity.
Subd. 3 Collection. The tax shall be collected by the operator at the time the payment for the lodging is
made and shall be remitted to the City on or before the 25th day of the month following the month within
which the tax is collected.
Subd. 4 Administrative Regulations. The City Administrator shall be authorized to establish
administrative regulations to effect the collection of the tax, and any interest and penalties thereon.
Subd. 5 Failure to Pay. Any operator failing to make payment by the 25th day of the month as specified
in Subdivision 3 of this Section shall be required to pay a penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax amount
remaining unpaid, and thereafter an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) if the tax is not paid within
thirty (30) days thereafter; also, interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum shall be paid in
addition to the penalties on the amount of tax remaining unpaid until the tax shall have been paid in full.
The City Attorney shall be authorized to commence such legal action as shall be necessary to collect all
taxes, interest, and penalties due under this Section. The Council shall also have the authority to assess all
unpaid amounts to the county auditor for collection in conjunction with real estate taxes.
Subd. 6 Expenditure. At least ninety-five percent (95%) of the gross proceeds derived from the tax
imposed by this Section shall be used by the City for the purposes of marketing and promoting the City as a
tourist and convention center, with the balance of the gross proceeds to be used to provide reimbursement
for administrative costs of collection and administration of tax by the City.
(Ordinances - 196A, 182A, 181A, 173A, 172A, 171A)
3.4.02 Sales and Use Tax.
Subd. 1 Authority. At the general election held November 6, 2012, the voters of the City of Cloquet
approved the imposition of a one-half of one percent sales and use tax to finance the costs of improvements
to City parks, trails and recreation areas and street and utility infrastructure as authorized in City Resolution
12-56 approved April 3rd, 2012.
The Minnesota legislature has, by the laws of Minnesota for 2011, 1ST Special Session, chapter 7, article 4,
section 10, subdivision 1, authorized the city to impose an additional sales and use tax within the City to
provide revenues to finance the costs of improvements to City parks, trails and recreation areas and street
and utility infrastructure. The amount of revenue from the tax imposed that may be used to finance the
improvements and any associated costs is limited to $16,500,000.00. The city approved the act in
accordance with applicable law.
Subd. 2 Definitions. The words, terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in Minnesota Statutes § 297A except where the context clearly indicates otherwise. In addition, the
following definitions shall apply:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 3 - GOVERNING BODY AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 3.4 Special Taxes 9
A. “Act” shall mean the laws of Minnesota for 2011, chapter 7, article 4, section 10, or as
may be amended.
B. “Chapter” shall mean this chapter in its present form and as subsequently codified in the
city code.
C. “City” shall mean the City of Cloquet.
D. “Commissioner” shall mean the commissioner of revenue for the state acting under the
authority of an agreement entered into between the city and the state pursuant to the act,
or such other person or entity designated to administer and collect the city's sales and use
tax.
E. “Director” shall mean the Finance Director of the City.
F. “Retailer Maintaining a Place of Business in the City or any like term” shall mean
any retailer having or maintaining within the City, directly or by a subsidiary or an
affiliate, an office, place of distribution, sales or sample room or place, warehouse or
other place of business, or having any representative, including an affiliate, agent, sales
person, canvasser or solicitor operating in the City under the authority of the retailer or its
subsidiary, for any purpose, including the repairing, selling delivering, installation, or
soliciting of order of the retailer's goods or services, or the leasing of tangible personal
property located in the City, whether the place of business or agent, representative,
affiliate, sales person, canvasser, or solicitor, is located in the City permanently or
temporarily, or whether or not the retailer or subsidiary is authorized to do business
within the City.
G. “Cloquet Sales and Use Tax” shall mean the sales and use tax imposed and collected
pursuant to this chapter.
Subd. 3 Sales and Use Tax. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, there is hereby imposed an
additional sales and use tax in the amount of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts from the sales at
retail, and the storage, use, distribution or consumption of goods or services which are taxable, pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 297A and occur within the City. The imposition, administration, collection
and enforcement of this tax shall be governed by the provisions of Minnesota Statute Chapters 297A, 270C,
and 289A.
Subd. 4 Separate Statement; Collection from Purchaser, Advertising No Tax, Minimum Uniform
Tax Collection Methods. The Cloquet sales and use tax shall be stated and charged separately from the
sales price or charge for service insofar as practical, and should be a debt from the purchaser to the seller
recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. In computing the tax to be collected as a result of any
transaction, any amount of tax less than one-half of one cent may be disregarded and amounts of tax onehalf
cent or more may be considered an additional cent. If the sales price of any sale at retail is ninety-nine
cents or less, no tax shall be collected.
Subd. 5 Exemption Certificates. A fully completed exemption certificate taken from a purchaser to the
effect that the property purchased is for resale or that the sale is otherwise exempt from the application of
the tax imposed by this chapter will conclusively relieve the retailer from collecting and remitting the tax to
the extent the seller is also relieved of liability for the sales and use tax under Minnesota Statutes
§297A.665. A person who has obtained from the Commissioner an exemption certificate pursuant to the
Minnesota Statute §297A may use such exemption certificate for the purposes of the sales tax imposed by
the City.
Subd. 6 Presumption of Purpose of Sale. For the purpose of the proper administration and enforcement
of §12.03 of this chapter, it shall be presumed that all retail sales for delivery in the City are for storage,
use, or other consumption in the City until the contrary is established.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 3 - GOVERNING BODY AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 3.4 Special Taxes 10
Subd. 7 Collection of Sales and Use Tax at Time of Sale.
A. Any retailer making deliveries within the City, any retailer maintaining a place of
business in the City, or any other retailer otherwise doing business within the City, upon
making sales of any items described in 3.4.02, Subd. 3 which are not exempted from the
sales tax imposed under that section and which are to be delivered or caused to be
delivered within the City to the purchaser, shall at the time of making such sales collect
the sales and use tax from the purchaser. The tax collected by such retailer shall be
remitted to the Commissioner on behalf of the City.
B. Any retailer required to collect the Cloquet sales and use tax and remit such tax to the
Commissioner pursuant to this section shall register with the Commissioner and provide
such other information as the Commissioner may require.
Subd. 8 Agent of Retailer. When in the opinion of the Commissioner it is necessary for the efficient
administration of the tax, the Commissioner may regard any salesman, representative, trucker, peddler or
canvasser as the agent of the dealer, distributor, supervisor, employer or other person under whom such
salesman, representative, trucker, peddler or canvasser operated or from whom the tangible property is
being sold is obtained, and may regard the dealer, distributor, supervisor, employer or other person as a
retailer for the purposes of this chapter.
Subd. 9 Effective Date, Transitional Sales. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Cloquet sales and
use tax authorized by this chapter shall apply to sales made on or after April 1, 2013 and shall be in
addition to all other taxes now in effect. The Cloquet sales and use tax shall not apply to the following:
A. The gross receipts from the purchase or lease of tangible personal property made under
an enforceable contract entered into before April 1, 2013, provided that delivery or
possession of items is taken on or before June 1, 2013.
B. The gross receipts from the purchase of taxable services, including utility services, if
billing period includes charges for services furnished before and after April 1, 2013.
However, the sales and use tax shall apply to all purchases of taxable services, including
utility services, if the billing period begins with services furnished on or after April 1,
2013.
C. The gross receipts from the purchase of construction materials used to complete a lump
sum or fixed price construction contract that was signed and enforceable before April 1,
2013, and that does not provide for an allocation of future taxes, provided that the
construction materials are used exclusively in performing the contract and the materials
are delivered before September 1, 2013.
Subd. 10 Collection and Enforcement. The Cloquet sales and use tax imposed by the City pursuant to
this chapter shall be subject to the same interests, penalties, and other rules as are applicable to the State
general sales tax imposed by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 289A and 297A. The Cloquet sales and use tax
imposed by the City pursuant to this chapter may be collected by the State on behalf of the City as provided
by an appropriate agreement with the Minnesota Commissioner or Revenue. The Cloquet sales and use tax
imposed by the City pursuant to the chapter shall expire either upon a determination by the Cloquet City
Council that sufficient funds have been received from the taxes to finance improvements and to prepay or
retire at maturity the principle, interest, and premium due on any bonds, including refunding bonds, issued
by the City of Cloquet; or, a maximum collection of $16,500,000.00 of the sales and use tax collected
pursuant to this Chapter. Any funds remaining after completion of improvements and retirement or
redemption of the bonds may be placed in the General Fund of the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 11 Tax Clearance; Issuance of Licenses. The City may not issue or renew a license for the
conduct of trade or business in the City if the Commissioner notifies the City that the applicant for such
license owes delinquent Cloquet sales and use taxes as provided in this chapter, or penalties or interest due
on such taxes. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 3 - GOVERNING BODY AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 3.4 Special Taxes 11
A. Cloquet sales and use taxes include sales and use tax as provided in this chapter including
all penalties and interest due on said sales and use taxes.
B. Delinquent taxes do not include a tax liability if:
1. In administrative or court action which contests the amount or validity of the
liability has been filed or served;
2. The appeal period to contest tax liability has not expired; or
3. The applicant has entered into a payment agreement and is current with the
payments.
C. Applicant shall mean an individual if the license is issued to or in the name of an
individual or the corporation, partnership or other entity if the license is issued to or in
the name of a corporation, partnership or other entity.
D. A copy of the notice of delinquent taxes given to the City shall also be sent to the
applicant taxpayer. In the case of renewal of a license, if the applicant requests a hearing
in writing, within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the notice of delinquent taxes, then a
contested case hearing shall be held by the Commissioner under the same procedures as
provided in Minnesota Statutes, Section 270C.72 for the State sales and use tax imposed
under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 297A, provided that if a hearing must be held on the
State sales and use tax, hearings may be combined.
Subd. 12 Termination of Taxes. The taxes imposed expire at the earlier of (1) 30 years, or (2) when the
city council determines that the amount of revenues received from the taxes to finance the improvements
first equal or exceeds $16,500,000, plus additional amounts needed to pay the costs related to issuance of
bonds, including interest on the bonds. Any funds remaining after completion of the project and retirement
or redemption of the bonds may be placed in the general fund of the city. The taxes imposed may expire at
an earlier time if the city so determines by ordinance.
3.4.03 Motor Vehicle Excise Tax.
Subd. 1 Authority. The Minnesota legislature has, by the laws of Minnesota for 2011, chapter 7, article 4,
section 10, subd. 2, authorized the city to impose an excise tax of up to $20 per motor vehicle from any
person engaged within the city in the business of selling motor vehicles at retail.
Subd. 2 Definitions. The words, terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in Minnesota Statutes §297A except where the context clearly indicates otherwise. In addition, the
following definitions shall apply:
A. “Act” shall mean the laws of Minnesota for 2011, chapter 7, article 4, section 10, subd 2.
or as may be amended.
B. “Chapter” shall mean this chapter in its present form and as subsequently codified in the
city code.
C. “City” shall mean the City of Cloquet.
D. “Director” shall mean the Finance Director of the City.
E. “Motor vehicle” shall mean any of the following as otherwise defined by Minnesota
Statutes, Section 168.011: a. passenger automobile; b. bus or intercity bus; c. truck; d.
truck-tractor; e. motorcycle; f. van; g. pickup truck; h. recreational vehicle.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 3 - GOVERNING BODY AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 3.4 Special Taxes 12
F. “Dealer” shall mean a person as defined by Minnesota Statutes, Section 168.011, subd
21, and licensed by the commissioner of public safety pursuant to Minnesota Statutes,
Chapter 168, and engaged in the city in the business of selling motor vehicles at retail.
G. “Sale, sells, selling, purchase or acquired” shall mean the acts described in Minnesota
Statutes, Section 297B.01, subd. 7.
Subd. 3 Excise Tax Imposed: Certain Motor Vehicle Sales by Dealers. There is hereby imposed
pursuant to the Act an excise tax of up to $20 per motor vehicle sold by a dealer in the city.
Subd. 4 Collection of Tax: Dealer’s Responsibility. A dealer who sells a motor vehicle shall collect
from the purchaser, at the time of the sale, the tax imposed herein shall be a person obligation of the dealer
and the proceeds of such tax collected shall be thereafter paid over to the city under such circumstances as
may be established from time to time by the director.
Subd. 5 Authority of Director; Investigatory Powers; Enforcement.
A. The director is authorized to establish rules and procedures to implement the collection of
the excise tax imposed by Section 3.4.03.
B. For the purpose of determining the correctness of any return or of determining whether
any person should have made a return or paid taxes or for the purpose of collection of any
such taxes hereunder, the director shall have poser to examine, or cause to be examined,
any books, papers, records, or memoranda, which may be relevant to making such
determinations, whether such books, papers, records, or memoranda, are the property of
or in the possession of such person or any other person. They shall have power to require
the attendance of any person having knowledge or information which may be relevant, to
compel the production of book, papers, records, or memoranda by persons so required to
attend, to take testimony on matters material to such determination, and to administer
oaths or affirmations.
C. Any unpaid obligation of a dealer to the city under Section 3.4.03 may be collected by a
judicial proceeding brought in the name of the city in the district court of Carlton County.
Subd. 6 Penalties. It is a misdemeanor for a dealer to violate Section 3.4.03.
Subd. 7 Termination of Taxes. The taxes imposed expire at the earlier of (1) 30 years, or (2) when the
city council determines that the amount of revenues received from the taxes to finance the improvements
first equal or exceeds $16,500,000, plus additional amounts needed to pay the costs related to issuance of
bonds, including interest on the bonds. Any funds remaining after completion of the project and retirement
or redemption of the bonds may be placed in the general fund of the city. The taxes imposed may expire at
an earlier time if the city so determines by ordinance.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Effective Date: March 7, 2006
Amendments: 10-07-08 350A / 12-01-09 368A / 07-16-13 424A / 02-04-14 433A / 05-20-14 (435A)
Section 4.1 Police Department 1
Section 4.1: Police Department
4.1.01 The Police Department. The Police Department of the City is hereby continued. The head of the Police
Department shall be known as the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall be responsible to and report to the City
Administrator. The number of members of the Police Department, together with their ranks and titles, shall be
determined by the City Council by resolution from time to time. The compensation to be paid to members of the
Police Department shall be fixed by the City Council. Members of the Police Department shall be appointed by the
City Council in accordance with the Council’s authority and its rules and standards related to hiring.
Subd. 1 Uniform and Badge. Each member of the Police Department shall, while on duty, wear a suitable
badge and uniform furnished by the City, except that the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief, and Detectives are
authorized to the performance of specific duties while not in uniform. When a member terminates
membership in the Police Department, the member shall immediately deliver to the City the badge, uniform,
weapons and all other property of the City.
Subd. 2. Police Department Policy Manual Adopted. The Police Department Policy Manual, as
amended, containing the general policies, procedures and rules for operation of the Police Department of
the City is hereby adopted, as the official departmental policy manual of the department.
Subd. 3. Extra Police. In case of riot or other law enforcement emergency, the Chief of Police may
appoint for a specified time as many special police officers as may be necessary for the maintenance of law
and order. During such term of appointment, the special police officer shall have only those powers and
perform only those duties as shall be specifically assigned by the Chief of Police. This authority can be
exercised in conjunction with the authority extended to the Chief of Police to utilize the voluntary police
reserve.
4.1.02 Voluntary Police Reserve.
Subd. 1. Establishment. There is hereby created within the Police Department a Voluntary Police
Reserve which shall consist of such number of volunteer members as the Police Chief deems necessary to
address public safety issues during public events or situations of emergency. The Police Reserve shall be
under the control and supervision of the Chief of Police. Members of the Police Reserve shall be appointed
the Police Chief and approved by the City Council. They shall serve under the direction of the superior
officers of the regular police force and such others as the Chief of Police may appoint from their own
number.
Subd. 2. Duties. When assigned to duty by the Chief of Police, each Police Reserve member shall have
the same authority, duties and obligations as regular members of the Police Department including the
authority to issue citations under the supervision of a regular police officer. Individual members or groups
may be used as deemed necessary by the Chief of Police but the Mayor will be consulted and must approve
the call to duty in times of an emergency.
Subd. 3. Oath and insignia. Each Police Reserve member shall take the oath prescribed by M.S. §358.03.
Each member shall be issued a badge, suitable items of clothing and such other insignia or evidence of
identification as the Chief of Police may prescribe. Upon termination of membership, a member shall
surrender to the city all city property issued to the member.
State law references: Form of Official Seals, Minn. Stats. §358.03
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 4.1 Police Department 2
Subd. 4. Personnel rules. Personnel rules and regulations applicable to regular employees of the city do
not apply to members of the Police Reserve, but each such member shall be covered as a city employee
under the workers' compensation insurance policy of the city while performing duties at the request of the
Police Chief.
Subd. 5. Other restrictions. No member of the acting Police Reserve shall exercise any authority over the
persons or property of others without displaying identification as such member. No Police Reserve member
shall make arrests upon a warrant unless accompanied by a regular police officer. Only Police Reserve
members shall use such identification or otherwise represent themselves to be members of the Police
Reserve. No Police Reserve member shall carry any firearm while on duty except as specifically authorized
by the Chief of Police.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 4.2 Deleted Section 3
Section 4.2 deleted per Ordinance No. 424A adopted 7/16/13
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 4.3 Citizen Advisory Board 4
Section 4.3: Citizen Advisory Board
4.3.01 Citizen Advisory Board. It shall be deemed advisable, and in the public interest, for the City to establish a
community based advisory board to assist and provide objective community perspective to the Cloquet Police
Department with regard to the handling of disciplinary procedures, public complaints and hiring procedures.
4.3.02 Composition of Board. A single advisory board shall serve as a resource for the police department and shall
be composed in the same manner set forth below.
Subd. 1. Membership. There will be three members of the Advisory Board who must be citizens of the
State of Minnesota and must necessarily be residents living within the city limits of the City of Cloquet. No
Board member shall be appointed or serve on the Advisory Board while serving or holding an elected office
with the City nor can they hold employment with the City or with any police department. All Board
members will also be required to provide an oath agreeing to faithfully perform their duties. The terms of
the Board members will be staggered three (3) year terms with an appointed position becoming vacant each
year.
4.3.03 Duties. From and after the appointment of the Advisory Board, the Advisory Board will provide objective
community perspective and advise the police department with regard to the hiring and supervision over the
employment, promotion, discharge and suspension of all officers and employees of the police department of the City
as provided in this Code and in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Citizen Advisory Board previously
adopted and specifically incorporated herein by reference.
4.3.04 Organization, Meetings. The Board shall, at its first meeting in each calendar year, elect from among its
members a chairperson, a vice-chairperson, and a secretary. The Board shall hold at least one regular meeting
annually and shall follow Minnesota Statutes in terms of the open meeting law by posting agendas, recording and
keeping minutes of its meetings and other such requirements as detailed under these Statutes.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 4.4 Emergency Government Operations 5
Section 4.4: Emergency Government Operations
4.4.01 Policy and Purpose. Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size
and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado, blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or from
sabotage, hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in order to insure that
preparations of this City will be adequate to deal with such disasters, and generally, to provide for the common
defense and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of this
City, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:
A. To establish a City emergency management organization responsible for City planning and
preparation or emergency government operations in time of disasters.
B. To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and disasters.
C. To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this City and other political subdivisions of
this State and of other states with respect to the carrying out of emergency preparedness functions.
D. To comply with provisions of M.S. §12.25, which requires that each political subdivision of
Minnesota shall establish a local organization for emergency management.
Subd. 1. Definitions.
1. Emergency Management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters,
caused by fire, flood, tornado and other acts of nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or
from industrial hazardous material mishaps. These functions include, without limitation,
firefighting services, police services, emergency medical services engineering, warning
services, communications, radiological, and chemical, evacuation, congregate care,
emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection,
temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civil
protection, together with all activities necessary or incidental for carrying out of the
foregoing functions. Emergency management includes those activities sometimes referred
to as “Civil Defense” functions.
2. Disaster means a situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to the
health and safety of any person or persons, or a situation which has resulted in or is likely
to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for which traditional sources of relief and
assistance within the affected area are unable to adequately address, repair or prevent the
injury or loss.
3. Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.
4. Emergency Management Forces means the total personnel resources engaged in citylevel
emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this
resolution or any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from City
departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and agencies.
5. Emergency Management Organization means the staff responsible for coordinating
city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This organization provides City
liaison and coordination with federal, state and local jurisdictions relative to disaster
preparedness activities and assures implementation of federal and state program
requirements.
State law references: Definitions, Minn. Stats. §12.03
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 4.4 Emergency Government Operations 6
4.4.02. Establishment of an Emergency Management Organization. There is hereby created with the City
government an emergency management organization which shall be under the supervision and control of the City
Emergency Management Director, hereinafter called the Director. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor for
an indefinite term and may be removed by him or her at any time. The Director shall serve at the discretion of the
City Council and may be compensated for his/her services at the discretion of the City Council but shall be paid his
or her necessary expenses. The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and
operation of the emergency preparedness organization, subject to the direction and control of the Mayor.
4.4.03. Powers and Duties of the Director. The Director, with the consent of the Mayor, shall represent the City
on any regional or state conference for emergency management. Specifically the Director will be involved with all
of the following:
1. The Director shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political
subdivisions of the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an
emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the
Council for its action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the State Emergency
Plan.
2. The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human resources, industries, resources
and facilities of the City as deemed necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency
management and to plan for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster.
3. The Director shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures, service
staffs, boards and sub-boards required, in accordance with state and federal plans and
directions subject to approval of the Mayor.
4. The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the emergency
preparedness of the City and shall present such plan to the Council for its approval.
When the Council has approved the plan, it shall be the duty of all City agencies and all
emergency preparedness forces of the City to perform the duties and functions assigned
by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time.
5. The Director shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the City to the end
that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plan of the Federal
Government and the State and correlated with emergency plans of the County and other
political subdivisions within the State.
6. In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the Director shall institute training
programs, public information programs and conduct practice warning alerts and
emergency exercises as may be necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the
City Emergency Plan when a disaster occurs.
7. The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies and facilities of
existing departments and agencies of the City to the maximum extent practicable.
8. The Director shall, in cooperation with those City departments and agencies affected,
assist in the organizing, recruiting and training of emergency management personnel,
which may be required on a volunteer basis to carry out the emergency plans of the City
and state. To the extent that emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular City
department or agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or
agencies and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 4.4 Emergency Government Operations 7
9. Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director shall coordinate the
activity of municipal emergency management organizations within the city and assist in
establishing and conducting training programs as required to assure emergency
operational capability in the several services as provided by M.S. §12.25.
State law references: Local organizations; directors, duties, M.S. §12.25
10. The Director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued by the Governor with
reference to emergency management.
11. The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency preparedness activities when
requested by the Mayor.
State law references: Mutual aid arrangements, Minn. Stats. §12.27
4.4.04. Coordination of efforts. The officers and personnel of all City departments and agencies shall be directed,
to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the City’s Emergency
Management organization and to the Governor upon request.
Subd. 1. The head of each department or agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for
the planning and programming of such emergency activities as will involve the utilization of the facilities of
the department or agency.
4.4.05. Local Emergencies. A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his legal successor or
designee. It shall not be continued for a period in excess of three days except by or with the consent of the Council.
Any order, or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt and
general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the City Administrator. A declaration of a local emergency shall
invoke necessary portions of the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or interjurisdictional disaster
plans, and may authorize aid and assistance thereunder. No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local
emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency functions. However, an
interjurisdictional disaster agency shall provide aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it
functions.
4.4.06. Emergency Regulations.
Subd. 1. Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for such an emergency for which
adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor or the Council, the Council may by resolution
promulgate regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation, respecting: the conduct
of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding or
essential public services, emergency health, fire, and safety regulation, drills, or practice periods required
for preliminary training, and all other matters which are required to protect public safety, health, and
welfare in declared emergencies.
Subd. 2. Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing: shall be dated; shall refer to the
particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the Office of the City
Administrator. A copy shall be posted and available for public inspection during business hours. Notice of
the existence of these regulation and their availability for inspection at the City Administrator’s Office shall
be conspicuously posted at the front of the city hall or other headquarters of the City or at such other places
in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the resolution. By resolution, the Council may modify
or rescind any such regulation.
Subd. 3. The Council may rescind any such regulation by resolution at any time. If not sooner rescinded
every such regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency
to which it relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule, or regulation inconsistent with an
emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during the period of time and to the
extent such conflict exists.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 4.4 Emergency Government Operations 8
Subd. 4. During a declared emergency, the City is empowered, under the provisions of M.S. §12.31 and
notwithstanding any statutory or charter provision to the contrary, through its Council, acting within or
without the corporate limits of the City, to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat
such disaster by protecting the health and safety of persons and property and providing emergency
assistance to the victims of such disaster. The City may exercise these powers in the light of the exigencies
of the disaster without compliance with the time consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law
pertaining to the performance of public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies
and materials, limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds including,
but not limited to, publication of resolutions, publication of call for bids, provisions of personnel laws and
rules, provisions relating to low bids, and requirement for bids.
State law references: National security or peacetime emergency; declaration, Minn. Stats. §12.31
4.4.07. Emergency Management a Government Function. All functions and activities relating to emergency
management are hereby declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of this section shall not affect the
right of any person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the
worker’s compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any such person to receive any benefits or
compensation under any act of Congress.
4.4.08. Participation in Labor Dispute or Politics. The emergency management organization shall not participate
in any form of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes, nor shall it be
employed in a labor dispute.
4.4.09 Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of Section 4.4 or any regulation adopted thereunder relating
to acts, omissions, or conduct other than official acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a misdemeanor.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 4.5 Security Alarm Responses by Law Enforcement 9
Section 4.5: Security Alarm Responses By Law Enforcement
4.5.01 Purpose. It has come to the attention of the City Council that it is becoming increasingly common for
private citizens to install and utilize security alarm systems. As a direct result of the increased use of such systems,
there has been a significant increase in the number of false alarms that have required local law enforcement response.
The purpose of these provisions is to encourage alarm users and alarm companies to properly use and maintain such
systems so as to reduce or eliminate false alarms which may unduly divert law enforcement resources from
responding to their regular duties within the City and County. These provisions are intended to address the use of
systems which directly or indirectly summon law enforcement response unnecessarily. These provisions further
establish a system of fines and provides penalties for violators, and establishes a system for the administration of
alleged violations.
Subd. 1. Definitions. In this section the following terms will take on the following meanings:
A. Security alarm system means an alarm installation designed to be used for personal safety and/or
the prevention or detection of burglary or robbery and which system is located in or around a
building, structure or facility.
B. Alarm user means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind who (which) uses or is in control of any security alarm system at an alarm
site.
C. False alarm means an alarm signal sent to a law enforcement authority requesting a response
when a situation requiring a response does not exist. Examples of false alarms include, but are not
limited to, circumstances which result by the activation of the alarm system through mechanical
failure, pet movement, alarm malfunction, improper installation or the inadvertent activation by a
user, owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his/her employees or agents. For purposes of this
section false alarms do not include signals sent as a result of changing climatic conditions such as
tornadoes, thunderstorms, utility line mishaps, or any other conditions which are clearly beyond the
control of the alarm manufacturer, installer, owner or user.
D. Law enforcement authority means the Cloquet Police Department, the Carlton County Sheriff's
Department or other authorized enforcement agency, or their designated representatives which are
notified to respond to the alarm signal.
Subd. 2. Reports of false alarms; notice to alarm user. The law enforcement authority shall file a
written report with the Cloquet Chief of Police each time they respond to an alarm signal which they
determine to be a false alarm. Each time such a report is filed with the Chief of Police, the Chief of Police
shall notify the alarm user by certified mail of the false alarm incident and will provide the security system
owner with a copy of the provisions of this section.
Subd. 3. User Fines; notice. An alarm user shall be subject to fines and warnings based strictly upon the
number of false alarms emitted from the alarm system which are reported and filed with the Cloquet Chief
of Police during a calendar year. Fines will be assessed as follows:
Number of
False Alarms Fines
1 - 3 $ 0
4 - 6 $ 50 per false alarm
7 or more $150 per false alarm
Upon receipt of a fourth and all subsequent false alarm reports, the City Administrator shall notify the alarm
user by certified mail that the threshold number of false alarms has occurred and will provide written notice
of the amount of the administrative fine due.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 4.5 Security Alarm Responses by Law Enforcement 10
Subd. 4. Appeals Process. Any alarm user who is required by the City to pay a user fine as the result of a
false alarm may make a written appeal of the false alarm charge to the City Administrator within ten (10)
days of the City’s mailing of the notice of false alarm. Notices received after ten (10) days are considered
late and will not be considered. The City Administrator will review the appeal and determine whether the
appellant is to be charged with a false alarm. Appeals from the final determination by the City
Administrator will be governed by the City Administrative process providing for administrative hearings.
Subd. 5. Payment of fines. When and where due. Payment of administrative fines pursuant to this
section must be made to the City Administrator's office within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the written
notice from the City to the alarm user. Failure to pay the fine within said thirty (30) day period will cause
the alarm user to be considered delinquent and the violator will be assessed a penalty for non-payment of a
full ten (10) percent of the fine due in each instance.
A. Delinquencies. All delinquent charges for user fines may be certified by the City Administrator to
the Carlton County Department of Property Taxation for collection with taxes due against the
property on which the alarm system is installed. This certification process shall take place on a
yearly basis on October 10th of each year or by such earlier date as is necessary to have the
delinquent charges collectible with taxes due and payable against the property in the next calendar
year.
Subd. 6. Alarm Report. When an alarm user has incurred five (5) false alarms or more within one
calendar year, the alarm user shall submit a written report to the City Administrator within ten (10) days
after being charged with the fifth false alarm, describing actions taken or to be taken to discover and
eliminate the cause of the false alarms. Failure to submit the written report required by this section will also
be considered a violation of this section consistent with subdivision 9 of this section.
Subd. 7. Administrative rules. The City Administrator is hereby authorized to promulgate such rules as
may be necessary for the implementation of this section and the administration thereof.
Subd. 8. Confidentiality. All information submitted in compliance with this section shall be held in
confidence and shall be deemed a confidential record exempt from discovery to the extent permitted by law.
Subject to requirements of confidentiality, the City Administrator may develop and maintain statistics for
the purpose of on-going alarm systems evaluation.
Subd. 9. Enforcement and penalties. Failure or omission to comply with this section shall be deemed a
misdemeanor and may be so prosecuted.
(Ordinance 275A)
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 4.6 Wrongful Interference with Public Officials 11
Section 4.6: Wrongful Interference With Public Officials
4.6.01. Wrongful Interference. No person shall intentionally do an act which he or she could reasonably expect
to delay, obstruct, resist or interfere with or entice another to delay, obstruct, resist or interfere with any peace
officer, emergency personnel or any other public official in discharging or attempting to discharge a duty of his or
her office.
4.6.02 Interference. No person shall assault, attempt to assault, threaten to assault, nor in any manner physically
resist, delay, obstruct or interfere with a peace officer, emergency personnel or other public official in the exercise of
his or her duties.
(Ordinance 24A)
State law references: Obstructing legal process, arrest, or firefighting, Minn. Stats. §609.50
4.6.03 Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be punished according to the laws of the State of
Minnesota. Violation of this Section shall constitute a misdemeanor. If the matter is not charged criminally or if
there are extenuating circumstances, it may be treated as an administrative offense in the discretion of the
prosecuting attorney with a financial penalty commensurate with that of a petty misdemeanor as then provided by
Minnesota Statute.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 4.7 Social Host Liability for Open House Parties, Events or Gatherings 12
Section 4.7: Social Host Liability for Open House Parties, Events or Gatherings
4.7.01. Purpose. The Cloquet City Council intends to further its efforts to prevent the underage possession and
consumption of alcoholic beverages regardless of whether or not such consumption or possession occurs within the
confines of a private residence or on public or private property within the City limits. It is the express intent of the
City Council to hold persons criminally responsible if that person hosts events or gatherings where persons under the
age of twenty one (21) possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering
obtained or supplied the alcohol.
4.7.02. Findings. The City Council finds that:
A. Events and gatherings held in private homes or on public or private property within the City limits
where alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of twenty-one (21) are harmful
to those persons and constitute a potential threat to the public health, safety and welfare warranting
regulation and prevention.
B. That prohibiting the underage consumption and possession of alcohol acts to protect underage
persons as well as the general public from injuries and harm related to alcohol consumption.
C. Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly, could have drastic and dangerous effects
on those affected by the actions of the irresponsible or minor user.
D. That parties and gatherings involving underage consumption and consumption often occur outside
the presence of parents and reliable adults which can lead to the irresponsible and excessive use of
alcohol and access to the alcohol by minors.
4.7.03. Definitions. For purposes of this section the following definitions will apply unless the context or intent
clearly requires a different meaning:
Alcohol or Alcoholic Beverage. Any beverage or liquid intended to be consumed as or with a beverage
containing more than one half of one percent of alcohol by volume.
Control. The right of possession of a residence, property or premises.
Event, Party or Gathering. Any group of two or more persons who have assembled or gathered together
for a social occasion or activity.
Host. Any person who aids, conducts, allows, entertains, organizes, supervises, controls or permits a
gathering, party or event. The owner or tenant of a residence is considered a host whether or not they are
present on the premises if they are aware that the event, party or gathering involves the presence of alcohol
and minors.
Minor. A person not legally permitted by reason of age to possess or consume alcoholic beverages
pursuant to the provisions of this Code and Minnesota State Law.
Open House Party. A social gathering or persons at a residence or premises. A social gathering attended
only by owners or those with rights of possession of the residence or premises, or immediate family
members, shall not be considered an open house party, event or gathering for purposes of this section.
Parent. Any person having the care or custody of an underage person as a natural, adoptive parent or stepparent
or as a legal guardian, or as a person to whom legal custody has been given by Order of a Court.
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or any association of one or more
individuals.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 4.7 Social Host Liability for Open House Parties, Events or Gatherings 13
Residence or Premises. A home, apartment, condominium, hotel room, premises or other dwelling unit or
meeting room or hall, whether occupied on a temporary basis or permanent basis, whether occupied as a
dwelling or for a social function, owned, rented, leased or used and/or under the control of any person or
persons with or without permission or compensation.
4.7.04 Prohibited Acts. No person having control or any residence or premises shall allow an open house party,
gathering or event to take place at the residence or premises if any alcoholic beverage is possessed or consumed by
any minor. It shall also be unlawful for a person to intentionally aid, advise, hire, counsel or conspire with another to
commit a violation of this section.
A. Exceptions. This section does not apply to the following circumstances:
1. Consumption or possession of alcohol by an underage person when with his/her parent
while present in the parent's household and no event or gathering is occurring; or
2. Consumption or possession of alcohol by an underage person is part of a legally protected
religious observance; or
3. Minors are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and
scope of employment as permitted by law.
4.7.05 Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be punished according to the laws of the State of
Minnesota. A violation of this Section shall constitute a misdemeanor. If the matter is not charged criminally or if
there are extenuating circumstances warranting leniency, it may be treated as an administrative offense in the
discretion of the prosecuting attorney with a financial penalty commensurate with that of a petty misdemeanor as
then provided by Minnesota Statute.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 4.8 Designated Predatory Offender Residency Restrictions 14
Section 4.8: Designated Predatory Offender Residency Restrictions
4.8.01. Purpose. The Cloquet City Council intends to serve the city’s compelling interest to promote, protect and
improve the health, safety, and welfare of Cloquet citizens under this Section. It is the express intent of the City
Council to further that interest by: creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in
concentrated numbers, within which certain predatory offenders are prohibited from establishing temporary or
permanent residence; and, by mitigating the concentration of certain predatory offenders, as recommended by
Minnesota Statutes § 244.052, Subd. 4a, by prohibiting certain predatory offenders from establishing temporary or
permanent residence within close proximity to one another.
4.8.02. Findings. The City Council finds that repeat predatory offenders present a real threat to the public safety
and especially to that of children. Certain predatory offenders are likely to use physical violence and present a high
risk to repeat their offenses, and most such predatory offenders have committed many more offenses and have many
more victims than are ever reported and prosecuted. This makes dealing with the danger posed to the public safety
and especially that of children by those certain predatory offenders extremely important.
4.8.03. Definitions. For purposes of this section the following definitions will apply unless the context or intent
clearly requires a different meaning:
Designated predatory offender. Any person who is required to register as a predatory offender under
Minnesota Statutes § 243.166 and who has been categorized as a Level III predatory offender under
Minnesota Statutes § 244.052, Subd. 3, a successor statute, or a similar statute from another state, in which
that person’s risk assessment indicates a high risk of reoffense.
Permanent residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
Temporary residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days
in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person’s permanent address or a place where
the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or non-consecutive
days in any month and which is not the person’s permanent residence.
School. A public or nonpublic preschool, elementary or secondary school.
Licensed child care center. A group child care center currently licensed by the Carlton County,
Minnesota, public health and human services department.
Public park/playground. A city-owned, improved outdoor area designed, equipped, and set aside for
children’s play and includes in that area such facilities as play equipment, surfacing, fencing, signs, internal
pathways, internal land forms, vegetation and related structures.
4.8.04. Prohibited Acts.
A. Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any designated predatory offender to
establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any of the following:
1. School;
2. Licensed child care center;
3. Public park/playground; or
4. The permanent or temporary residence of any other designated predatory offender.
B. Measurement of distance. For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the
requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the
permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest outer property line of the properties
listed in Section 4.8.04.A. above.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 4.8 Designated Predatory Offender Residency Restrictions 15
C. Exceptions. This section does not apply under the following circumstances:
1. The designated predatory offender established the permanent residence or temporary
residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
§§ 243.166 and 243.167, or a successor statute, prior to February 3, 2014;
2. The designated predatory offender was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was
not convicted as an adult;
3. The designated predatory offender is a minor;
4. The designated predatory offender has demonstrated they no longer pose the same degree of
risk to the community and have been granted a risk level reduction by the End of
Confinement Review Committee, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes § 244.052, Subd. 3(i).
5. The school, licensed child care center or public playground within 1,000 feet of the person’s
permanent residence was opened after the designated predatory offender established the
permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes §§ 243.166 and 243.167, or a successor statute;
6. The residence is also the primary residence of the designated predatory offender’s parents,
grandparents, siblings or spouse, and was their residence prior to February 3, 2014;
7. The residence is a property purchased, leased, or contracted with and licensed by the
Minnesota Department of Corrections prior to February 3, 2014.
4.8.05. Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be punished according to the laws of the State of
Minnesota. A violation of this Section shall constitute a misdemeanor. If the matter is not charged criminally or if
there are extenuating circumstances warranting leniency, it may be treated as an administrative offense in the
discretion of the prosecuting attorney, with a financial penalty commensurate with that of a petty misdemeanor as
then provided by Minnesota Statute. Each day a person maintains a residence in violation of this ordinance
constitutes a separate violation.
4.8.06. Severability. The provisions of this Section are severable and if any provision of this Section or application
of any provision of this Section due to any circumstance is held invalid, the application of such provision to other
circumstances and the remainder of this Section shall not be affected thereby.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 4.9 Regulation of Synthetic Drugs 16
Section 4.9: Regulation of Synthetic Drugs
4.9.01 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prescribe the regulation of synthetic drugs and synthetic drug
establishments to protect the general health, safety, and welfare of the City’s residents.
4.9.02 Findings of the City Council. The City Council makes the following findings regarding the need to regulate
synthetic drugs and the distribution and possession of synthetic drugs:
A. The consumption of products labeled not for human consumption is a public health hazard, creates
public nuisances, and results in an increased need for public safety services.
B. The health hazards associated with the consumption of these products include headaches, agitation,
nausea, vomiting, hallucinations, loss of consciousness, hypertension, tremors, seizures, psychosis,
strokes, addiction, paranoid behavior, anxiety, increased heart rate, and even death.
C. The manner in which synthetic drugs are marketed, manufactured, and sold is, purportedly, not
currently regulated by the federal drug administration.
D. Synthetic drugs were being sold as legal products without even the basic regulation and licensing
requirements that many other businesses have within the City.
E. Prohibiting the possession and sale of synthetic drug products will provide for better public health
and safety.
4.9.03 Conclusions of the City Council. In direct furtherance of the substantial goals of public health, safety, and
welfare, the City Council adopts this section, recognizing that it has a great interest in the health and safety of its
citizens as well as the present and future character of the City’s residential and commercial neighborhoods.
4.9.04 Definitions.
A. The term “synthetic drug” means any compound, substance, or derivative that is not approved for
human consumption by the United States Food and Drug Administration or specifically permitted
for human consumption under Minnesota law, and, when introduced into the body, induces an
effect similar to that of a Schedule I or Schedule II controlled substance listed in Minnesota Statute
section 152.02, subdivisions 2 and 3, or Minnesota Rules, parts 6800.4210 and 6800.4220,
regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of human consumption.
4.9.05 Other Applicable Laws. This Ordinance is intended to complement state and federal laws regulating
synthetic drugs.
4.9.06 Prohibited Acts.
A. A person who unlawfully sells a synthetic drug whether or not for remuneration is guilty of a crime
as prescribed by Minnesota Statute.
B. A person who unlawfully possesses any amount of a synthetic drug is guilty of a misdemeanor.
C. It shall not be a violation of this section if a person is acting under the written direction and
supervision of a medical doctor.
4.9.07 Severability. If any portion of this Ordinance, or its application to any circumstances, is held invalid, the
remaining provisions shall be considered severable, and shall be given effect to the maximum extent possible.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Effective Date: March 7, 2006
Amendments: 10-07-08 351A / 08-02-17 468A / 12-19-17 469A/ 04-02-19 479A
Section 5.1 General Traffic 1
Section 5.1: General Traffic
5.1.01 Minnesota State Highway Traffic Regulation Act Incorporated by Reference. The regulatory
provisions of Minn. Stat. Chapter 169 shall be adopted as a traffic code regulating the use of highways, streets and
alleys within the City and shall be incorporated in and made a part of this Chapter as completely as if set out here in
full.
State law references: Adoption by reference, Minn. Stats. § 471.62.
5.1.02. Designation of Through Streets. The Council may designate any street as a through street and any
intersection as a stop intersection where necessary to preserve the free flow of traffic and to prevent accidents, and
shall cause to be posted appropriate signs at the entrance to such streets or intersections, but no trunk highway shall
be designated as a through street and no intersection on a trunk highway shall be designated as a stop intersection
unless the consent of the Commissioner of Highways to such designation is first secured. Every driver of a vehicle
shall bring his or her vehicle to a full stop before entering any established street or intersection properly designated
and posted.
5.1.03. Designation of One-Way Streets. The Council may designate one-way streets where necessary to
preserve the free flow of traffic and to prevent accidents, and shall cause to be posted appropriate signs at the
entrances to such streets indicating in which direction lawful vehicular traffic shall move. No person shall operate
any vehicle on a street designated and sign posted for one-way traffic as a one-way street in a direction opposite to
that permitted on the street.
State law references: Authority to designate through highways, Minn. Stats. §169.04(5); authority to
designate on-way streets, Minn. Stats. §169.04(4); obedience to traffic control devices, Minn. Stats.
§169.06, subd. 4; through highways, Minn. Stats. §169.20, subd. 3; one-way streets, Minn. Stats. §169.18,
subd. 6.
5.1.04 Prohibition Against Exhibition Driving. No person shall start or accelerate any motor vehicle with an
unnecessary exhibition of speed on any public or private driveway within the City. Prima facia evidence of the
unnecessary exhibition of speed shall be squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires or the throwing of sand
or gravel by the tires of the vehicle, or both. Violators of this provision may be cited either under state statute or as
an administrative offense with a maximum administrative fine commensurate with the then existing fine under state
statute for a petty misdemeanor.
State law references: Reckless or careless driving, Minn. Stats. §169.13.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section 5.2 Inattentive Driving 2
Section 5.2: Inattentive Driving
5.2.01. Prohibition Against Inattentive Driving. No person shall be so engaged or occupied while driving a
motor vehicle as to interfere with the safe driving of such vehicle. Depending upon the severity of the offense
violators can either be cited under state statute or as an administrative offense punishable as a petty misdemeanor.
(Ordinance 144A)
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section 5.3 Regulation of Trucks 3
Section 5.3: Regulation of Trucks
5.3.01. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following terms shall have the meaning given. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future; words in the singular shall
include the plural. The words "shall" shall always be mandatory and not merely directory, and "may" shall be
permissive.
Subd. 1 City. "City" shall mean the City of Cloquet, Minnesota.
Subd. 2 Deviating Truck. "Deviating Truck" shall mean a truck which leaves and departs from a street
designated to be used by pulpwood truck traffic.
Subd. 3 Person. "Person" shall be any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
Subd. 4 Pulpwood Truck. "Pulpwood Truck" shall mean a vehicle designated or operated for the
transportation of pulpwood.
Subd. 5 Pulpwood Truck Route. "Pulpwood Truck Route" shall mean any street as designated in this
Section, over and along which a pulpwood truck within the City shall operate.
5.3.02. Truck Travel Restricted. All pulpwood trucks operating within the City shall be operated only over and
along the pulpwood truck routes established in this Section, except that this Section shall not prohibit:
A. The operation of trucks upon any street where necessary to the conduct of business at a destination
point, provided streets upon which the traffic shall be permitted shall be used until reaching the
intersection nearest the destination point.
B. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the City.
C. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the City, or public utilities, while engaged in the
repair, maintenance, or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the
City.
D. The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any case where the truck could be
lawfully operated on the street for which the detour is established.
5.3.03. Streets and Roads Designated for Pulpwood Truck Use. The following streets and roads shall be
maintained for pulpwood truck routes:
A. Highway #33 and Service Drives;
B. County State Aid Highway #45 (Cloquet Avenue) from I-35 in Scanlon to 18th Street;
C. Brookston Road;
D. Brevator Road;
E. University Road;
F. Reservation Road;
G. County State Aid #7 or Big Lake Road;
H. Prospect Avenue West of Highway #33;
I. Broadway; and
J. Avenue B; from Broadway to 22nd Street; and
K. Any other street or road designated a pulpwood truck route and posted by the Council.
(Ordinance 18A)
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section 5.3 Regulation of Trucks 4
5.3.04. Enforcement.
Subd. 1. Maps. The City Administrator shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out the truck routes
or streets upon which pulpwood truck traffic shall be permitted and the maps shall be available to the
public.
5.3.05. Liability and Penalties. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. In the discretion of the City prosecutor violations may also be treated as administrative offenses with
a maximum fine commensurate with the existing maximum penalty for a petty misdemeanor.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section 5.4 Parking Regulation 5
Section 5.4: Parking Regulation
5.4.01. General Prohibitions. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street or highway except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other
designated City official or traffic control device. This same prohibition will apply along any tract or parcel of land
owned or under the control of any governmental body, authority or agency when such stopping, standing or parking
is prohibited by official signs or by painted curb markings. The City, by sign, may designate certain parking areas
and parking spaces in the City to be limited exclusively for those public building users of specific public buildings
while the user is actually within the building. Violators who park in those restricted areas when they are not within
that designated public facility may have their motor vehicles towed at their expense and shall receive a parking ticket
for violation of that restricted parking area.
State law references: Obedience to traffic control devices, Minn. Stats. §169.06, Subd. 4.
Subd. 1. Penalties for Violation. Fines for parking tickets will constitute administrative violations and shall be in
an amount in accordance with the resolution of the City Council regarding such violations. In no event will the
amount charged for a parking offense exceed the maximum assessable for a petty misdemeanor as then defined by
state statute.
State law references: Petty misdemeanors, Minn. Stats. §609.0332.
5.4.02. Exceptions. The Police Department shall be empowered to temporarily suspend the parking provisions of
this Section on any street or avenue within the City on account of parades, street or utility conditions, or for other
reasons by placement of appropriate temporary signs on the street or avenue. All vehicles shall be removed from any
street or avenue on which "no-parking" signs have been placed pursuant to this Section with fifteen (15) hours after
placement of the signs. The Police Department shall be further empowered to designate "no-parking" spaces in front
of the main entrances of hotels, theaters, churches, depots, hospitals or other public places at their discretion in the
interest of public safety and welfare.
5.4.03. Limited Parking Zones. The Council may designate 30 minute, one hour, or two hour limited parking
zones and shall cause the same to be marked by appropriate signs in the zones so established. The zones shall be
established wherever necessary for the convenience of the public or to minimize traffic hazards and to permit a free
flow of traffic. No persons shall park any vehicle in any limited parking zone for a longer period than is specified on
the sign marking the zone.
5.4.04. Designation of Parking Spaces. The Chief of Police shall be authorized and directed to mark off
individual parking spaces established pursuant to this Section and in such other zones as may hereinafter be
established. The parking spaces will be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface of
the street by the City. At each space so marked off, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that the
vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated.
5.4.05. Winter Parking / Snow Emergency Regulations.
Subd. 1 Winter Parking Restrictions. During the period from November 1st to March 31st of each year,
no person, persons, firm or corporation shall park any motor vehicle on the streets, alleys, boulevards,
sidewalks or public grounds within the corporate limits of the City between the hours of midnight and six
o'clock a.m. This subdivision does not apply to a motor vehicle parked at an open business establishment
between the hours of midnight and 2:00 a.m. unless ordered to be moved at the direction of a peace officer.
(Ordinance 478A)
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section 5.4 Parking Regulation 6
Subd. 2 Winter Parking / Snow Emergency – Penalties / Impoundment. (a) A motor vehicle found to
be in violation of Subdivision 1 of this section is subject to a parking citation. (b) A motor vehicle found to
be in violation of Subdivision 1 when there is a snowfall accumulation requiring the plowing of city streets
(approximately 2 inches or more), as determined by the Director of Public Works or the Supervisor of
Street Maintenance, is subject to a parking citation and to immediate removal, as needed for plowing, to an
impound lot at the owner’s expense by a towing authority authorized by the City, and only at the direction
of a peace officer who has prepared, in addition to a parking citation, a written towing report describing the
motor vehicle and the reasons for towing, in accordance with Minn. Stat. 168B.035. Towing and storage
fees are in addition to any fine otherwise imposed for the violation of this section. Such vehicle shall not be
released until the fine and the fees for towing and storage are paid.
5.4.06. Truck Parking.
Subd. 1 Definitions.
A. The term "Semi-truck" shall include any truck-tractor, road tractor, or semitrailer or any
combination of these as those terms are defined in Minn. Stat. Sections 169.01 Subd. 7, Subd. 9
and Subd. 11.
B. The term "Straight Truck" shall include any motor vehicle which is larger than a van or pickup
truck.
Subd. 2 Prohibition. Except as provided in this Section, no semi-truck or straight truck may be parked
upon any street, alley, thoroughfare or public ground in any residential area located in the City, except when
actually loading or unloading goods being or to be transported.
Subd. 3 Hazardous Materials. No semi-truck or straight truck used for transportation of petroleum
products, explosives or hazardous materials shall be parked upon any street, alley, thoroughfare or public
grounds, as defined in Minn. Stat. Section 169.01 except when loading or unloading products being or to be
transported.
Subd. 4 Idling. No semi-truck or straight truck lawfully parked in the City may run its engine, whether or
not the engine is used to propel the vehicle for more than thirty minutes in any three hour period.
5.4.07. Disabled Vehicles. No disabled motor vehicle shall be parked upon any street, alley, thoroughfare or
public ground or vacant lot in the City for more than twenty-four consecutive hours, even if the vehicle is a "dead
storage" vehicle or a vehicle under repair. A dead storage vehicle shall be defined for the purpose of this Section as
any vehicle missing any major parts or missing a tire, wheel or otherwise disabled.
5.4.08. Sidewalks, Alley Obstruction. No motor vehicle shall be parked upon a sidewalk in the City, except when
loading or unloading products being or to be transported, and shall be parked so as not to obstruct pedestrian traffic.
Any straight truck or semi-truck may be parked on a street, alley, thoroughfare, or public grounds at a job site
adjacent to and during the duration of a particular job, provided that the vehicle shall be parked in such a manner as
to not obstruct the orderly flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. No motor vehicle shall be parked in or upon any
alley in the City of Cloquet in a manner which obstructs vehicle traffic and is required to leave a clear and
unobstructed width of at least ten (10) fee of the alley available for the free passage of other vehicles.
5.4.09. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation found to be in violation of any of the prohibitions contained in
this Section shall be guilty of an administrative offense or petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine up to the maximum provided by Minnesota Statute for petty misdemeanor offenses, together with
costs of prosecution.
5.4.10. Reservation of Powers. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as prohibiting the City from providing
for bus stops, taxicab stands and other matters of a similar nature, including the loading or unloading of trucks, vans,
or other commercial vehicles.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section 5.4 Parking Regulation 7
5.4.11. Parking Monitor. The Chief of Police is authorized to appoint and utilize a parking monitor to assist the
police department in enforcing the parking provisions of this Code.
Subd. 1. Definition. "Parking Monitor" shall mean that person or persons appointed by the Chief of
Police, with the consent of the City Council, to act as parking control monitors in enforcing the parking,
handicap and crosswalk codes or ordinances of the City and Minnesota State Statutes. The Parking Monitor
shall not need to be licensed to be a peace officer, constable or part-time peace officer.
Subd. 2 Citations. The Parking Monitor shall be duly authorized and empowered to issue a citation or
citations in lieu of arrest or continued detention of any person who is believed to have violated any codes,
ordinance or statutes of the State of Minnesota for parking, handicap or crosswalk violations of the City and
States Statutes. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to mean the Parking Monitor shall be authorized
to do any of the following, which acts can only be done by a peace officer:
A. Arrest or detain a violator; or,
B. Ask a person receiving a citation to give a written promise to appear in Court; or,
C. Take a person in custody as permitted by Minn. Stat. Section 629.34.
Subd. 3. Nothing in this Subsection shall be construed to limit the authority of any peace officer to issue a
citation or perform all other lawful acts of enforcement of any parking, handicap or crosswalk state statute,
this Code, or the Ordinances of the City or as otherwise prescribed by law.
(Ordinance 198A, 151A)
State law references: Definitions, Minn. Stats. §169.01 Subd. 7, Subd. 9 and Subd. 11.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section 5.5 Regulation of Bicycles 8
Section 5.5: Regulation of Bicycles
5.5.01 Use of Streets.
Subd. 1 Age. No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street, highway or alley in the City in such
a manner that, in the opinion of a designated police officer, is unsafe or impedes vehicle traffic properly in a
lane of traffic designed for vehicle traffic.
5.5.02 Number of Persons. No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on the public streets or highway of the City
with more persons on it than there are seats attached to the bicycle as intended by the manufacturer.
5.5.03 Speed. No bicycle shall be ridden faster than is reasonable and proper and shall be operated with reasonable
regard to the safety of the operator and other persons upon the public streets and highways of the City.
5.5.04 Lights. No bicycles shall be permitted on any street or public highway of the City between thirty minutes
after sunset and thirty minutes before sunrise, without a headlight visible under normal atmospheric conditions from
the front thereof for not less than 300 feet indicating the approach or presence of the bicycle, firmly attached to the
bicycle and when properly lighted shall give a clear white light, or without a yellow or red light or reflector attached
to and visible from 200 feet from the rear thereof.
5.5.05 Riding Abreast. No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street or other public highway in the City
abreast of more than one other person riding or propelling a bicycle.
5.5.06 Applicability of Traffic Rules. Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any public street or
highway in the City shall observe all traffic rules and regulations and stop at all stop signs, and, shall turn only at
intersections, signal for all turns, ride at the right hand side of the street or highway, pass to the left when passing
overtaken vehicles and individuals which are slower moving and shall pass vehicles to the right when meeting.
5.5.07. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation found to be in violation of any of the prohibitions contained in
this Section shall be guilty of an administrative offense or petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished by the fine up to the maximum provided by Minnesota Statute for petty misdemeanor offenses, together
with costs of prosecution.
State law references: Bicycle lanes and ways, Minn. Stats. §160.263; bicycle registration, Minn. Stats. ch.
168C; operation of bicycles, Minn. Stats. §169.222.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section 5.6 Regulation of Snowmobiles, ATV’s and Motorcycles 9
Section 5.6: Regulation of Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles and Special Vehicles
Including All-Terrain Vehicles (ATV’s), Motorized Golf Carts, Utility Task Vehicles and
Mini-Trucks within City Limits
5.6.01 Intent. It is the intent of this Section to supplement Minnesota Statutes chapters 84 and 169, as they may be
amended from time to time, with respect to the operation of snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles (ATV’s), off-highway
motorcycles and special vehicles as defined in Minn. Stat. 169.045. This section is not intended to otherwise allow what
Minnesota State Statutes prohibit, nor prohibit what Minnesota State Statutes allow.
5.6.02 Definitions.
Subd. 1 Snowmobiles. “Snowmobiles” as used in this Section shall have the meaning as defined in Minn.
Stat. Section 84.81 as it may be amended from time to time and presently means any self-propelled vehicle or
any vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle designed to travel across ice or snow steered by skis
or runners, but not operated exclusively upon railroad or trolley tracks.
Subd. 2 All-terrain Vehicles/ATV. “All-terrain vehicle or ATV” as used in this Section shall have the
meaning as defined in Minn. Stat. Section 84.92 as it may be amended from time to time and presently means a
motorized flotation-tired vehicle, of not less than three low pressure tires, but not more than six tires that is
limited in engine displacement of less than 800 cubic centimeters and total dry weight of less than 900 pounds.
Subd. 3 Off-Highway Motorcycle. “Off-highway motorcycle” as used in this Section shall have the
meaning as defined in Minn. Stat. Section 84.787 as it may be amended from time to time and presently means
a motorized, off-highway vehicle traveling on two wheels and having a seat or saddle designed to be straddled
by the operator and handlebars for steering control, including a vehicle that is registered under chapter 168 for
highway use if it is also used for off-highway operation on trails or unimproved terrain.
Subd. 4 Motorcycle. “Motorcycle” as used in the Section shall mean every motor vehicle not otherwise
defined above having a saddle for the use of the rider, and designated for travel on not more than 3 vehicles in
contact with the ground, including motor scooters and bicycles with a motor attached, but excluding a tractor.
Subd. 5 Motorized Golf Cart. A vehicle commonly known as a golf cart, having at least three wheels and
either an electric or gas powered motor.
Subd. 6 Mini-Truck. As defined in Minn. Stat. § 169.01, subd. 40(a), which presently is a motor vehicle
that has four wheels; is propelled by an electric motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal
combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters or less; has a total dry weight
of 900 to 2,200 pounds; contains an enclosed cabin and a seat for the vehicle operator; commonly resembles a
pickup truck or van, including a cargo area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle; and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards required of motor vehicles in the Code of Federal
Regulations, title 49, sections 571.101 to 571.404, and successor requirements. A mini-truck does not include:
a neighborhood electric vehicle or a medium-speed electric vehicle as defined by § 73.11; or a motor vehicle
that meets or exceeds the regulations in the Code of Federal Regulations, title 49 section 571.500, as it may be
amended from time to time.
Subd. 7 Utility Task Vehicle (UTV). A utility task vehicle means a side-by-side, four-wheel drive, offroad
vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an internal combustion engine with a piston displacement
capacity of 1,200 cubic centimeters or less, and has a total dry weight of 1,800 but less than 2,600 pounds.
Subd. 8 Motor Vehicle. “Motor Vehicle” as used in this Section shall mean every self-propelled device
in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn within the City, regardless of
whether the motor vehicle is required by law to be registered with the State of Minnesota and regardless of
whether the driver, operator or person in physical control of the vehicle is required by law to have obtained a
license, permit or endorsement to a license so as to lawfully operate the motor vehicle within the State of
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section 5.6 Regulation of Snowmobiles, ATV’s and Motorcycles 10
Minnesota. A Motor vehicle shall not include a vehicle moved solely by human power, but shall include
without limitation the following:
A. Snowmobile as defined in Subdivision 1;
B. Recreational vehicles and ATV’s, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Motorized dirt bike having two or more wheels; and
(2) Motorized all-terrain vehicle having three or more wheels, such as a threewheeler
or four-wheeler; and,
C. Off-highway motorcycle as defined in Subdivision 3;
D. Motorcycle as defined in Subdivision 4.
E. Any other motor vehicle as shall be defined in this Section regardless of the vehicle's
number of wheels or mode of self-propulsion if other than solely by human power,
including but not limited to the following types of commonly understood vehicles:
(1) Automobile;
(2) Truck; and
(3) Van
(4) Motorized Golf Cart as defined in Subdivision 5
(5) Mini-truck as defined in Subdivision 6
(6) Utility Task Vehicle as defined in Subdivision 7
5.6.03 Snowmobile and Off-Highway Motorcycle Operation. Unless otherwise specifically modified herein, the
City hereby adopts (as they are amended from time to time) Minn. Stat. §84.81 to §84.915 relating to the operation of
snowmobiles and §84.787 to §84.796 relating to the operation of off-highway motorcycles within the city limits. In
addition, a snowmobile may be operated upon city roadways, road shoulders, and the inside bank or slope of those city
streets, county roads, and state highways as are designated on a City Snowmobile Map which shall be maintained by the
City provided that operation occurs on the farthest right hand side of the street, road or highway and whenever possible
and legal the operation occurs within the ditch and always in the same direction as traffic.
Subd. 1. Snowmobile Restrictions. However, it shall be unlawful to operate a snowmobile within city limits as
follows:
a. On a public sidewalk used for pedestrian travel;
b. On boulevards located within the public right-of-way;
c. On private property except where permission has been obtained from its owner;
d. On public property, playgrounds, parks and recreation areas except as designated on the City
Snowmobile Map;
e. On any school grounds, except as permission has been expressly obtained from school
authorities;
f. At a rate of speed in excess of 30 miles per hour but in no event at a rate of speed greater than
reasonable and proper under existing conditions;
g. To operate a snowmobile in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger person
or property; and,
h. In a manner that disturbs, annoys or interferes with the peace and quiet of the public.
5.6.04 Authorized Use of ATV’s (all-terrain vehicles), motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles and mini-trucks
within city limits by permit only. Consistent with Minn. Stat. 169.045, ATV’s, motorized golf carts, utility task
vehicles and mini-trucks as defined in this Section, will only be allowed on designated streets or roadways within the City
as designated by the City on a City ATV Route Map which shall be maintained by the City. However, operation of such
vehicles upon the streets and roadways designated on the City ATV Route Map will be by permit only and will otherwise
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section 5.6 Regulation of Snowmobiles, ATV’s and Motorcycles 11
comply with the provisions of Minn. Stat. 169.045 as amended from time to time. However, from and after the adoption
of this Code section no person shall drive, operate or be in physical control of any motor vehicle as shall be defined in
this Section on the private property of another within the City without the express permission of the owner of the
property, nor shall any person drive, operate or be in physical control of a motorized golf cart, all-terrain vehicle, utility
task vehicle or mini-truck as shall be defined in this Section upon any lands owned, controlled or regulated by the City
and used as a City Park, or otherwise owned by the City, except where specifically permitted by the City as shall be
provided for below in this Section.
In that regard, the Mayor, subject to the consent of the Council, shall be instructed to determine what areas of the City
owned, controlled or regulated lands, if any, will be allowed for this use, and in areas so designated it shall be lawful to
drive, operate or be in physical control of a motorized golf cart, all-terrain vehicle, utility task vehicle or mini-truck. For
purposes of designating permitted areas, the City shall post signs of the type normally used in highway traffic regulation
by the City designating the areas in which such use will be permitted.
Unless otherwise specifically modified herein, the City hereby adopts the provisions of Minn. Stat. §84.92 to §84.929
relating to the operation of ATV’s as they are amended from time to time and adopt them by reference.
Subd. 1. Restrictions on the permitted use of ATV’s, motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles and minitrucks.
No person shall operate a motorized golf cart, all-terrain vehicle, utility task vehicle or mini-truck on
streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public property without obtaining a permit as provided herein.
A. Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain
all of the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) Model name, make and year and number of the motorized golf cart, all-terrain
vehicle, utility task vehicle, or mini-truck.
(3) Current driver’s license or reason for not having a current license.
(4) Other information as the city may require.
B. The operator of an all-terrain vehicle or utility task vehicle shall either have a valid driver’s
license and/or a valid ATV safety certificate issued by the Commissioner of the Department of
Natural Resources. Proof of the same must be in the possession of the operator at all times.
C. The annual permit fee shall be as set forth in the annual fee schedule promulgated by the City
Council, as may be amended from time to time.
D. Permits shall be granted for a period of one year and may be renewed annually Jan. 1 to Dec.
31.
E. No permit shall be granted or renewed unless the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant must demonstrate that he or she currently holds or has held a valid
Minnesota driver’s license to operate a mini-truck.
(2) The applicant may be required to submit a certificate signed by a physician that the
applicant is able to safely operate a motorized golf cart, all-terrain vehicle or utility
task vehicle on designated roadways.
(3) The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance with the provisions
of Minnesota Statues concerning insurance coverage for the golf cart, all-terrain
vehicle, utility task vehicle or mini-truck.
(4) The applicant has not had his or her driver’s license revoked as the result of criminal
proceedings.
(5) The applicant for a permit to operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility task vehicle shall
either have a valid driver’s license and/or a valid ATV safety certificate issued by the
Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section 5.6 Regulation of Snowmobiles, ATV’s and Motorcycles 12
Subd 2. Motorized golf carts, all-terrain vehicles, utility task vehicles, and mini-trucks are permitted to operate
only on designated city streets, not state or federal highways, except to cross at designated intersections.
Subd 3. Motorized golf carts, all-terrain vehicles, utility task vehicles, and mini-trucks are prohibited from city
sidewalks except for purposes of snow removal or unless otherwise exempt as provided herein.
Subd 4. Except for purposes of snow removal, motorized golf carts, all-terrain vehicles, and utility task vehicles
and mini-trucks may only be operated on designated roadways from sunrise to sunset, unless equipped with
original equipment headlights, tail lights, and rear-facing brake lights. Except for purposes of snow removal,
they shall not be operated in inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, for or other
conditions, or at any time when there is insufficient visibility to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway
at a distance of 500 (Five Hundred) feet.
Subd 5. Motorized golf carts shall display the slow-moving vehicle emblem provided for in Minn. Stat.
§169.045, as it may be amended from time to time, when operated on designated roadways.
Subd 6. Motorized golf carts, all-terrain vehicles, utility task vehicles, and mini-trucks shall be equipped with a
rear-view mirror to provide the driver with adequate vision from behind as required by Minn. Stat. §169.70.
Subd 7. The operator of a motorized golf cart, all-terrain vehicle, utility task vehicle or mini-truck may cross
any street or highway intersecting a designated roadway.
Subd 8. When operating a motorized golf cart, all-terrain vehicle, utility task vehicle or mini-truck, the operator
must have a copy of the permit in his or her possession, provide proof of insurance and properly display permit
in plain sight as designated by permit.
Subd 9. Every person operating a motorized golf cart, an all-terrain vehicle, a utility task vehicle or a mini-truck
under permit on designated roadways has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle
under the provisions of Minn. Stat., ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to time, except when these
provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts or mini-trucks and except as otherwise
specifically provided in Minn. Stat. §169.045(7), as it may be amended from time to time.
Subd 10. Additional Mini-truck equipment requirements:
A. A mini-truck may be operated under permit on designated roadways if it is equipped with all
of the following:
(1) At least two headlamps.
(2) At least two tail lamps.
(3) Front and rear turn-signal lamps.
(4) An exterior mirror mounted on the driver’s side of the vehicle and either an exterior
mirror mounted on the passenger’s side of the vehicle or an interior mirror.
(5) A windshield.
(6) A seat belt for the driver and front passenger.
(7) A parking brake.
Subd 11. The Cloquet Police Department is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a
finding that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this section or Minn. Stat., Chapter 169, as it
may be amended from time to time, or if there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate the
motorized golf cart, all-terrain vehicle, utility task vehicle or mini-truck on the designated roadways.
Subd 12. The number of occupants on the golf cart, all-terrain vehicle, utility task vehicle or mini-truck may not
exceed the design occupant load.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section 5.6 Regulation of Snowmobiles, ATV’s and Motorcycles 13
5.6.05 Exemptions, No permit required.
Subd. 1. Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit a person from operating a motorized golf cart, all-terrain
vehicle, utility task vehicle or mini-truck for the following purposes:
A. Authorized city staff may operate city owned motorized golf carts, mini-trucks, all-terrain
vehicles or utility task vehicles without obtaining a permit within the City on city streets,
sidewalks, trails, rights-of-way, and public property when conducting city business;
B. For law enforcement purposes;
C. For public safety purposes including fire department and ambulance service;
D. For emergencies and exigent circumstances as determined by the Chief of Police for the City
of Cloquet.
5.6.06 Limitation of Liability. Nothing in this sub-chapter shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the City
of any injuries to persons or damage to property which may result from the operation of a motorized golf cart,
all-terrain vehicle, utility task vehicle or mini-truck by a permit holder, other authorized user, the grant of such
permit, or the failure by the City to revoke such permit.
5.6.07 Violations and Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this code section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and is subject to having any permit previously granted under this sub-chapter revoked.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section 5.7 Abandoned Motor Vehicles 14
Section 5.7: Abandoned Motor Vehicles
5.7.01 Abandoned Motor Vehicles. The City hereby adopts and specifically incorporates by direct reference the
provisions contained in Minn. Stat. §168B relating to abandoned vehicles.
Subd. 1. Impoundment and Sale. The police department shall take into custody and impound any
abandoned or unauthorized motor vehicle as defined by Minn. Stat. §168B.011. It shall give notice of the
taking as provided by law and if the owner or any lien holder does not reclaim the vehicle within the period
provided by law, it shall provide for the sale of the vehicle to the highest bidder at public auction or sale
following two weeks' published notice.
Subd. 2 Disposition of Proceeds. The proceeds of the sale of an abandoned or unauthorized motor
vehicle shall be placed in the general fund of the City. If the former owner or entitled lien holder makes
application and furnishes satisfactory proof of ownership or a lien interest within ninety (90) days of the
sale, he or she shall be paid the net proceeds of the sale of the vehicle, less the cost of towing, preserving,
and storing the vehicle and all administrative, notice and publication costs incurred in its handling.
State law references: Definitions, Minn. Stats §168B.011.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section 5.8 Prohibition Against Camping on Public Streets or Rights of Way 15
Section 5.8: Prohibition Against Camping on Public Streets or Rights of Way
Subd. 1. General Prohibitions. No person shall park any recreational vehicle or trailer capable of
habitation on any public street or highway for purposes of occupation or camping overnight except where
specifically permitted. This same prohibition will apply to any recreational vehicle or trailer parked on any
public street or highway to which services such as water or electricity are connected regardless of the length
it is parked. The City, by sign, may designate certain parking areas and parking spaces in the City for
camping. Violators who park or occupy a recreational vehicle or trailer capable of habitation in violation of
this provision may have their recreational vehicle or camping trailers towed at their expense and shall also
receive a parking ticket for violation of this prohibition.
Subd. 2. Penalties for Violation. Fines for parking tickets issued pursuant to this section will constitute
administrative violations and shall be in an amount in accordance with the resolution of the City Council
regarding such violations. At the time of the adoption of this section, the violation imposed will be an
administrative fee of $25 per violation with each day constituting a separate violation. In no event will the
amount charged for a parking offense under this section exceed the maximum assessable for a petty
misdemeanor as then defined by State Statute.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 5 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Section 5.9 Prohibition Against Parking Vehicles for Sale on Public Streets or Rights of Way 16
Section 5.9: Prohibition Against Parking Vehicles For Sale on Public Streets or Rights of Way
Subd. 1. General Prohibitions. No person shall park or leave unattended any vehicle listed or being
advertised for sale on any public street or highway overnight except where specifically permitted. This
same prohibition will apply to any recreational vehicle or trailer parked on any public street or highway
which is being advertised for sale. The City, by sign, may designate certain parking areas and parking
spaces in the City for such purpose or a person may conduct such activity on private property. Violators
who park and advertise any vehicle for sale in violation of this provision may have the vehicle towed at
their expense and shall also receive a parking ticket for violation of this prohibition.
Subd. 2. Penalties for Violation. Fines for parking tickets issued pursuant to this section will constitute
administrative violations and shall be in an amount in accordance with the resolution of the City Council
regarding such violations. At the time of the adoption of this section, the violation imposed will be an
administrative fee of $25 per violation with each day constituting a separate violation. In no event will the
amount charged for a parking offense under this section exceed the maximum assessable for a petty
misdemeanor as then defined by State Statute.
CHAPTER 6 LICENSES AND PERMITS
6.1 Licensing of Taxicabs ................................................................................... 1
6.2 Alcoholic Beverage Licensing ....................................................................... 4
6.3 Provisions Regarding the Sale of 3.2% Beer ............................................ 24
6.4 Providing for General Licensing Restrictions,
Responsibility of Licensee, Right to Search, and
Compliance Checks Regarding the
Sale of Alcoholic Beverages ........................................................................ 31
6.5 Licensing and Regulation of the Sale, Possession,
and Use of Tobacco Products and
Tobacco Related Devices ............................................................................ 35
6.6 Licensing of Peddlers, Solicitors, Itinerant
Businesses and Transient Merchants ........................................................ 41
6.7 Regulation and Licensing of Gambling ..................................................... 49
6.8 Regulation and Licensing of Gaming Rooms ............................................ 52
6.9 Regulation and Licensing of Professional
Therapeutic Massage .................................................................................. 58
6.10 Licensing and Regulation Regarding the
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses ................................................. 64
6.11 Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers .............................................. 74
6.12 Licensing and Regulation of Businesses or
Commercial Enterprises involved in the
Process of Tattooing and Body Piercing ................................................... 89
6.13 Regulation and Licensing of Solid Waste
and Recycling ............................................................................................. 90
6.14 Regulation and Licensing of Excavators ................................................... 96
6.15 Hunting Deer by Bow and Arrow in
Cloquet City Limits ................................................................................... 101
6.16 Regulation and Licensing of Bowling Alleys ........................................... 103
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Effective Date: March 7, 2006
Amendments: 07-10-07 342A / 06-02-09 359A / 06-16-09 360A / 09-01-09 361A / 11-03-09 363A,364A,365A,366A /
11-17-09 367A / 02-02-10 374A / 02-16-10 375A / 07-20-10 383A / 09-21-10 384A / 02-07-12 408A /
06-19-12 411A / 10-01-13 427A / 12/17/13 431A / 01-06-15 439A / 04-07-15 442A /08-16-16 458A
12-06-16 460A / 03-21-17 463A / 04-02-19 479A / 01-21-20 486A / 02-04-20 487A
Section 6.1: Licensing of Taxicabs 1
SECTION 6.1: LICENSING OF TAXICABS
6.1.01 Definitions. Unless it appears from the context that a different meaning is intended, the following words
shall have the meaning attached to them by this Section.
Subd. 1. Operator. The word “operator” shall mean and include any person owning or having control of
the use of one or more taxicabs used for hire upon the streets or engaged in the business or operation of a
taxicab within the corporate limits of the City.
Subd. 2. Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any street, avenue, alley, court, cul de sac, or
thoroughfare which is a public place located within the corporate limits of the City.
Subd. 3. Taxicab. The word "taxicab" shall mean any private motor vehicle used for the purpose of
transporting passengers for hire over and upon any street, avenue, alley, court, land or public place within
the corporate limits of the City; but the term shall not include vehicles subject to control and regulation by
the public service commission or vehicles regularly used by undertakers in carrying on their business.
Subd. 4. Taxicab Driver. The word “taxicab driver” shall mean and include any person who drives a
taxicab, whether such person be the owner of such taxicab or employed by a taxicab owner or operator.
6.1.02 License and Insurance Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to
carry on the operation of taxicabs for carrying passengers for hire within the corporate limits of the City without first
securing liability insurance from an insurance company or association holding a license to do an indemnity
insurance business in the State of Minnesota, as specified and for the purposes set forth in this Section, and without
first having obtained a taxicab license as required in this Section. Provided, further, that the total number of taxicab
licenses issued and outstanding under authority of this Section shall not exceed one for every 1000 persons residing
within the corporate limits of the City.
6.1.03 Amount of Insurance. The liability or indemnity insurance required to be furnished under the provisions
of this section for each taxicab carrying passengers for hire as specified in this Section shall be in such amounts as
are established by applicable state statute or the Council from time to time. However, in no event will the liability
limits of such a policy be less than $100,000 per person and $300,000 per accident. The policy shall be in such form
that it shall provide for the payment of any judgment obtained against the insured or principal therein to the extent of
the liability therein provided by any person injured in person or property by reason of any act of the owner, driver,
chauffeur, manager or other person in the operation of a taxicab or by the representative of any person killed or
injured by such act. Proof of such insurance shall be filed with the City Administrator and shall have a condition that
it cannot be canceled without thirty (30) days’ written notice to the City Administrator. In the case of any
cancellation of insurance, the license issued under this Section to the person, firm, partnership or corporation whose
policy is so canceled shall become inoperative and void unless and until further proof of insurance shall be furnished
to the City Administrator.
6.1.04 Application for License. Each applicant for a taxicab license shall apply to the City Administrator for
such license upon a form to be provided by the City and must comply with the following provision to the
satisfaction of the City Council:
1. The applicant must not be an illegal alien.
2. The applicant must be 18 years of age or over if a natural person, and in the case of any copartnership,
firm or corporation, must be authorized to operate taxicabs and carry on business in
accordance with the hours of the State.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.1: Licensing of Taxicabs 2
3. The applicant must fill out, upon the blank form provided by the City, a statement covering the
legal name of the operator and each vehicle to be licensed giving the following information:
• The full name and address.
• The class and passenger carrying capacity of each vehicle for which a license is desired.
• The length of time the vehicle has been in use.
• The make, model and year of vehicle.
• The factory vehicle identification number
• The State license number.
• The holder of legal title to such motor vehicle if other than the applicant.
• A statement signed by the operator of a garage or service station or State Inspections
Department, or by a mechanic employed in such garage or service station, certifying that
each vehicle sought to be licensed is in a thoroughly safe condition for the transportation
of passengers.
4. The applicant must fill out upon the blank form provided by the City regarding each driver and
giving the following information:
• The full name of driver.
• The birth date and address of the driver.
• The drivers license number of the driver.
5. If such application is made by an individual owner, it shall be signed and sworn to by such owner;
if it is made by a partnership, then it shall be signed and sworn to by one of the partners; and if it
is made by a corporation, then it shall be signed and sworn by one of the duly elected officials of
such corporation.
6.1.05 Approval. Upon receiving the application, the City Administrator shall place the application on file in his
or her office and when proof of insurance as required by section 6.1.03 has been filed with the City Administrator,
he or she shall refer the application with the policy, bond or undertaking to the City Council for approval or
disapproval.
6.1.06 Issuance of License. Upon receipt and approval by the City Council of the application, the City
Administrator shall issue a license to the applicant in conformity to and with the provisions of this Section. The City
Administrator shall issue to the licensee a license bearing a number for each vehicle licensed under the operator,
which license the applicant shall display or have available for review in each motor vehicle.
6.1.07 Restrictions. The operation of the motor vehicle shall be subject to the following restrictions:
A. No person operating the motor vehicle shall carry any passengers or permit any passengers to
ride anywhere except on the seats of the motor vehicle.
B. Children and infants must be transported in approved child carrier seats, if of an age where state
law requires it.
C. No more than one passenger shall be permitted to ride on the seat with the driver besides the driver
or chauffeur of the taxicab.
D. No taxicab shall take on or discharge passengers while in motion.
E. All passengers shall be received and discharged at the curb or as near thereto as the motor vehicle
can approach. Passengers shall be allowed to alight or board a taxicab on the right-hand side only,
excepting on one way streets, where passengers may also alight or board on the left-hand side of
the vehicle, provided the left side of the vehicle is abutting the curb.
F. No taxicab shall travel faster than the limitation placed thereon by the laws of the State and the
Code or Ordinances of the City.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.1: Licensing of Taxicabs 3
G. No driver of any taxicab shall solicit passengers by motion, calling by voice or sounding horn, bell
or whistling.
H. No persons shall drive a taxicab without first having obtained a chauffeur’s license, as provided
for by State Statutes.
I. No taxicab shall be operated upon any street within the corporate limits of the City without having the
name of the company prominently displayed, either by having the name painted upon the front or rear
door, or by having a suitable sign bearing the name of the company placed in a position such as is
readily visible to the public.
J. No taxicab shall be operated without a card or notice conspicuously posted in the taxicab showing that
within the prior 30 days the taxicab has been inspected by an automobile mechanic, in a garage with
the necessary equipment needed to inspect, adjust and repair lights and brakes, and that the lights and
brakes of the taxicab were found to comply with the Statutes of the State of Minnesota in such cases
made and provided.
K. No taxicab or other vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for hire in the City shall carry
signs, posters, placards or other medium of advertising, except that automobiles used as taxicabs may
have a base or stand on the rear of the automobile not larger in size than twenty-four (24) inches high
or twenty-four (24) inches wide and so situated as not to interfere with the vision through the rear
window or handicap the driving and operation of the vehicle. Buses or other types of vehicles may
have signs, posters, placards, or other medium of advertising not larger than specified in this
Subdivision attached to the sides or rear of the vehicle and so placed as to not interfere with the vision
or operation of the vehicle. Any such signs, posters, placards, or other medium or advertising shall not
contain any obscene or indecent matter or advertise the use or consumption of intoxicating liquor or
non-intoxicating malt beverage.
6.1.08 License Fee. No license shall be issued under this section until the appropriate license fee shall be paid in full.
The fee for license under this section shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council.
6.1.09 License Term. Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of time of one year. All such licenses under
this article shall expire on December 31st of each calendar year or portion thereof.
6.1.10 Transfers. No license shall be transferred or sold. No refund shall be made for the unexpired portion of any
license surrendered to the City or revoked as provided in this Section.
6.1.11 Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be handled in the same manner as the original
application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days but no more than sixty (60) days before the
expiration of the current license.
6.1.12 Taxi Stands. The City Council may by resolution establish necessary stands for taxicabs upon the public
streets in the City and shall designate the stands by the placing of signs and the painting of curbs at the points designated
as stands. No vehicle other than a taxicab shall be permitted to stand or park at the designated taxicab stands, except that
a vehicle may stop in the designated taxicab stand for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers while the driver
is in attendance upon the vehicle, and no taxicab shall stand or park upon a public street at a point other than a designated
taxicab stand except that a taxicab may stop at a point not so designated for the purpose of discharging and receiving
passengers while the diver is in attendance upon the taxicab.
6.1.13 Enforcement of Fare. It shall be unlawful for any person who has been transported by a taxicab to refuse to pay
the fare for the transportation.
6.1.14 Revocation. Violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be cause for revocation of any licenses
issued under this section at the discretion of the City Council.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 4
SECTION 6.2: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSES
6.2.01 Adoption of State Law by Reference. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 340A, as they may be
amended from time to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on
consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale,
distribution, and consumption of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and
are made a part of this Code as if set out in full. It is the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 340A are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at
the time this Code is adopted.
6.2.02 City May Be More Restrictive Than State Law. The Council is authorized by the provisions of Minnesota
Statutes, Chapter 340A.509, as it may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this Code,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages within its limits beyond those contained in
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time.
6.2.03 Definitions. In addition to the definitions contained in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 340A.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this ordinance:
A. Brewer. Means a person who manufactures malt liquor for sale and who holds a Brewers License
issued by the State of Minnesota.
B. Brewery Taproom (also known as a microbrewery). Means a facility on the premises
of or adjacent to the premises owned by a Brewer, licensed under Minn. Stat. 340A.301,
intended for the on-sale consumption and limited off-sale of beer produced on site by the
brewer as authorized by Minn. Stat. 340A.26.
C. Brew Pub. Means a brewer who also holds one or more retail on-sale license(s) and who
manufactures fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year, at any one licensed
premises, the entire production of which is soley for consumption on tap on any licensed
premises owned by the brewer, or for off-sale from those licensed premises as permitted
in Minn. Stat. 340A.24.
D. Caterer’s Permit. Means a permit issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety and the
City of Cloquet to a restaurant that holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by
the City. The holder of a caterer’s permit may sell intoxicating liquor as an incidental
part of a food service that serves prepared meals at a place other than the premises for
which the holder’s on-sale intoxicating liquor license is issued.
E. Club. Means an incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state for
civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for intellectual improvement, or for the
promotion of sports or a congressionally chartered veterans’ organization. In addition,
the club must meet the following criteria:
1. Has more than 30 members;
2. Own or rent a building or space in a building for more than one year that is
suitable and adequate for the accommodation of its members;
3. Is directed by a board of directors, executive committee, or other similar body
chosen by the members at a meeting held for that purpose. No member, officer,
agent, or employee shall receive any profit from the distribution or sale of
beverages to the members of the club, or their guests, beyond a reasonable
salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the governing body.
F. Cocktail Room. Means a facility on or adjacent to the premises of a micro distillery
licensed under Minn. Stat. 340A.22, which has been issued a cocktail room license for
the on-sale of distilled liquor produced by the distiller for consumption on the premises of
or adjacent to one distillery location owned by the distiller.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 5
G. Distilled Spirits. Means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, whiskey,
rum, brandy, gin, and other distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof,
for non- industrial use.
H. Growler. Means a 64-ounce container of malt liquor brewed and sold to an individual on
the site of a licensed Brewery Taproom for consumption off the licensed premises as
prescribed for in MS 340A.301.
I. Exclusive Liquor Store. An “Exclusive Liquor Store” is an establishment used
exclusively for the sale of:
1. alcoholic beverages;
2. tobacco products;
3. ice;
4. beverages, either liquid or powder, specifically designated for mixing with
intoxicating liquor;
5. soft drinks;
6. liqueur-filled candies;
7. food products that contain more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume;
8. cork extraction devices;
9. books and videos on the use of alcoholic beverages;
10. magazines and other publications published primarily for information and
education on alcoholic beverages;
11. multiple-use bags designed to carry purchased items;
12. devices designed to ensure safe storage and monitoring of alcohol in the home,
to prevent access by underage drinkers; and
13. home brewing equipment.
14. clothing marked with the specific name, brand, or identifying logo of the
exclusive liquor store, and bearing no other name, brand, or identifying logo.
J. Licensed Premises. Means the premises described in the approved license application,
subject to the provisions of Section 340A.410, Subd. 7. In the case of a restaurant, club,
or exclusive liquor stores licensed for on-sales of alcoholic beverages and located on a
golf course, “licensed premises” means the entire golf course except for areas where
motor vehicles are regularly parked or operated.
K. Liquor. Means 3.2 Malt Liquor, Intoxicating Liquor, Strong Beer/Malt Liquor, and
Wine.
L. Intoxicating Liquor. Means ethyl alcohol and includes distilled, fermented, spirituous,
vinous and malt beverages containing in excess of 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight.
M. 3.2 Malt Liquor. (Often referred to as 3.2 beer) Means any potable malt beverage with an
alcoholic content of more than one-half percent (½%) by volume and not more than three
point two percent (3.2%) by weight.
N. Micro-Distillery. Means a distillery operated within the State producing premium,
distilled spirits in total quantity not to exceed 40,000 proof gallons in a calendar year and
licensed under Minn. Stat. 340A.22.
O. Off-Sale. Means the sale of liquor in the original package in retail stores for consumption
off or away from the premises where sold.
P. On-Sale. Means the sale of liquor by the glass, or by the drink for consumption on the
premises only.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 6
Q. On-Sale Wine License. Means a license authorizing the sale of wine not to exceed 14
percent alcohol by volume, for consumption on the licensed premises only, in
conjunction with the sale of food unless otherwise permitted by State Law.
R. Original Package. Means the bottle or container in which the liquor is placed at the
place of manufacture.
S. Restaurant. Means an eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a single
proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises, where full
waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a customer orders food from printed
menus and where the main food course is served and consumed while seated at a single
location. To be a restaurant as defined by this section, an establishment shall have a
license from the state as required by M.S. § 157.16, as it may be amended from time to
time, and meet the definition of either a “small establishment,” “medium establishment”
or “large establishment” as defined in M.S. § 157.16, subd. 3d, as it may be amended
from time to time. An establishment which serves prepackaged food that receives heat
treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza that is heated and served, shall not
be considered to be a restaurant for purposes of this Code unless it meets the definitions
of a “small establishment”, “medium establishment” or “large establishment”.
The term "restaurant," when used in connection with “on-sale wine” or “on-sale 3.2 malt
liquor” licenses, shall mean an establishment under the control of a single proprietor or
manager, having appropriate facilities for serving meals and seating not fewer than 25
guests at one time, and where, in consideration of payment thereof, meals are regularly
served at table to the general public and which employs an adequate staff to provide the
usual and suitable service to its guests.
T. Theater. Means a building containing an auditorium in which live dramatic, musical,
dance, or literary performances are regularly presented to holders of tickets for those
performances.
6.2.04 Types of Liquor Licenses. The City Council is authorized to issue the following licenses and permits:
A. On-sale intoxicating liquor
B. On-sale wine
C. Off-sale intoxicating liquor
D. 3.2% on-sale intoxicating liquor
E. 3.2% off-sale intoxicating liquor
F. Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor
G. Optional 2am liquor
H. Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor
I. Temporary 3.2% malt liquor
J. Brew Pub on-sale intoxicating liquor
L. Brew Pub on-sale 3.2% malt liquor
M. Brewer taproom off-sale malt liquor
N. Brewer temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor
O. Brewer taproom (microbrewery)
P. Cocktail room
Q. Micro-distiller off-sale
R. Micro-distiller temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor
6.2.05 On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor.
A. On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued to the following establishments as
defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and this Code:
1. hotel,
2. restaurant,
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 7
3. bowling center,
4. theater,
5. exclusive liquor store,
6. club or congressionally chartered veterans organizations, with the approval of
the commissioner, provided that the organization has been in existence for at
least three (3) years and liquor sales will only be to members and bona fide
guests.
7. brewery taprooms
8. cocktail rooms
B. Number of On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor Licenses Which May be Issued. “On-Sale
Intoxicating Liquor” licenses may be granted in such number and to such persons as
qualify under State Liquor Laws, but shall permit consumption of liquor on the licensed
premises only. No more than thirteen (13) licenses may be issued without voter approval
by City referendum. [M.S. §340A.413] Licenses issued to bowling centers, restaurants,
hotels, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations, and establishments that
are issued licenses to sell wine under M.S. §340A.404, Subd. 5 are excluded from the
license limits.
C. On-Sale Club License. An on-sale intoxicating liquor club license requires approval by
the City. After approval by the City, the Commissioner of Public Safety’s final approval
must be obtained. Without the Commissioner’s approval, the license will not be
effective.
D. The Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense
intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at a community festival held within the city
under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4(b), as it may be amended from time to
time. The Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to
dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any convention, banquet,
conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the premises of a sports, convention,
or cultural facility owned by the city, under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4(a),
as it may be amended from time to time; however, the licensee is prohibited from
dispensing intoxicating liquor to any person attending or participating in a youth amateur
athletic event being held for persons 18 years of age or younger being held on the premises.
The authorization shall specify the area in which intoxicating liquor must be dispensed
and consumed, and shall not be issued unless the licensee demonstrates that it has
liability insurance as required under M.S. 340A.409 to cover the event.
6.2.06 On-Sale Wine Licenses.
A. On-sale wine licenses may be issued to:
1. theaters,
2. restaurants that have facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one time and meet
the criteria of M.S. §340A.404, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time,
and which meet the definition of restaurant in Section 6.2.03, Subd. 6 of this
Code,
a. Seating for 25 guests at one time must meet all City Zoning
and Fire Code laws;
3. licensed bed and breakfast facilities which meet the criteria in M.S. § 340A.401,
subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
B. On-sale wine licenses shall permit the sale of wine of up to 24% alcohol by volume for
consumption on the licensed premises
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 8
C. After approval by the City, the Commissioner of Public Safety’s final approval must be
obtained. Without the Commissioner’s approval, the license will not be effective.
D. The holder of an on-sale wine license who also holds an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor
license is authorized to sell malt liquor with a content over 3.2 percent (strong beer)
without an additional license.
E. The license shall permit the sale of wine on all days of the week unless the City Council
restricts the sale of wine on all days except Sunday.
6.2.07 3.2 Percent On-Sale Malt Liquor Licenses.
A. 3.2% on-sale malt liquor licenses may be issued only to:
1. golf courses,
2. restaurants,
3. hotels,
4. clubs,
5. bowling centers,
6. establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor with the
incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.
6.2.08 Intoxicating Liquor, On-Sale; Sunday Sales.
A. Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to:
1. restaurant that has an on-sale intoxicating liquor license and a minimum seating
capacity of 30 persons;
2. club;
3. bowling center; or
4. hotel which has a seating capacity of at least 30 persons, which holds an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license, and which serves liquor only in conjunction with the
sale of food.
6.2.09 Optional 2 A.M. Permit.
A. No licensee may sell intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. unless the licensee has obtained a permit from the
Commissioner.
B. After approval by the City, the Commissioner of Public Safety’s final approval must be
obtained and license will be issued by the Commissioner.
6.2.10 Off-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License.
A. Off- sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to:
1. exclusive liquor stores.
B. Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses shall allow for the sale of intoxicating liquor in its
original container for consumption off the licenses premises only. An off-sale
intoxicating liquor licensee may sell off-sale wine and 3.2 percent malt liquor without an
additional license.
C. After approval by the City, the Commissioner of Public Safety’s final approval must be
obtained. Without the Commissioner’s approval, the license will not be effective.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 9
D. The number of “Off-Sale” licenses available at any one time will be determined by the
City Council but not more than twelve (12) will be issued at any one time.
6.2.11 3.2 Percent Off-Sale Malt Liquor Licenses.
A. 3.2% malt liquor off-sale licenses shall permit the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor at retail
in the original package for consumption off the premises only. An off-sale intoxicating
liquor license cannot be issued to a place where 3.2 percent malt liquor is sold for
consumption on the premises.
6.2.12 Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor Licenses.
A. Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued:
1. Only in connection with a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious,
or other nonprofit corporation that has existed for at least three years.
B. After approval by the City, the Commissioner of Public Safety’s final approval must be
obtained. Without the Commissioner’s approval, the license will not be effective.
C. No license shall be for longer than four consecutive days and the City shall issue no more
than 12 days’ worth of temporary licenses to any one organization in one calendar year.
6.2.13 Temporary 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Licenses.
A. Temporary 3.2% malt liquor licenses may be issued:
1. Only to a club, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization.
6.2.14 Consumption and Display Permits.
A. Permit Required. No business establishment or club which does not hold an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license may directly or indirectly allow the consumption and display
of alcoholic beverages or knowingly serve any liquid for the purpose of mixing with
intoxicating liquor without first having obtained a permit from the Commissioner of
Public Safety under Minnesota Statutes, Section 340A.414.
B. Local consent required. A Consumption and Display permit issued under this section is
not effective until approved by the City Council. After approval by the City, the
Commissioner of Public Safety’s final approval must be obtained. Without the
Commissioner’s approval, the license will not be effective. All permits issued under this
section expire on March 31 of each year.
C. One day consumption and display permits. The City Council may issue a one day
permit for the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor to a nonprofit organization
in conjunction with a social activity in the city sponsored by the organization. The permit
must be approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety and is valid only for the day
indicated on the permit. The City may not issue more than ten permits under this section
in any one year.
6.2.15 Brew Pub On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor or On-Sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Licenses.
A. With the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, the City Council may issue to
brewers who operate a restaurant in their place of manufacture and who meet the criteria
established under M.S. §340A.24, as it may be amended from time to time. Sales under
these licenses at an on-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year. If a brew pub licensed
under this section possesses a license for off-sale under Section 6.2.16 below, the brew
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 10
pub’s total combined retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per
year, provided that off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels.
6.2.16 Brewer Off-Sale Malt Liquor Licenses.
A. With the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, the City Council may issue to a
brewer that is a licensee under Section 6.2.15 above and otherwise meets the criteria
established at M.S. §340A.24, as it is amended from time to time. Off-sale of malt liquor
shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores in the City. Malt
liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the premises before the applicable off-sale
closing time at exclusive liquor stores. All malt liquor sold under this license shall be
packaged in the manner required by M.S. §340A.285 as it may be amended from time to
time. Sales under this license may not exceed 500 barrels per year. If a brewer licensed
under this section possesses a license under Section 6.2.15 above, the brewers total retail
sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year, provided that off-sales
may not total more than 500 barrels.
B. Brewer off-sale malt liquor licenses may also be issued, with approval of the
Commissioner, to a holder of a brewer’s license under M.S. §340A.301, subd 6(c), (i), or
(j) and meeting the criteria established by M.S. §340A.28 as may be amended from time
to time. The amount of malt liquor sold at off-sale may not exceed 500 barrels annually.
Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at exclusive liquor
stores and the malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the premises before the
applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor stores. Packaging of malt liquor for
off-sale under this license must comply with M.S. §340A.285.
6.2.17 Brewer Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor.
A. With the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, the City Council may issue to a
brewer who manufactures fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year a temporary
on-sale intoxicating liquor license in connection with a social event within the City
sponsored by the brewer.
6.2.18 Brewer Taproom License.
A. The City Council may issue to the holder of a brewer’s license under M.S. §340A.301,
Subd 6(c), (i) or (j) as it may be amended from time to time. A brewer’s taproom license
authorizes on-sale of malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption on the
premises of or adjacent to one brewery location owned by the brewer. A brewer may
have only one taproom license and may not have an ownership interest in a brewer
licensed under M.S. §340A.301, Subd 6(d) as it may be amended from time to time. A
brewer taproom license may not be issued to a brewer that brews more than 250,000
barrels of malt liquor annually or a winery that produces more than 250,000 gallons of
wine annually. Within ten days of issuing a brewer taproom license the City Clerk will
inform the Commissioner of Public Safety of the licensee’s name, address, trade name
and the effective date and expiration date of the license. The City Clerk will inform the
Commissioner of Public Safety of a license transfer, cancellation, suspension, or vocation
during the license period.
6.2.19 Cocktail Room License.
A. The City Council may issue a holder of a state micro-distillery license a cocktail room
license. A micro-distillery cocktail room license authorizes on-sale of distilled liquor
produced by the distiller for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one distillery
location owned by the distiller. The holder of a micro-distillery cocktail room license may
also hold a license to operate a restaurant at the distillery. No more than one cocktail
room license may be issued to any distiller and a micro-distillery cocktail room license
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 11
may not be issued to any person having an ownership interest in a distillery licensed
under M.S. §340A.301 Subd 6(a). No single entity may hold both a micro-distillery
cocktail room and taproom license and a micro-distillery cocktail room and taproom
license may not be co-located. Within ten days of the issuance of a micro-distillery
cocktail room license, the City shall inform the Commissioner of Public Safety of the
licensee’s name and address and trade name, and the effective date and expiration date of
the license. The City shall also inform the Commissioner of Public Safety of a
micro-distillery cocktail room license transfer, cancellation, suspension or revocation
during the licensing period.
6.2.20 Micro-Distiller Off-Sale License.
A. The City Council may also issue a micro-distiller license to a holder of a state micro-distillery
license. A micro-distiller off-sale license authorizes of sale of one 375 milliliter bottle per
customer per day of product manufactured on-site provided the product is also available for
distribution to wholesalers.
6.2.21 Micro-Distiller Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating License.
A. The City Council may issue a micro-distiller temporary on-sale intoxicating license but only to
the holder of a state micro-distillery license . A micro-distiller temporary on-sale intoxicating
liquor license authorizes on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the
City sponsored by the micro-distillery.
6.2.22 Temporary Licenses.
Subd. 1. Temporary On-Sale Liquor Licenses. Consistent with Minn. Stat. 340A.404 Subd. 10, and as
limited by Minn. Stat. 340A.410 subd. 10, hereinafter the City Council will determine on a case-by-case
basis the number of clubs, political committees registered under Minn. Stat. 10A.14 (charitable, religious or
nonprofit organizations in existence for three (3) years) that will be issued a temporary on-sale license to
sell intoxicating liquor within the City.
1. Consistent with the provisions of Minn. Stat.340A.404 Subd. 10, the City Council will
determine the duration of any such licenses granted (not to exceed 1 day per year for any
one licensee). The Council shall not award more than one temporary license to any one
organization or registered political committee annually unless the license is issued in
connection with an event officially designated as a community festival by the City
Council.
2. Location. A temporary license authorized by this section may authorize the on-sale of
intoxicating liquor on premises other than the premises owned or permanently occupied
by the licensee provided the site is approved and located within the City limits.
Subd. 2 Temporary On-Sale 3.2% Beer Sales. The City hereby adopts the provisions of Minn. Stat.
340A.404 Subd. 10 as a guideline for the issuance of 3.2% beer sales temporary licenses and hereinafter the
City Council will determine on a case-by-case basis the number of clubs, political committees registered
under Minn. Stat. 10A.14 (charitable, religious or nonprofit organizations in existence for three years) that
will be issued a temporary on-sale license to sell 3.2% beer within the City. Temporary on-sale licenses
may be issued in the discretion of the Council, subject to the limits of this Section, to clubs, or charitable,
religious, or non-profit organizations listed as 501(c) corporations for tax purposes.
1. Location. A temporary license authorized by this section may authorize the on-sale of
3.2% beer on premises other than the premises owned or permanently occupied by the
licensee provided the site is approved by the City Council and located within the City
limits.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 12
2. Conditions of Temporary License. Any license issue under this provision may provide
that the licensee may contract for intoxicating liquor catering services with the holder of a
full year on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the municipality. Any license issued
under this ordinance is subject to all of the laws governing the sale of intoxicating liquor
and all such licenses are not valid unless first approved by the Commissioner of Public
Safety or designated representative.
3. License Fees and Insurance. All licensees issued a license pursuant to this section will
pay the City a fee of $50 for each day the license is requested for at the time of
application. In addition, as a condition of receiving said license, all licensees will provide
the City Administrator a certificate of insurance providing proof of liability and dram
shop insurance in an amount of Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000) per claim
and One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) in aggregate. The City will be added as a named
insured on any such certificate and will be given ten (10) days written notice prior to
termination of any such policy.
4. Conditions of Temporary License. Any license issue under this provision may provide
that the licensee may contract for intoxicating liquor catering services with the holder of a
full year on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the municipality. Any license
issued under this ordinance is subject to all of the laws governing the sale of intoxicating
liquor and all such licenses are not valid unless first approved by the Commissioner of
Public Safety or designated representative.
5. License Fees and Insurance. All licensees issued a license pursuant to this section will
pay the City a fee of $50 at the time of application. In addition, as a condition of
receiving said license, all licensees will provide the City Administrator a certificate of
insurance providing proof of liability and dram shop insurance in an amount of Five
Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000) per claim and One Million Dollars ($1,000,000)
in aggregate. The City will be added as a named insured on any such certificate and will
be given Ten (10) days written notice prior to termination of any such policy.
Subd. 3. Temporary On-Sale License. With regard to all temporary on-sale licenses approved the City
pursuant to Minn. Stat. 340A.403, the licenses shall be issued subject to the following restrictions and
conditions:
1. Eligible Licenses. Licenses shall be issued only to clubs or charitable, religious or nonprofit
organizations having an Internal Revenue Service Determination Letter pursuant to
the provisions of Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code as amended.
2. Limit on Number. Consistent with the provisions and limitations of Minn. Stat.340A.410
Subd. 10, the City Council will determine the number and duration of any such temporary
licenses granted to any one organization or political committee annually not to exceed
twelve (12) days per year. The Council shall not award more than one temporary license
to any one organization or registered political committee annually unless the license is
issued in connection with an event officially designated as a community festival by the
City Council. A series of temporary licenses may be issued under this provision in any
combination not to exceed a total of twelve (12) days per year in any combination of the
following:
a) No more than three (3) four-day licenses;
b) No more than four (4) three-day licenses;
c) No more than six (6) two-day licenses;
d) No more than twelve (12) one-day licenses.
3. One-Day On-Sale Licenses. One-day On-Sale licenses to sell liquor in a parking lot are
required to be fenced in. One-Day On-Sale licenses to sell liquor in a park does not need
to be fenced in.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 13
4. Police. The applicant shall deposit with the City Administrator at the time of applying
for the license, sufficient funds to reimburse the City for all costs for two (2) police
officers who shall be on the location for which the temporary license for the sale of 3.2
percent malt liquor is issued during all times when 3.2 percent malt liquor is sold, unless
otherwise determined by the City Council that either fewer or additional officers are
needed of which the applicant shall reimburse the City as identified by the Council.
5. Restrictions. The licensee shall not permit any person under the legal drinking age to
remain or be in the area where the 3.2 percent malt liquor is being sold and consumed,
which area shall be enclosed by a fence or other enclosure.
6. Special Application Requirements. An applicant for a temporary license for the sale of
3.2 percent malt liquor shall apply on forms provided by the City to the City
Administrator not less than sixty (60) days prior to the date for which the temporary
license for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor is sought. In addition, all applicants shall
also provide the City Administrator with a certificate of liability insurance covering the
event for which the license is sought in the minimum amount of $500,000 per claim and a
$1,000,000 in aggregate. It shall be a requirement that the City of Cloquet be named as
an additional insured on the policy and that the City of Cloquet be provided with a
minimum of ten (10) days written notice prior to termination of any insurance policy so
obtained.
7. Compliance. All applicants for a temporary "On-Sale" license for the sale of 3.2 percent
malt liquor shall comply with all provisions of Minnesota Law and Cloquet Code or
Ordinances including Minn. Stat. Sections 340A.402 and 340A.412. Evidence of
compliance with this subdivision shall be submitted to the City Administrator by the
applicant not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the event for which the temporary
license for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor is sought.
6.2.23 Council Discretion to Grant or Deny a License. The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or
deny the application for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No applicant has a right to a
license under this Code.
6.2.24 Application for License.
Subd. 1. Form. Every application for a license issued under this Code shall be on a form provided by the
city. Every application shall state the name of the applicant, the applicant's age, representations as to the
applicant's character, with references as the Council may require, the type of license applied for, the
business in connection with which the proposed license will operate and its location, a description of the
premises, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has been in
that business at that place, and other information as the Council may require from time to time. No person
shall make a false statement in an application.
Subd. 2. Description of Premises. An application for an On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License shall
specifically describe the compact and contiguous premises within which liquor may be dispensed and
consumed. No license issued under the Chapter shall be effective beyond the building space and attached
courtyards, patios, or gardens as approved by the Council and as shown on the license application for such
license.
The description may not include any parking lot or sidewalk unless a “Sidewalk Use Permit Agreement”
has been executed and the appropriate insurance has been submitted. If the seating area is on the public
sidewalk, a minimum of a four foot walking path must be available for the public. The barrier required
between seating area and the walking path must be approved by the city prior to the seating area being
established.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 14
6.2.25 License Fees.
Subd. 1. No license shall be issued under this section until the appropriate license fee shall be paid in full.
The fee for license under this section shall be established by ordinance or resolution as adopted from time
to time by the City Council. No license or other fee established by the City shall exceed any limit
established by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for a liquor license.
Subd. 2. In the event that the costs of investigation exceeds the fee established by Council, the applicant
shall reimburse the City of Cloquet for the actual costs of the investigation, as determined by the City
Council prior to the issuance of a liquor license to the applicant.
Subd. 3. No liquor license fee for 3.2 percent malt liquor, On-Sale intoxicating liquor and off-sale
intoxicating liquor, shall be increased without providing mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed
increase to all affected licensees at least 30 days before the hearing. [M.S. 340A.408, Subd. 3a]
Subd. 4. The fee for all licenses issued by the City, except temporary licenses, granted after the
commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a monthly basis. In computing such fee, any
unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as one month.
Subd. 5. The annual fee for an off-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be reduced by $100 if at the time of
initial application or renewal the following conditions are met:
1. The licensee agrees to have a private vendor train all employees within 60 days of hire
and annually thereafter in laws pertaining to the sale of alcohol, the rules for
identification checks, and the responsibilities of establishments serving intoxicating
liquors; and
2. The licensee agrees to post a policy requiring identification checks for all persons
appearing to be 30 years old or less; and
3. A cash award and incentive program is established by the licensee, to award employees
who catch underage drinkers, and a penalty program is established to punish employees
in the event of a failed compliance check.
4. Failure to abide by the provisions of this paragraph may result in suspension of the
license until the conditions of the fee reduction are met and may result in suspension
and/or revocation of the license pursuant to Section 6.2.39 of this Code.
6.2.26 Term and Expiration of Licenses. Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All
licenses, except temporary licenses, shall expire on June 30 of each year. All licenses shall expire on the same date.
Temporary licenses expire according to their terms. Consumption and display permits issued by the Commissioner
of Public Safety and the accompanying City consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year.
6.2.27 Refunds. A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee for a retail license to sell intoxicating or 3.2
percent malt liquor may occur only if authorized by Minn. Stat. 340A.408 Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time
to time, less the investigation fee.
6.2.28 Applications for Renewal. At least 90 days before a license issued under this Code is to be renewed, an
application for renewal shall be filed with the city. The decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the
sound discretion of the Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.
6.2.29 Transfer of License. No license issued under this Code may be transferred without the approval of the
Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a transfer of the license, and a transfer of
stock without prior Council approval is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a license
shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the provisions of this code applying to
applications for a license shall apply.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 15
6.2.30 Financial Responsibility. Prior to the issuance of any license under this Code, the applicant shall
demonstrate proof of financial responsibility as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to
time, with regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to time. This proof will be
filed with the City and the Commissioner of Public Safety as a condition of issuance or renewal of his or her license.
Applicant shall file a duplicate copy of all filing with the City Administrator prior to issuance of a license. Any
lapse in insurance coverage or other evidence of financial responsibility as set forth within this Section shall
automatically suspend the licensee’s license to operate. Notice of cancellation of current liquor liability policy to
licensee of impending suspension or revocation shall result in suspension or revocation instantly upon lapse unless
evidence of compliance of financial responsibility requirements is presented to the City Administrator and other
licensing authority before termination shall be effective. Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of
state law and of this ordinance is a continuing condition of any license.
Subd. 1. Exempt Licensees. Those licensees that are exempt from the liability insurance provisions of
Minn. Stat. 340A.409 and 340A.801 shall file with the City Administrator an affidavit prepared by the
licensee and duly notarized containing at least the following:
A. On-Sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licensees:
1. That the licensee-affiant's on-sales of the preceding licensing period were less
than $25,000.00.
2. That licensee-affiant expects the sales to be less than $25,000.00 for the period
of license being applied for.
3. That the licensee-affiant shall notify the City Administrator within twenty-four
(24) hours of the sales of the licensee reaching $24,000.00.
4. That the licensee-affiant shall, during the license period, obtain certificate of
insurance or bond during the licensing period if his or her sales reach
$25,000.00
5. That the licensee-affiant shall have the security required pursuant to Minn. Stat.
340A.409 and 340A.801 in effect prior to the sale of the $25,000.00 in sales. Failure to
file the affidavit required in this Section shall automatically suspend the licensee's
license.
B. Off-Sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licensees:
1. That the licensee-affiant's on-sales of the preceding licensing period were less
than $50,000.00.
2. That licensee-affiant expects the sales to be less than $50,000.00 for the period
of license being applied for.
3. That the licensee-affiant shall notify the City Administrator within twenty-four
(24) hours of the sales of the licensee reaching $49,000.00.
4. That the licensee-affiant shall, during the license period, obtain certificate of
insurance or bond during the licensing period if his or her sales reach
$50,000.00.
5. That the licensee-affiant shall have the security required pursuant to Minn. Stat.
340A.409 and 340A.801 in effect prior to the sale of the $50,000.00 in sales.
Failure to file the affidavit required in this Section shall automatically suspend
the licensee's license.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 16
C. On-Sale Wine licenses.
1. That the licensee-affiant's sales of the preceding licensing period were less than
$25,000.00.
2. That licensee-affiant expects the sales to be less than $25,000.00 for the period
of license being applied for.
3. That the licensee-affiant shall notify the City Administrator within twenty-four
(24) hours of the sales of the licensee reaching $24,000.00.
4. That the licensee-affiant shall, during the license period, obtain certificate of
insurance or bond during the licensing period if his or her sales reach
$25,000.00
5. That the licensee-affiant shall have the security required pursuant to Minn. Stat.
340A.409 and 340A.801 in effect prior to the sale of the $25,000.00 in sales.
Failure to file the affidavit required in this Section shall automatically suspend
the licensee's license.
Subd. 2. The licensee shall obtain liability insurance, a bond surety or cash as provided under Minn. Stat.
340A.409 and 340A.801 in an amount not less than provided by statute when the licensee is not exempt
pursuant to law.
Subd. 3. Any lapse in insurance coverage or other evidence of financial responsibility as set forth within
this Section shall automatically suspend the licensee's license to operate. Notice of cancellation of current
liquor liability policy to licensee of impending suspension or revocation shall result in suspension or
revocation instantly upon lapse, unless evidence of compliance of financial responsibility requirements is
presented to the City Administrator and other licensing authority before termination shall be effective.
6.2.31 Investigation.
Subd. 1. Preliminary background and financial investigation. On an initial application for a license, on
an application for transfer of a license and, in the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public
interest to do so, on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall conduct a preliminary background
and financial investigation of the applicant or it may contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for
the investigation. The applicant shall pay with the application a non-refundable investigation fee
established by ordinance or resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council, which shall be in
addition to any license fee. The results of the preliminary investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of
Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license.
Subd. 2. Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results of a preliminary
investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the Council, a comprehensive background and financial
investigation, the Council may either conduct the investigation itself or contract with the Commissioner of
Public Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee for this comprehensive background and financial
investigation to be paid by the applicant shall be $500, less any amount paid for the initial investigation if
the investigation is to be conducted within the state, and $10,000, less any amount paid for the initial
investigation, if the investigation is required outside the state. The unused balance of the fee shall be
returned to the applicant whether or not the application is denied. The fee shall be paid in advance of any
investigation and the amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable in the event the
application is denied. The results of the comprehensive investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of
Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license.
Subd. 3. Inspection of Premises. All premises where any license under this Chapter is granted shall be
open to inspection by a licensed police officer or other properly designated officer or employee of the City
at any time during which the place so licensed is open to the public for business.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 17
Subd. 4. Inspection of Records. The business records of the licensee, including federal and state tax
returns shall be available for inspection by the City Administrator, or other duly authorized representative
of the City at all reasonable times.
6.2.32 Hearing and Issuance. The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and not investigated
in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any
person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the Council shall in
its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No license shall become effective until the proof of financial
security has been approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
6.2.33 Hours and Days of Sale for Intoxicating Liquor and 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor.
Subd. 1. Off-Sale: No sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor may be made:
1. on Sundays; except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m;
2. before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday;
3. on Thanksgiving Day;
4. on Christmas Day, December 25; or
5. after 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24.
Subd. 2. On-Sale: No sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor for consumption on the
licensed premises may be made:
1. Between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through Saturday;
2. After 2:00 a.m. on Sundays, except as provided in Subd.3 below.
Subd. 3. Intoxicating liquor; Sunday Sales; On-Sale
1. A restaurant, club, bowling center, or hotel with seating capacity for at least 30 persons
and which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license may sell intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the premises in conjunction with the sale of food between the hours of
10:00 a.m. on Sundays and 1:00 a.m. (2:00 a.m. if they have a state license) on Monday.
2. The establishment serving intoxicating liquors on Sundays must obtain a Sunday license.
The license must be issued by the City Council for a period of one year, and the fee for
the license will be set by the Council from time to time but may not exceed $200
annually.
6.2.34 Samples. It shall be lawful for the holder of an "off- sale" intoxicating liquor license to provide on the
premises of the retail licensee samples of wine, liqueurs, cordials and distilled spirits which the retail licensee
currently has in stock and is offering for sale to the general public without obtaining an additional license, provided
the wine, liqueur, cordial, and distilled spirits samples are dispensed at no charge and consumed on the licensed
premises during the permitted hours of "off-sale" in a quantity less than 50 milliliters of wine per variety per
customer, 100 milliliters of malt liquor, and 25 milliliters of liqueur or cordial, and 15 milliliters of distilled spirits
per variety per customer. A brewer may furnish samples of malt liquor the brewer manufactures in a quantity of less
than 100 milliliters of malt liquor per variety per customer.
6.2.35 Restrictions on Issuance.
Subd. 1. Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises described in the application.
Subd. 2. Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly issued within the City to any one person.
Subd. 3. No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises on which taxes,
assessments, utility charges, service charges, or other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
Subd. 4. No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible for a license under state law.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 18
Subd. 5. Distance from Schools and Churches. No license shall be granted for any place within 1,200 feet
of any public school or within 600 feet of any church unless the entity pre-existed the location of the school
or church in question or unless such a use is permitted under City Zoning and is approved by the City
Council. In applying this restriction, the distance shall be measured between the main front entrance of
each structure, following the route of ordinary pedestrian travel.
6.2.36 Conditions of License. The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license specified
below shall result in a suspension of the license until the condition is met.
Subd. 1. All Intoxicating and 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Licenses.
A. Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business and the conditions
of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises is deemed
the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by
this ordinance and the law equally with the employee.
B. Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city employee, or any other
person designated by the Council to conduct compliance checks and to otherwise enter,
inspect, and search the premises of the licensee during business hours and after business
hours during the time when customers remain on the premises without a warrant.
C. No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in a public park,
on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any public place other than on
the premises of an establishment licensed under this ordinance or where the consumption
and display of liquor is lawfully permitted.
D. Sale to Minors or Intoxicated Persons. No liquor shall be sold or served to any
intoxicated person or to any person under 21 years of age.
E. No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any consumption of
intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in an on-sale licensed premises more than
30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
F. No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other container containing
intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor to remain upon any table, bar, stool,
or other place where customers are served, more than 30 minutes after the time when a
sale can legally occur.
G. No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on the on-sale licensed
premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
H. Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for revocation or
suspension of the license.
I. Nudity on the Premises of Licenses Establishments is Prohibited. The City Council finds
that it is in the best interests of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
people of the City that nudity is prohibited as provided in this section on the premises
of any establishment licensed under this ordinance. This is to protect and assist the
owners, operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the public
in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and combination of
alcohol, nudity and sex. The Council especially intends to prevent any subliminal
endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to lead to the possibility of various
criminal conduct, including prostitution, sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The
Council also finds that the prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment
licensed under this ordinance, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing
community standards of the City.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 19
It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or persons on the licensed
premises when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals
covered with a non-transparent material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the
licensed premises when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and
genitals covered with a non-transparent material.
A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law, and is
justification for revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine, or 3.2 percent malt liquor
license or any other license issued under this Code or the imposition of a civil penalty
under the provisions of 6.2.40.
Subd. 2. On-Sale Licenses.
A. No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during hours when
the sale of liquor is prohibited.
B. Unlicensed Premise. It shall be unlawful for any licensee holding an "On-sale"
license to sell or dispense intoxicating liquor except upon and within the
premises or building for which the license was granted. No person shall
consume liquor in any such unlicensed place.
C. Illegal Sales. No "On-Sale" dealer shall sell liquor by the bottle or container for
removal from the premises.
D. Any licensee holding a retail on-sale license to sell alcoholic beverages shall not
allow, suffer or permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years of age
to be, remain or loiter in or upon such premises.
E. Six Months' Prior Eligibility. No regular on-sale license shall be granted for a business
or club which has not been in operation and eligible to receive a license for a least six
(6) months immediately preceding the application of a license.
F. Banquet Room. A regular on-sale license shall entitle the holder to serve beer in a
separate room of the licensed premises for banquets or dinners at which shall not be
present fewer than twenty-five (25) persons.
Subd. 3. Off-Sale Licenses.
A. Failure by on off-sale intoxicating liquor license who has received a fee reduction
pursuant to section 6.2.08, Subd. 5 of this Code to abide with the provisions of section
6.2.08, Subd. 5.
Subd. 4. 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Licenses.
A. Age Misrepresentation. No minor shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of
obtaining beer.
B. Inducing Purchase. No person shall induce a minor to purchase or procure beer.
C. Procurement. No person other than the parent or legal guardian shall procure beer for
any minor, and then only for consumption on the premises of the parent or guardian.
D. Possession. No minor shall have beer in his or her possession with the intent to consume
it at a place other than the household of his or her parent or guardian.
E. Consumption. No minor shall consume beer unless in the company of his or her parent
or guardian on the premises of the parent or guardian.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 20
F. Interest of Manufacturers or Wholesalers. No manufacturer or wholesaler of beer shall
have any ownership of or interest in an establishment licensed to sell at retail contrary to
the provisions of Minnesota Statutes. No retail licensee and manufacturer or wholesaler
of beer shall be parties to any exclusive purchase contract. No retail licensee shall
receive any benefits contrary to law from a manufacturer or wholesaler of beer and no
such manufacturer or wholesaler shall confer any benefits contrary to law upon a
retail licensee.
G. Liquor Dealer's Stamp. No licensee shall sell beer while holding or exhibiting in the
licensed premises a Federal retail liquor dealer's special tax stamp unless he or she is
licensed under the laws of Minnesota to sell intoxicating liquors.
Subd. 5. Club License.
A. All sales of liquor or beer by the club shall be restricted to members of the licensed club
or to bona fide guests as defined in this Section and no sale may be made to a nonmember
unless (1) he or she is a guest in the company of the member, or (2) a guest at a
special event in the club sponsored by a member for which a reservation has been made
by such member at least twenty-four (24) hours preceding the event, or (3) all guests
shall sign a guest register which shall give his or her name, address and the name of the
club of which he or she is a member; or the name of the member of whom he or she is a
guest.
B. All liquor and beer license restrictions, sale regulations and hours and days of sales, as
stated in this Chapter and relating to the "on-sale" of liquor and beer, shall be binding
upon all club licensees.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a member of the licensed club to purchase
liquor or beer from the club unless he or she is a guest of the member or at a social event
as defined in Subparagraph A.
6.2.37 Minors.
Subd. 1. No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms constituting the place in
which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on-sale, except that persons under the
age of 18 may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person, host or dishwashing
services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, or other multi-purpose building serving food in rooms in
which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on-sale.
Subd. 2. No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment except to work, consume
meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, or attend social functions that are held in a portion of the
premises where liquor is not sold.
6.2.38 Sale of Liquor by Caterers.
Subd. 1. Illegal Sale. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a caterer’s permit to sell alcoholic beverages
off the holder’s licensed premises in the City, except as an incidental part of the service of prepared meals
at an event sponsored by a person with whom the holder has contracted for such prepared meal service.
Subd. 2. Illegal Interest. It shall be unlawful for the person who has contracted with the holder for
prepared meal service to have any legal, equitable or pecuniary interest in the holder, or the holder’s
compensation from the catered event.
Subd. 3. Information Required. Except for holders who also hold an on-sale intoxicating liquor license
issued by the City, it is unlawful for any person holding a caterer’s permit to sell or otherwise provide
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 21
alcohol to any individual or group located within the corporate boundaries of the City unless said person
has first provided the Police Chief for the City with the following:
A. A copy of their valid caterer’s permit as issued by the State of Minnesota; and
B. A copy of their valid on-sale liquor license as issued by the city where their primary on-sale liquor
premise is located; and
C. A copy of their dram shop insurance policy clearly indicating that dram shop coverage is currently
in force; and
D. A completed caterer’s permit application form; and
E. Payment of an application fee as set by resolution by the City Council.
Subd. 4. Aiding and Abetting. It is unlawful for any person to intentionally aid, advise, hire, counsel, or
conspire with or otherwise procure another to commit the prohibited act.
Subd. 5. Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
6.2.39 Suspension and Revocation.
A. The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days or revoke any liquor
license upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, regulation,
or provision of this ordinance relating to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial
responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an
opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. §14.57 to 14.70, as
it may be amended from time to time. The Council may act as the hearing body under that Act, or
it may contract with the Office of Hearings Examiners for a hearing officer.
B. The following are the minimum periods of suspension or revocation which shall be posed by the
Council for violations of the provisions of this Code or M.S. §340A, as it may be amended from
time to time or any rules promulgated under that Chapter as they may be amended from time to
time:
1. For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale of alcoholic beverages
while the license is under suspension, sale of intoxicating liquor where the only license is
for 3.2 percent malt liquor, or violation of Section 6.2.35, Subd. 1 (I), the license shall be
revoked.
2. The license shall be suspended by the Council after a finding under this section, division
A, that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, rule, or provision of
this ordinance for at least the minimum period as follows:
(a) For the first violation within any three-year period, at least one day suspension
in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.
(b) For a second violation within any three-year period, at least three consecutive
days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be
imposed.
(c) For the third violation within any three-year period, at least seven consecutive
days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be
imposed.
(d) For a fourth violation within any three-year period, the license shall be revoked.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 22
3. The Council shall select the day or days during which the license shall be suspended.
C. Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall effect an immediate suspension of any
license issued pursuant to this ordinance or state law without further action of the Council. Notice
of cancellation or lapse of a current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the
licensee of the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has received
notice of lapse of required insurance or of suspension or revocation of a license may request a
hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing to the City Administrator, a hearing before the
City Council shall be granted within ten days. Any suspension under this Division (B) shall
continue until the City Council determines that the financial responsibility requirements of state
law and this ordinance have again been met.
D. The provisions of Section 6.2.40 (Penalties) pertaining to civil penalties may be imposed
in addition to or in lieu of any suspension or revocation under this Code.
6.2.40 Penalties
Subd. 1. Any person violating the provisions of this Code or Minn. Stat. Ch. 340A as it may be amended
from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time is
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law.
Subd. 2. The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation of Minn. Stat. Ch.
340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and of this Code. Conviction of a violation in a court of
law is not required in order for the Council to impose the civil penalty. A hearing under the Administrative
Procedures Act, Minn. Stat. 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time, is not required before
the penalty is imposed, but the Council shall hold a hearing on the proposed violation and the proposed
penalty and hear any person who wishes to speak. Non-payment of the penalty is grounds for suspension
or revocation of the license. The following is the minimum schedule of presumptive civil penalties which
must be imposed in addition to any suspension unless the license is revoked:
A. For the first violation within any three-year period, $500.
B. For the second violation within any three-year period, $1,000.
C. For the third and subsequent violations within any three-year period, $2,000.
Subd. 3. The term “violation” as used in Section 23 includes any and all violations of the provisions in this
section, or of Minn. Stat. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated
under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time. The number of violations shall be
determined on the basis of the history of violations for the proceeding three-year period. Revocation shall
occur within 60 days following a violation for which revocation is imposed.
6.2.41 Temporary expansion of licensed premises; outdoor sales and services. The purpose of this section is to
allow for the temporary expansion of the licensed premises of a liquor licensee, to temporarily include limited
outdoor areas directly adjacent to and contiguous with the permanently licensed premises on City owned land or
City public right-of-way, from time to time, subject to such conditions as the City Council determines will protect
the public health, safety and welfare. The City Council finds that allowing outdoor sales and services in downtown
commercial areas is beneficial to the creation of a vibrant and prosperous business community so long as adequate
review, controls, and accountability are in place. Accordingly, liquor licensees shall be entitled to apply for the
benefits available under this section.
Therefore, the holder of any retail liquor license for premises located in the HC and CC zoning districts of the City
may, on an annual basis, apply for a permit for temporary expansion of its licensed premises, for an area directly
adjacent to and contiguous with the permanently licensed premises. The City Council may grant such a permit on
the terms and conditions specified under this section and such other terms and conditions as the City Council may
determine are necessary or advisable to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Such permit shall authorize
use of any temporary expansion area on particular days, dates and times and shall be valid for a period of time as
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.2: Alcoholic Beverage Licenses 23
specified in the permit, not to exceed one year. If approved by the City Council, a temporary expansion area may
include defined areas of public property including public sidewalks and/or parking lots. Application for a permit for
temporary expansion of a licensed premises or other unlicensed premises shall be subject to the following
requirements and procedures.
Subd. 1 Application. Application for a permit for temporary expansion of a licensed premises or other
premises shall be made on a form provided by the City and shall contain the following information and
such other information as the City may require from time to time:
A. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the license holder and of all managers of the
licensed establishment or of the owner and manager of an unlicensed premises.
B. A specific description and diagram of the area in which the temporary expansion activity is to
occur. The description and diagram must include location, dimensions, barriers proposed to be
used, ingress and egress arrangements, seating capacity, and other pertinent information.
C. Written consent of the owner of the expansion area or of a person with lawful responsibility for
the expansion area, if the owner is someone other than the licensee or business owner.
D. The purpose for which the temporary expansion is sought, a description of planned activities,
including food and beverage service, entertainment, if any, security plans (include lighting,
sanitation, liquor control, etc.) and days and hours of operation including beginning and ending
dates.
E. Proof that any necessary auxiliary permits have been obtained.
F. A detailed description of the planned staffing of the temporary expansion areas during hours of
operation, and methods the licensee will use to ensure that consumption of alcoholic beverages are
not removed from those areas.
G. Such other information as the City may deem necessary for the protection of public health, safety
and welfare.
Subd. 2 Fees. Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee in such amount as may be
determined by the City Council from time to time.
Subd. 3 Review. Applications shall be submitted to the City Administrator’s office and shall be reviewed
by such staff persons as may be appropriate in the circumstances, including the Chief of Police in all
applications which involve the outdoor sale of liquor. Review of applications shall include consideration of
all pertinent building code, fire code, and other life safety issues, applicable zoning ordinances, history of
licensee with regards to maintaining order on the licensed premises and complying with applicable laws,
potential impact of proposed outdoor service on adjoining properties in terms of light, noise and liquor
control, and other considerations.
Subd. 4 Conditions. Approval of an application may be made subject to any appropriate restrictions or
conditions, which may vary from establishment to establishment depending upon the location and
circumstances.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.3: Provisions Regarding the Sale of 3.2% Beer 24
SECTION 6.3 PROVISIONS REGARDING THE SALE OF 3.2% BEER
6.3.01 Definition of Terms.
Subd. 1 Beer. As used in this Section, "Beer" shall mean “3.2 percent malt liquor” which is any malt
beverage with an alcoholic content of more than one-half of one percent by volume and not more than three
and two-tenths percent by weight.
Subd. 2 Beer Store. "Beer Store" shall mean an establishment for the sale of beer, cigars, cigarettes, all
forms of tobacco, beverages, ice and soft drinks at retail.
6.3.02 License Required.
Subd. 1 Licenses. No person, except wholesalers and manufacturers to the extent authorized by law, shall
deal in or dispose of by gift, sale or otherwise, or keep or offer for sale, any beer within the City without
first having received a license as provided in this Section. Licenses shall be of three kinds: (1) Regular
"On-Sale"; (2) "Off-Sale", (3) Temporary "On-Sale".
Subd. 2 Regular On-Sale. Regular "On-Sale" licenses shall be granted only to bona fide clubs, beer
stores, drug stores, restaurants, and hotels where food is prepared and served for consumption on the
premises. "On-Sale" licenses shall permit the sale of beer for consumption on the premises only.
Subd. 3 Off-Sale. "Off-Sale" licenses shall permit the sale of beer at retail, in the original package for
consumption off the premises only.
Subd. 4 Temporary On-Sale 3.2% Beer Sales.
A. Temporary Licenses. The City hereby adopts the provisions of Minn. Stat. §340A.404
Subd. 10 as a guideline for the issuance of 3.2% beer sales temporary licenses and
hereinafter the City Council will determine on a case-by-case basis the number of clubs,
political committees registered under Minn. Stat. 10A.14 (charitable, religious or
nonprofit organizations in existence for three years) that will be issued a temporary onsale
license to sell 3.2% beer within the City. Temporary on-sale licenses may be issued
in the discretion of the Council, subject to the limits of this Section, to clubs, or
charitable, religious, or non-profit organizations listed as 501(c) corporations for tax
purposes.
1. Location. A temporary license authorized by this section may authorize the onsale
of 3.2% beer on premises other than the premises owned or permanently
occupied by the licensee provided the site is approved by the City Council and
located within the City limits.
2. Conditions of Temporary License. Any license issue under this provision may
provide that the licensee may contract for intoxicating liquor catering services
with the holder of a full year on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the
municipality. Any license issued under this ordinance is subject to all of the laws
governing the sale of intoxicating liquor and all such licenses are not valid
unless first approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety or designated
representative.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.3: Provisions Regarding the Sale of 3.2% Beer 25
3. License Fees and Insurance. All licensees issued a license pursuant to this
section will pay the City a fee of $50 for each day the license is requested for at
the time of application. In addition, as a condition of receiving said license, all
licensees will provide the City Administrator a certificate of insurance providing
proof of liability and dram shop insurance in an amount of Five Hundred
Thousand Dollars ($500,000) per claim and One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) in
aggregate. The City will be added as a named insured on any such certificate
and will be given ten (10) days written notice prior to termination of any such
policy.
6.3.03 General License Applications. Every application for a license to sell beer shall be made to the City
Administrator on a form supplied by the City and containing such information as the Administrator or the City
Council may require. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in an application.
6.3.04 Temporary On-Sale License. With regard to all temporary on-sale licenses approved the City pursuant to
Minn. Stat. 340A.403, the licenses shall be issued subject to the following restrictions and conditions.
Subd. 1 Eligible Licenses. Licenses shall be issued only to clubs or charitable, religious or non-profit
organizations having an Internal Revenue Service Determination Letter pursuant to the provisions of
Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code as amended.
Subd. 2 Limit on Number. Consistent with the provisions and limitations of Minn. Stat.§340A.410 Subd.
10, the City Council will determine the number and duration of any such temporary licenses granted to any
one organization or political committee annually not to exceed twelve (12) days per year. The Council shall
not award more than one temporary license to any one organization or registered political committee
annually unless the license is issued in connection with an event officially designated as a community
festival by the City Council. A series of temporary licenses may be issued under this provision in any
combination not to exceed a total of twelve (12) days per year in any combination of the following:
a) No more than three (3) four-day licenses;
b) No more than four (4) three-day licenses;
c) No more than six (6) two-day licenses;
d) No more than twelve (12) one-day licenses.
Subd. 3 One-Day On-Sale Licenses. One-day On-Sale licenses to sell liquor in a parking lot are required
to be fenced in. One-Day On-Sale licenses to sell liquor in a park does not need to be fenced in.
Subd. 4 Police. The applicant shall deposit with the City Administrator at the time of applying for the
license sufficient funds to reimburse the City for all costs for two (2) police officers who shall be on the
location for which the temporary license for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor is issued during all times
when 3.2 percent malt liquor is sold.
Subd. 5 Restrictions. The licensee shall not permit any person under the legal drinking age to remain or
be in the area where the 3.2 percent malt liquor is being sold and consumed, which area shall be enclosed
by a fence or other enclosure.
Subd. 6 Special Application Requirements. An applicant for a temporary license for the sale of 3.2
percent malt liquor shall apply on forms provided by the City to the City Administrator not less than sixty
(60) days prior to the date for which the temporary license for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor is sought.
In addition, all applicants shall also provide the City Administrator with a certificate of liability insurance
covering the event for which the license is sought in the minimum amount of $500,000 per claim and a
$1,000,000 in aggregate. It shall be a requirement that the City of Cloquet be named as an additional
insured on the policy and that the City of Cloquet be provided with a minimum of ten (10) days written
notice prior to termination of any insurance policy so obtained.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.3: Provisions Regarding the Sale of 3.2% Beer 26
Subd. 7 Compliance. All applicants for a temporary "On-Sale" license for the sale of 3.2 percent malt
liquor shall comply with all provisions of Minnesota Law and Cloquet Code or Ordinances including Minn.
Stat. Sections 340A.402 and 340A.412. Evidence of compliance with this subdivision shall be submitted
to the City Administrator by the applicant not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the event for which
the temporary license for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor is sought.
6.3.05 License Fees and Duration.
Subd. 1 Payment Required. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a receipt for
payment in full of the required fee for the license. All fees shall be paid into the general fund of the City.
Subd. 2 Expiration; Pro Rata Fees. Every license except a temporary license shall expire on the last day
of June of each year. Each license except a temporary license shall be issued for a period of one (1) year,
except that if a portion of the license year has elapsed when the license is granted, the license shall be
issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee. In computing such fee, any unexpired fraction of a
month shall be counted as one month. A temporary license shall be issued for a specific period in which a
special event to which the sale is incident is being held and such period shall be stated on the license.
Subd. 3 Fees. The annual fee for a regular on-sale license; the annual fee for an "off-sale" license; and the
fee for a temporary license shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to time by the City
Council.
Subd. 4 Refunds. Upon rejection of application for a license, the City Administrator shall refund the
amount paid, less the investigation fee. In the event that the costs of investigation exceeds the fee
established by Council, the applicant shall reimburse the City of Cloquet for the actual costs of the
investigation, as determined by the City Council prior to the issuance of a liquor license to the applicant. In
addition, no part of the fee paid for any license issued under this section shall be refunded except in the
following instances upon application to the Council within seven (7) days from the happening of the event.
There shall be refunded a pro rata portion of the fee for the unexpired period of the license, computed on a
monthly basis, when operation of the licensed business ceases not less than one (1) month before expiration
of the license because of:
A. Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or other catastrophe;
B. The licensee's illness;
C. The licensee's death;
D. A change in the legal status of the municipality making it unlawful for the licensed
business to continue.
6.3.06 Granting of License.
Subd. 1 Investigation and Hearing. The City Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application.
After such investigation and hearing, the Council shall grant or refuse the application in its discretion by
motion or resolution.
Subd. 2 Transfers. Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be transferable to
another holder. Each license shall be issued only for the premises described in the application. No license
may be transferred to another place without the approval of the Council.
6.3.07 Number of Licenses. The City Council shall determine the number of regular "on-sale" and “off-sale”
3.2% licenses that will be granted annually. In addition, a club or charitable, religious, or non-profit organization
may be issued a temporary “on-sale" 3.2% license. (Minn. Stat. §340A.403 & 340A.411).
6.3.08 Persons Ineligible for License. No license shall be granted to any person made ineligible for such a
license by State law.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.3: Provisions Regarding the Sale of 3.2% Beer 27
6.3.09 Places Ineligible for License.
Subd. 1 Conviction or Revocation. No license shall be granted for sale on any premises where a licensee
has been convicted of the violation of this Section, any other Code provision or ordinance related to
alcoholic beverages, or of the State Beer or Intoxicating Liquor Law, or where any license under this
Chapter has been revoked for cause until one (1) year has elapsed after such conviction or revocation.
Subd. 2 Distance from Schools and Churches. No license shall be granted for any place within 1,200
feet of any public school or within 600 feet of any church unless the entity pre-existed the location of the
School or Church in question or unless such a use is permitted under City Zoning and is approved by the
City Council. In applying this restriction, the distance shall be measured between the main front entrance
of each structure, following the route of ordinary pedestrian travel.
Subd. 3 Six Months' Prior Eligibility. No regular on-sale license shall be granted for a business or club
which has not been in operation and eligible to receive a license for a least six (6) months immediately
preceding the application of a license.
Subd. 4 Payment of Obligations Due City. No license shall be granted for operation on any premises
upon which taxes or assessments or other financial claims of the City are delinquent or unpaid.
6.3.10 Conditions of License.
Subd. 1 General Conditions. Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions in the following
subdivisions and all other provisions of this Section and of any other applicable Code provision, ordinance
of the City, or State law.
Subd. 2 Sale to Minors or Intoxicated Persons. No beer shall be sold or served to any intoxicated
person or to any person under 21 years of age.
Subd. 3 Consumption by Minors. Any licensee holding a retail on-sale license to sell alcoholic
beverages shall not allow, suffer or permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years of age to be,
remain or loiter in or upon such premises.
Subd. 4 Employment of Minors. Except as otherwise permitted by State law, no minor under 18 shall be
employed on the premises of a beer store.
Subd. 5 Gambling. No gambling or any gambling devices shall be permitted on any licensed premises
unless appropriate license is issued by the State or City as permitted by law.
Subd. 6 Interest of Manufacturers or Wholesalers. No manufacturer or wholesaler of beer shall have
any ownership of or interest in an establishment licensed to sell at retail contrary to the provisions of
Minnesota Statutes. No retail licensee and manufacturer or wholesaler of beer shall be parties to any
exclusive purchase contract. No retail licensee shall receive any benefits contrary to law from a
manufacturer or wholesaler of beer and no such manufacturer or wholesaler shall confer any benefits
contrary to law upon a retail licensee.
Subd. 7 Liquor Dealer's Stamp. No licensee shall sell beer while holding or exhibiting in the licensed
premises a Federal retail liquor dealer's special tax stamp unless he or she is licensed under the laws of
Minnesota to sell intoxicating liquors.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.3: Provisions Regarding the Sale of 3.2% Beer 28
Subd. 8 Sales of Intoxicating Liquors. No licensee who is not also licensed to sell intoxicating liquor or
who does not hold a consumption and display permit shall sell or permit the consumption or display of
intoxicating liquors on the licensed premises or serve any liquids for the purpose of mixing with
intoxicating liquor. The presence of intoxicating liquors on the premises of such a licensee shall be prima
facie evidence of possession of intoxicating liquors for the purpose of sale; and the serving of any liquid for
the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquors shall be prima facie evidence that intoxicating liquor is
being permitted to be consumed or displayed contrary to this Section.
Subd. 9 Searches and Seizures. Any peace officer may enter, inspect and search the premises of a
licensee during business hours without a search warrant and may seize all intoxicating liquors found on the
licensed premises in violation of Subdivision 8.
Subd. 10 Licensee Responsibility. Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his or her place
of business and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order.
Subd. 11 Banquet Room. A regular on-sale license shall entitle the holder to serve beer in a separate
room of the licensed premises for banquets or dinners at which shall not be present fewer than twenty-five
(25) persons.
Subd. 12 Financial Responsibility. Prior to the issuance of a beer and wine license, the applicant shall
demonstrate proof of financial responsibility as is required pursuant to Minn. Stat. 340A.409 and
340A.801. The applicant shall file all documents required by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
Applicant shall file a duplicate copy of all filing with the City Administrator prior to issuance of a license.
A. Those licensees that are exempt from the liability insurance provisions of Minn. Stat.
340A.409 and 340A.801 shall file with the City Administrator an affidavit prepared by
the licensee and duly notarized containing at least the following:
1) That the licensee-affiant's sales of the preceding licensing period were less than
$10,000.00.
2) That licensee-affiant expects the sales to be less than $10,000.00 for the period
of license being applied for.
3) That the licensee-affiant shall notify the City Administrator within twenty-four
(24) hours of the sales of the licensee reaching $9,000.00.
4) That the licensee-affiant shall, during the license period, obtain certificate of
insurance or bond during the licensing period if his or her sales reach
$10,000.00
5) That the licensee-affiant shall have the security required pursuant to Minn. Stat.
340A.409 and 340A.801 in effect prior to the sale of the $10,000.00 in sales.
Failure to file the affidavit required in this Section shall automatically suspend
the licensee's license.
B. The licensee shall obtain liability insurance, a bond surety or cash as provided under
Minn. Stat. 340A.409 and 340A.801 in an amount not less than provided by statute when
the licensee is not exempt pursuant to law.
C. Any lapse in insurance coverage or other evidence of financial responsibility as set forth
within this Section shall automatically suspend the licensee's license to operate. Notice
of cancellation of current liquor liability policy to licensee of impending suspension or
revocation shall result in suspension or revocation instantly upon lapse, unless evidence
of compliance of financial responsibility requirements is presented to the City
Administrator and other licensing authority before termination shall be effective.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.3: Provisions Regarding the Sale of 3.2% Beer 29
6.3.11 Hours of Sale:
Subd. 1 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor. No sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor for consumption on the licensed
premises may be made:
(1) Between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through Saturday;
(2) After 2:00 a.m. on Sundays, except as provided by subdivision 3.
Subd. 2. 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor; Sunday Sales; On-Sale. A restaurant, club, bowling center, or hotel
with a seating capacity for at least 30 persons and which holds a 3.2 percent malt liquor license may sell 3.2
percent malt liquor for consumption on the premises in conjunction with the sale of food between the hours
of 10:00 a.m. on Sundays and 2:00 a.m. on Mondays provided the establishment applying for the extension
from 1:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. holds a Sunday liquor license and has otherwise complied with all the
applicable provisions as set forth in this Code including the “No Hand Gun” posting requirement, have
submitted the required Form 9011 - 2 a.m. and has been approved by and has paid all required fees to the
Alcohol and Gambling Enforcement Division of the State of Minnesota and has been approved by the City
Council.
Subd. 3. 3.2 Percent liquor; off-sale. No sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor may be made by an off-sale
licensee:
(1) on Sundays; except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;
(2) before 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday;
(3) after 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday;
(4) on Thanksgiving Day;
(5) on Christmas Day, December 25; or
(6) after 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24.
Subd. 4. Sales after 1:00 a.m.; permit fee. No licensee may sell 3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. unless the licensee has a valid liquor license and must comply with all
other applicable provisions of this code and must provide the City with verification that the establishment
has submitted the 9011 - 2 am Form to the State Alcohol and Gambling Enforcement Division and has been
approved and has paid all required fees.
6.3.12 Firearm Posting Requirements. All establishments holding a liquor license that apply for an extension of
hours of service will additionally be required to post in the establishment a notice consistent with the requirements
of Minnesota Statute §624.714 subd. 17, as amended, to ban the possession of firearms on the premises.
6.3.13 Clubs. No club shall sell beer except to members and to guests in the company of members.
6.3.14 Restrictions on Purchase and Consumption.
Subd. 1 Age Misrepresentation. No minor shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of obtaining
beer.
Subd. 2 Inducing Purchase. No person shall induce a minor to purchase or procure beer.
Subd. 3 Procurement. No person other than the parent or legal guardian shall procure beer for any minor,
and then only for consumption on the premises of the parent or guardian.
Subd. 4 Possession. No minor shall have beer in his or her possession with the intent to consume it at a
place other than the household of his or her parent or guardian.
Subd. 5 Consumption. No minor shall consume beer unless in the company of his or her parent or
guardian on the premises of the parent or guardian.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.3: Provisions Regarding the Sale of 3.2% Beer 30
Subd. 6 Consumption Prohibited-Where:
A. No beer shall be consumed in any theater, recreation hall or center, dance hall, ball park,
public park, or other place of public gathering used for purposes of entertainment,
amusement or playing of games unless otherwise allowed by the City Council as part of a
community event or festival.
B. No beer shall be consumed on any public street, sidewalk (unless specifically allowed
above as part of a community event or festival) or in any automobile within the City
limits of the City.
Subd. 7 Liquor Consumption and Display. No person shall consume or display any intoxicating liquor
on the premises of a licensee who is not also licensed to sell intoxicating liquors or who does not hold a
consumption and display permit.
6.3.15 Suspension or Revocation. The violation of any provisions or conditions of this Section by a beer licensee
or his or her agent shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the license. The license of any person who holds
a Federal retail liquor dealer's special tax stamp without a license to sell intoxicating liquors at such place shall be
revoked without notice and without hearing. In all other cases, a license granted under this Section may be revoked
or suspended by for a period of time, not to exceed sixty (60) days or revoke any intoxicating liquor license, upon a
finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, regulation, Code or Ordinance relating to
intoxicating liquor. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity
for a hearing pursuant to Minn. Stat. Sections 14.57 to 14.69 of the Administrative Procedure Act. Reasonable
notice, as provided for in State law, shall be deemed by mailing of notice by certified mail ten (10) days prior to the
date of hearing to the address shown on the application of licensee. Suspension and revocation shall be automatic
without a hearing if the licensee shall violate the provisions of this Section relating to insurance and financial
responsibility. If a licensee shall have his or her license suspended or revoked, the license shall not be reinstated
without a new application for license filed in accordance with the provisions of this Section as though the applicant
had no license and not as a renewal application.
6.3.16 Penalty. Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or gross
misdemeanor as provided by Minnesota Statute.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.4: Providing for General License Restrictions, Responsibility of Licensee, 31
Right to Search, and Compliance Checks Regarding the Sale of Alcoholic Beverages
SECTION 6.4: PROVIDING FOR GENERAL LICENSE RESTRICTIONS,
RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE, RIGHT TO SEARCH, AND COMPLIANCE
CHECKS REGARDING THE SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
6.4.01 Purpose. Because the City finds that there is a connection between high risk and illegal conduct related to
the illegal sale and possession of alcoholic beverages within the City; and, since the City further believes it is in the
best interests of its citizens for the City to regulate the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in a manner
which will help to prevent illegal sales and the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages by minors and underage
adults (those under the legal drinking age), the City believes that it is in the best interests of its citizens and the
general public that the City provide for compliance checks and administrative penalties for licensees who sell, barter
or dispense intoxicating (and non-intoxicating beverages) in violation of the provisions of Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 340A and applicable law.
6.4.02 Definitions and Interpretations. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all
terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall
include the singular. The term “shall” means mandatory and the term “may” means permissive.
The following terms shall have the definitions given to them:
Subd. A. Intoxicating and Nonintoxicating Liquor. Alcoholic beverages as referred to in this section
are intended to refer to both intoxicating and nonintoxicating liquors as those terms are defined by
Minnesota Statute.
1. An intoxicating liquor is any distilled, fermented spirituous, vinous and malt beverage
containing more than 3.2 percent ethyl alcohol by weight.
2. A nonintoxicating liquor is any malt liquor containing not less than one-half of one
percent alcohol by volume nor more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight.
Subd. B. Sale. A sale shall mean any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other consideration.
Subd. C. Underage Adult. Any natural person who is an adult but who has not yet reached the legal age
for the consumption of intoxicating or nonintoxicating beverages as defined by Minn.Stat. 340A.503.
Subd. D. Minor. Minor shall mean any natural person who has not yet reached the age of eighteen (18)
years.
Subd. E. Compliance Checks. Compliance checks shall mean the system the City uses to investigate and
ensure that those authorized to sell alcoholic beverages are following and complying with the requirements
of applicable state laws and city Code or Ordinances with regard to the sale of alcoholic beverages.
Compliance checks may involve the use of individuals (including minors) under the age of twenty-one (21)
as authorized by this section.
6.4.03 License. No person or retail establishment shall sell or offer to sell any intoxicating or nonintoxicating
beverage product without first having obtained a license to do so from the City.
Subd. A. Revocation or Suspension. Any license issued by the City may be revoked or suspended as
provided in the Violations and Penalties section of this section.
6.4.04 Prohibited Sales. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to sell or offer to sell any intoxicating
or nonintoxicating alcoholic beverage:
1. To any person under the then existing legal drinking age as that term is defined by Minnesota
Statute.
2. By any other means, or to any other person, prohibited by federal, state, or other local law, Code
or Ordinance provision, or other regulation.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.4: Providing for General License Restrictions, Responsibility of Licensee, 32
Right to Search, and Compliance Checks Regarding the Sale of Alcoholic Beverages
6.4.05 Administrative Penalties and Responsibility for Illegal Sales.
Subd. A. All licensees shall be responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the sale of
alcoholic beverage on the licensed premise, and for purposes of this section the sale of such an item by an
employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder.
Subd. B. Violations and Penalties. Notwithstanding the above, the clerk or employee specifically
involved in a compliance check violation or determined to have violated this section will be personally
liable to pay an administrative fee in addition to any fees or license suspensions or revocations imposed
upon the employer or license holder.
It is hereby determined that the following penalty schedule is adopted:
A. A first offense violation will result in an administrative fee of Two Hundred Dollars
($200) to the merchant license holder and a Two Hundred Dollar ($200) penalty fee to
the individual clerk or bartender involved in the violation. The amounts of the
administrative fees shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to time by the
City Council and can be modified based upon the circumstances. The administrative fee
assessed the merchant license holder will be waived if the merchant license holder was
not the individual clerk or bartender involved directly in the violation and if the merchant
license holder can provide proof within fourteen days of the date of the violation that the
employee involved in the violation had attended RBS (responsible beverage service) staff
training prior to the alleged offense as approved by the City.
B. A second offense violation within twenty-four (24) months of a first violation will result
in an administrative penalty of Three Hundred Dollars ($300) to any clerk or bartender
previously cited within 24 months and an administrative penalty of Three Hundred
Dollars ($300) to any merchant/licensee whose clerk was previously cited for a violation
of this section within a 24 month period which dollar amount may be modified by
resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council. If the non-licensee clerk or
bartender cited has not been previously cited in the preceding 24 month period the
administrative fee for the involved clerk or bartender will be treated as a first time
offense. The administrative fee for the merchant/licensee will be reduced to the amount
of a first time offense if the merchant license holder can provide proof that his/her
employees have attended staff ID training as approved by the City within fourteen (14)
days of the determination of a violation. Failure to comply with this mandate will result
in the assessment of the higher administrative fee.
C. A third offense violation within a twenty four (24) month period will result in An
administrative penalty of Four Hundred Dollars ($400) to any clerk or bartender cited
with two prior violations of this section and will result in an administrative penalty of
Four Hundred Dollars ($400) to any merchant/licensee whose clerk was previously cited
for a violation of this section within a 24 month period. If the involved clerk or bartender
cited has not been previously cited in the preceding 24 month period, the administrative
fee of the merchant/licensee will be reduced to a dollar amount commensurate with a
second offense violation if the merchant license holder can provide proof that his/her
employees have attended staff ID training as approved by the City within fourteen (14)
days of the determination of a violation. A third offense within a twenty four month
period may also result in a suspension of any license issued by the City to the merchant
license holder.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.4: Providing for General License Restrictions, Responsibility of Licensee, 33
Right to Search, and Compliance Checks Regarding the Sale of Alcoholic Beverages
D. A fourth offense violation and any subsequent violations within a twenty-four (24)
month period will result in an administrative penalty of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000)
to any clerk or bartender cited with three prior violations of this section and will result in
an administrative penalty fee to the merchant/licensee holder of an additional One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000). The merchant/license holder will also be required to provide
proof that his/her employees have attended staff ID training as approved by the City
within fourteen (14) days of determination of violation. A fourth or subsequent offense
within a twenty four month period may also result in a suspension or revocation of any
license issued by the City to the merchant license holder.
E. In each instance where the clerk or bartender involved in a violation is also the merchant
license holder, the individual cited will receive only the penalty prescribed for the
merchant license holder.
All administrative fees imposed by this section are deemed payable within sixty (60) days of the
date of citation or no later than thirty (30) days after the date of any written decision determining
that a violation has occurred for all appeals. Failure to pay any administrative fee imposed within
the time limits set herein will result in a license suspension until the date of payment.
Subd. C. Citation Process and Right to a Hearing. Upon discovery of a violation of this section or
pursuant to a compliance check, the involved clerk or bartender and the licensee shall be issued a citation
by City Police. Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a
separate offense. All fees imposed by this section will be payable to the City Administrator of the City of
Cloquet. No administrative fee may be imposed until the clerk or bartender and the licensee has received
written notice of the violation by personal service or by certified mail sent to the location of the alleged
violation and the cited parties have been afforded an opportunity for a hearing. Any cited party that
requests a hearing in writing within twenty (20) days of the date of mailing of the written notice of
violation will be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before a person authorized by the licensing authority
to conduct the hearing. A decision that a violation has occurred must be in writing and will be completed
within ten (10) days of the hearing.
Subd. D. Right to Obtain a Transcript. If a hearing is requested, the hearing will not be recorded and
will only be transcribed if all financial arrangements are made in advance with a certified court reporter by
the person requesting the hearing. Furthermore, any person requesting that the hearing be transcribed
agrees to provide the City with a copy of the transcript at not cost to the City.
6.4.06 Compliance Checks and Inspections. All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by City Police or
other authorized city officials during regular business hours. From time to time, but at least once per year, the City
shall conduct compliance checks by engaging underage youth to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase
alcoholic beverage. No minor or underage adult used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification
or theatrical makeup which misrepresents their age. All minors and underage adults lawfully engaged in a
compliance check shall answer all questions about their age truthfully when asked by the licensee and shall produce
any identification which he or she is asked to produce. In all instances, the minors or underage adults shall be
accompanied by City Police or authorized city officials to the location of the compliance check.
A. Mandatory Keg Registration. As of July 1, 1999, all off-sale licensed establishments will be
required to register and mark for identification all kegs sold to the public. The information that
will be required for registration includes, but is not limited to, any registration number located or
placed on the keg, the name and address and drivers license number of the individual to whom the
keg was sold, the day in which the keg was sold, the brand of beer in the keg and the keg size.
Merchants/Licensees will be required to maintain information on all kegs sold within the City of
Cloquet for a minimum of one (1) year. In addition, the merchant/licensee will be required to
make this information available to the City Police officers upon demand during normal hours of
operation. Merchant license holders will be required to mark the kegs sold in a manner in which
to allow them to specifically identify them. Failure to comply with this provision will result in an
administrative penalty which shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to time by
the City Council for the first offense second offense or any subsequent offense.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.4: Providing for General License Restrictions, Responsibility of Licensee, 34
Right to Search, and Compliance Checks Regarding the Sale of Alcoholic Beverages
6.4.07 Other Illegal Acts. Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this section.
Subd.1. Illegal Possession. It shall be a violation of this section for any minor or underage adult to have
in his or her possession any alcoholic beverage. This subdivision shall not apply to minors or underage
adults lawfully involved in a compliance check on behalf of the City and it does not apply to any minor or
underage adult who possesses or consumes an alcoholic beverage in the household of the youth’s parent or
guardian with the consent of the parent or guardian.
Subd. 2. Illegal Use. It shall be a violation of this section for any minor or underage adult to drink or
possess alcoholic beverages unless they are lawfully involved in a compliance check on behalf of the City
or use the alcoholic beverage in the household of their parent or guardian with the consent of the parent or
guardian. Minors and underage adults suspected of violating this provision of this section may be referred
to juvenile court for prosecution by the City Attorney or the Carlton County Attorney consistent with
existing agreements.
Subd. 3. Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this section for any minor or underage adult to
purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any alcoholic beverage from any person or merchant
(unless otherwise permitted pursuant to provisions cited above), and it shall be a violation of this section
for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items for or on behalf of a minor or underage adult. It
shall also be a violation of this section for any person to sell or otherwise provide by gift, barter or sale any
alcoholic beverages or products to any underage adult or minor. It shall further be a violation for any
person to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any alcoholic
beverage. All individuals suspected of violating this provision of the Code will be referred to the City
Attorney or Carlton County Attorney consistent with existing agreements for prosecution. This subdivision
shall not apply to underage adults or minors who purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic beverage while
under the direct supervision of a responsible adult for enforcement purposes or for training and education
of enforcement purposes.
Subd. 4. Use of False Identification. It shall be a violation of this section for any underage adult or minor
to attempt to disguise their true age by the use of a false form of identification, whether the identification is
that of another person or one in which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
Subd. 5. Other Penalties. The administrative fees and license suspension consequences set forth in this
section are not intended to replace or limit any other juvenile, criminal, administrative or civil sanctions or
consequences that may be imposed by state or federal law for the same activity.
6.4.08 Exceptions and Defenses. Nothing in this section shall prevent the providing or use of alcoholic beverages
to underage adults or minors as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony or by a parent
or guardian of a minor or underage adult in the household of the parent or guardian. It shall also be an affirmative
defense to the violation of this section for a person to have reasonable relied on proof of age as described by law.
6.4.09 Severability and Savings Clause. If any section or portion of this section shall be found unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, that finding shall not serve as an
invalidation or affect the validity and enforceability of any other section or provision of this section.
6.4.10 Judicial Review. Any person who maintains they are aggrieved by a decision pursuant to this section may
have the decision reviewed in the district court consistent with Minn. Stat. §462.361.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.5: Regulation and the Sale, Possession, and Use of 35
Tobacco Products, and Tobacco Related Devices
SECTION 6.5: REGULATION AND THE SALE, POSSESSION, AND USE OF
TOBACCO PRODUCTS, AND TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES
6.5.01 Purpose. The City finds that smoking contributes to and/or causes premature death, disability, and chronic
disease (including but not limited to cancer, heart and lung disease); and that smoking related diseases result in
excess medical care costs to individuals and the public at large. Since smoking initiation occurs primarily in
adolescence, the City finds it is in the best interests of its citizens for the City to regulate the distribution of tobacco
products in a manner which will help to prevent young people from starting to smoke, and which will encourage and
assist existing smokers in their efforts to quit smoking. The City also has an interest in promoting clean indoor air
for all its citizens and visitors.
6.5.02. Definitions and Interpretations. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all
terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall
include the singular. The term "shall" means mandatory and the terms "may" means permissive. The following
terms shall have the definitions given to them:
Subd. 1. Tobacco or Tobacco Products. Tobacco or tobacco products shall mean any substance or item
containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco; snuff, fine cut or other
chewing tobacco; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other
smoking tobacco; snuff flower; cavendish; short, plug and twist tobacco; dipping tobacco; refuse scraps,
clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf prepared in such a
manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing, or smoking.
Subd. 2. Tobacco Related Devices. Tobacco related devices shall mean any tobacco product as well as a
pipe, rolling papers, or other device used in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing, or smoking of
tobacco or tobacco products. Tobacco related devices should include electronic cigarettes, as defined as
any electronic smoking device that can be used to deliver nicotine or any other substances to the person
inhaling from the device. The term shall specifically include such devices whether they are manufactured
as electronic cigarettes, electronic cigars, electronic pipes, or any other lighted smoking equipment or
device by any other product name.
Subd. 3. Self-Service Merchandising. Self-service merchandising shall mean open displays of tobacco,
tobacco products, or tobacco related devices in any way, other than vending machines, where any person
shall have access to the product without the assistance or intervention of an employee of the premises
maintaining the self-service merchandising.
Subd. 4. Vending Machine. Vending machine shall mean any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other
type of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices upon the insertion of
money, tokens, or other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related device.
Subd. 5. Sale. A sale shall mean any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other consideration.
Subd. 6. Loosies. Loosies shall mean the common term used to refer to a single or individually packed
cigarette.
Subd. 7. Underage Person. Underage Person shall mean any natural person who has not yet reached the
age of twenty one (21) years.
Subd. 8. Retail Establishment. Retail establishment shall mean any place of business where tobacco,
tobacco products, or tobacco related devices are available for sale to the general public. Retail
establishments shall include, but not limited to grocery stores, convenience stores, and restaurants.
Subd. 9. Moveable Place of Business. Moveable place of business shall refer to any form of business
operated out of a truck, van, automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter or not a fixed
address store front or other permanent type of structure authorized for sales transactions.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.5: Regulation and the Sale, Possession, and Use of 36
Tobacco Products, and Tobacco Related Devices
Subd. 10. Compliance Checks. Compliance checks shall mean the system the City uses to investigate
and ensure that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices are
following and complying with the requirements of this section. Compliance checks may involve the use of
underage persons as authorized by this section.
6.5.03. License. No person or retail establishment shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related device without first having obtained a license to do so from the City.
Subd. 1. Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related
devices shall be made on a form provided by the City. The application shall contain the full name of the
applicant, the applicant's residential and business addresses, telephone numbers, the name of the business
for which the license is sought, and any additional information the City deems necessary. Upon receipt of a
completed application, the City Administrator shall forward the application to the Council for action at its
next regularly scheduled council meeting. If the Administrator shall determine that an application is
incomplete, the Administrator shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the information
necessary to make the application complete.
Subd. 2. Action. The Council may either approve or deny a license application, or it may delay action for
such reasonable period of time as is necessary to complete an investigation of the application or the
applicant as it deems necessary. If the Council shall approve the license application, the Administrator
shall issue the license to the applicant upon payment of the required fee. If the Council denies the license,
notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant's right to appeal the
Council's decision.
Subd. 3. Term. All licenses shall expire on the last day of June of each year. Each license shall be issued
for a period of one year except that if a portion of the license year has elapsed when the application is
made, a license may be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee. In computing such fee, any
unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as one month.
Subd. 4. Revocation or Suspension. Any license issued under this section may be revoked or suspended
as provided in the Violations and Penalties section.
Subd. 5. Transfers. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid only on the premise for which the
license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to
another location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the Council.
Subd. 6. Moveable Place of Business. No license shall be issued to a moveable place of business. Only
fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this section.
Subd. 7. Displays. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the
licensed premise.
Subd. 8. Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be handled in the same
manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least thirty days (30) but no
more than sixty days (60) before the expiration of the current license. The issuance of a license under this
section shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right and shall not entitle the holder to an
automatic renewal of the license.
6.5.04. Fees. No license shall be issued under this section until the appropriate license fee shall be paid in full and
all property taxes have been properly paid up to the date of approval. The fee for license under this section shall be
established by resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.5: Regulation and the Sale, Possession, and Use of 37
Tobacco Products, and Tobacco Related Devices
6.5.05. Basis for Denial of License. The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance of or renewal of a
license under this section, and if a license is mistakenly issued or renewed, it shall be revoked upon the discovery
that the person was ineligible for the license for any reason consistent with this section including the following
reasons:
A. The applicant is under the age of twenty one (21) years.
B. The applicant has been convicted of any violation of a federal, state, or local law, Code or
Ordinance provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices.
C. The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related
devices revoked.
D. The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application, or provides
false or misleading information.
E. The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law, Code or Ordinance, or
other regulation, from holding such a license.
6.5.06. Prohibited Sales. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco,
tobacco product, or tobacco related device:
A. To any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
B. By means of loosies as defined in Section 2, subdivision 6, of this section.
C. Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana,
or other type of deleterious, hallucinogenic, or toxic or controlled substance except
nicotine and not naturally found in tobacco or tobacco products.
D. By any other means, or to any other person, prohibited by federal, state, or other local
law, Code or Ordinance provision, or other regulation.
6.5.07. Vending Machines. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this section to allow the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices by the means of vending machine.
6.5.08. Self-Service Sales. It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this section to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related devices by any means whereby the customer may have access to such items without
having to request the item from the licensee or the licensee employee. All tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco
related devices shall be stored behind a counter or other area not freely accessible to customers. The sale of cartons
of cigarettes containing ten (10) packs of cigarettes or more, and full rolls of chewing tobacco containing ten (10)
tins or more are excluded from this provision.
6.5.09. Compliance Checks and Inspections. All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by City Police or
other authorized city officials during regular business hours. From time to time, but at least twice per year, the City
shall conduct compliance checks by engaging underage persons to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices. No underage person used in compliance checks shall attempt
to use a false identification or theatrical makeup which misrepresents the underage person’s age. All underage
persons lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the underage person’s age
truthfully when asked by the licensee and shall produce any identification which he or she is asked to produce. The
underage person or persons shall be accompanied by City Police or authorized city officials to the location of the
compliance check.
6.5.10. Responsibility. All licensees under this section shall be responsible for the actions of their employees in
regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices on the licensed premise, and the sale of
such an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as prohibiting the City from also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this
section, state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.5: Regulation and the Sale, Possession, and Use of 38
Tobacco Products, and Tobacco Related Devices
6.5.11. Violations and Penalties.
Subd. 1. Citations for Violations. Upon discovery of a violation of this section or pursuant to a
compliance check, the clerk or employee shall be issued a citation by City Police and the licensee shall be
notified of the citation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or continues, shall
constitute a separate offense.
Subd. 2. Administrative Penalty by Licensee.
A. Upon determination of a violation of a compliance check or an illegal sale hereunder, the
licensee will be liable for an administrative penalty as follows:
Violation Administrative
Fee
License Suspension
First Violation $100 none
Second Violation within a 24 month period $200 and 10 day
Third Violation within a 24 month period $500 and 90 day
Fourth Violation within a 24 month period $1000 and up to 1 year
Fifth and Subsequent Violation within a 24 month period $1000 and permanent revocation
B. No administrative penalty may be imposed until the licensee has been sent written notice
by certified mail of the violation to the address listed on the license. Any administrative
penalty suffered by licensee is in addition and separate from any administrative penalty
imposed upon employee.
Subd. 3. Administrative Penalty by Clerk/Employee.
A. The clerk or employee specifically involved in a compliance check violation or
determined to have violated this section will be personally liable to pay an administrative
fee. Upon determination of a violation of a compliance check or an illegal sale
hereunder, the clerk/employee will be liable for an administrative penalty as follows:
Violation Administrative Fee
First Violation $50.00
Second Violation within a 24 month period $100.00
Third and Subsequent Violation within a 24 month period $200.00
B. No administrative penalty may be imposed until the clerk or employee has been sent
written notice by certified mail of the violation. Any administrative penalty imposed
upon employee is separate from and in addition to any administrative penalty imposed
upon licensee.
Subd. 4. Payment of Administrative Fees.
A. All administrative fees imposed by this section are deemed payable within sixty (60) days
of the date of mailing of the written notice of violation or no later than thirty (30) days
after the mailing of the written decision of an appeal determining that a violation has
occurred.
B. All such administrative fees imposed pursuant to this section will be payable to the City
Administrator, City Hall, 101 – 14th Street, Cloquet MN 55720. The administrative
penalties may be modified from time to time by the City Council.
C. Failure by the licensee to pay any administrative fee imposed against the licensee within
the time limit set herein will result in a license suspension until the date of payment.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.5: Regulation and the Sale, Possession, and Use of 39
Tobacco Products, and Tobacco Related Devices
D. Failure by clerk/employee to pay any administrative fee imposed within the time limit set
herein shall, at the option of the City Administrator, be either through a collection agency
or legal proceedings in accordance with the City’s Collection Policy.
Subd. 5. Right to a Hearing.
A. No administrative penalty may be imposed until the violator has been afforded an
opportunity for a hearing before a hearing officer to contest the fact that a violation has
occurred. Requests for a hearing must be submitted in writing to the Chief of Police,
101 – 14th Street, Cloquet MN 55720, within twenty (20) days of the date of mailing of
the written notice of violation.
B. Upon receipt of written notice, the City shall have ten (10) business days to set the time
and place for the hearing. Written notice of the hearing time and place shall be mailed or
delivered to the accused violator at least ten (10) business days prior to the hearing.
C. The hearing officer shall have authority to dismiss the violation or reduce or waive the
penalty.
D. A decision shall be issued by the hearing officer within ten (10) business days. If the
hearing officer determines that a violation of this section did occur, that decision, along
with the hearing officer’s reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed
under 6.5.11 of this section, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be
provided to the City and the accused violator by in person delivery or mail as soon as
practicable. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds
grounds for reducing or not imposing any penalty, those findings shall be recorded and a
copy provided to the City and the acquitted accused violator by in person delivery or mail
as soon as practicable.
E. Suspension or revocation shall not occur until written notice by the hearing officer has
been served on the licensee by certified mail to the address listed on the license and a
copy of such notice provided to the City.
Subd. 6. Hearing Officer. For purposes of this section, the hearing officer shall be designated in writing
by the City Administrator. The hearing officer is authorized to hear and determine any controversy relating
to the violation. This process is intended to replace any existing administrative procedures previously
established by ordinance with regard to violations enumerated herein.
Subd. 7. Right to Obtain a Transcript. If a hearing is requested, the hearing will not be recorded and will
only be transcribed if all financial arrangements are made in advance with a certified court reporter by the
person requesting the hearing. Furthermore, any person requesting that the hearing be transcribed agrees to
provide the City with a copy of the transcript at no cost to the City.
Subd. 8. License Suspension or Revocation Without a Hearing. Any license issued pursuant to this
Section may be suspended or revoked for violation of any provision of this Section or as detailed in 6.5.11
Subd. 2. Suspension or revocation shall not occur until written notice has been served on the licensee by
certified mail to the address listed on the license.
Subd. 9. Other Penalties. The administrative fees and license suspension consequences set forth in this
section are not intended to replace or limit any other juvenile, criminal, administrative or civil sanctions or
consequences that may be imposed by state or federal law for the same activity.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.5: Regulation and the Sale, Possession, and Use of 40
Tobacco Products, and Tobacco Related Devices
6.5.12. Other Illegal Acts. Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this section.
Subd. 1. Illegal Possession. It shall be a violation of this section for any underage person to have in his or
her possession any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device or tobacco related electronic delivery
device. This subdivision shall not apply to underage persons lawfully involved in a compliance check on
behalf of the City.
Subd. 2. Illegal Use. It shall be a violation of this section for any underage person to smoke, chew, sniff,
or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device or tobacco related electronic delivery
device. All underage persons found in violation of this section shall be cited with an administrative offense
and shall be subject to the administrative fine schedule as amended from time to time by the City Council.
Such underage persons who are also under the age of 18 years shall be referred to juvenile court for review
by the Carlton County Attorney’s Office for delinquency proceedings.
Subd. 3. Illegal Procurement. It shall be a violation of this section for any underage person to purchase
or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device from
any person or merchant, and it shall be a violation of this section for any person to purchase or otherwise
obtain such items on behalf of an underage person. It shall also be a violation of this section for any person
to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device to any underage
person. It shall further be a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to coerce an underage person to
illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. This
subdivision shall not apply to underage persons who purchase or attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco
product, or tobacco related devices while under the direct supervision of a responsible adult for
enforcement purposes or for training and education for enforcement purposes.
Subd. 4. Use of False Identification. It shall be a violation of this section for any underage person to
attempt to disguise their true age by the use of a false form of identification, whether the identification is
that of another person or one in which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
6.5.13. Exceptions and Defenses. Nothing in this section shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco product,
or tobacco related devices to an underage person as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural
ceremony. It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this section for a person to have reasonably relied on
proof of age as described by state law.
6.5.14. Judicial Review. Any person who maintains he is aggrieved by a decision pursuant to 6.5.03, 6.5.11 or
6.5.12 herein may have the decision reviewed in the district court consistent with Minn. Stat. §462.361.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.6: Licensing of Peddlers, Solicitors, Itinerant Businesses, and 41
Transient Merchants
SECTION 6.6: LICENSING OF PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS,
ITINERANT BUSINESSES, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
6.6.01 Purpose. To regulate peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants and to exercise the City's statutory
authority to regulate the nuisance created by such itinerant business practices under the city's general police powers
and as specifically authorized by Minnesota Statute §329.15, §412.221 (subd. 19) and §437.02.
6.6.02 Definitions. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given
their commonly accepted definitions. The singular shall include the plural and plural shall include the singular. The
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter, and vice-versa. The term "shall" means mandatory and the term
"may" is permissive. When used in this Section, the following terms have the following meanings:
Subd. 1. Peddler. "Peddler" means any person, whether a resident of the City of Cloquet or not, who
goes from house to house, door to door, business to business, from place to place, or from street to street,
conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise or offering or exposing the same for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other
personal property, that the person is carrying or otherwise transporting. The term peddler shall mean the
same as the term "hawker". It does not include vendors of milk and dairy products, farm and garden
products sold by those involved in growing or cultivating the same, or the delivery or sale of bakery goods,
groceries, or ice by those who distribute their products to regular customers on established routes.
Subd. 2. Transient Merchant. "Transient merchant" includes any person, individual, co-partnership, firm
or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee, or employee, whether a resident of the City of Cloquet
or not, who engages in, or transacts any temporary and transient business of selling and delivering goods,
wares and merchandise within said city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, temporarily hires, leases,
uses or occupies any building, structure, vacant lot, motor vehicle, trailer, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, public
room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops or any street, alley or other place within the City for the
exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. Provided
that such definition does not include any person, firm or corporation who, while occupying such temporary
location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples for the purpose of securing orders for future
delivery only. The person, firm or corporation so engaged is not relieved from complying with the
provisions of this Section merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader,
merchant, or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with as a part of, or the
name of any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer.
Subd. 3. Solicitor. "Solicitor" means any person, whether a resident of the City of Cloquet or not, who
goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street, soliciting donations or taking or
attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals,
or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for service to be performed in the
future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such order
or whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such orders. Such definition includes any person
who, for himself, or for another person, firm or corporation, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building,
motor vehicle, trailer, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or
other place within the City for the primary purpose of exhibiting samples or taking orders for future
delivery. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of this provision if
the actual purpose of the person's activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above.
Subd. 4. Contribution Solicitation. "Contribution solicitation" means an attempt by a solicitor to obtain
money from a solicitee for any cause or purpose, when either the solicitor or person acting for him contacts
the solicitee by telephone or in person other than at the established place of meeting, business, service, or
activity of the organization represented by the solicitor, except: (1) an attempted solicitation in which the
solicitee personally knows the identity of the solicitor, the name of the organization he represents, and the
identity of the services performed or offered by the organization, or, (2) an attempted solicitation in which
the solicitee has first initiated the contact with the solicitor or the organization represented by him.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.6: Licensing of Peddlers, Solicitors, Itinerant Businesses, and 42
Transient Merchants
Subd. 5. Canvasser. A “canvasser” is similar to a solicitor in some respects but is differentiated by the
fact that a canvasser refers to the practice of going door-to-door or location to location with the primary
purpose of furthering religious, social, or political advocacy. Unlike solicitors, financial profit is not the
canvasser’s primary motivation.
Subd. 6. Person. "Person" The term person shall mean any natural individual, group, organization,
corporation, partnership, or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations, partnerships,
and associations, the term shall include each member, officer, partner, associate, agent, or employee.
Subd. 7. Farmers Market. A “farmers market” is an association with formal rules and/or bylaws or
membership requirements who assemble at a defined location for the purpose of selling their agricultural
products (fresh fruits, vegetables and other locally-grown farm products) directly to consumers.
6.6.03 License Required. It is unlawful for any "peddler" or "transient merchant" to engage in any such business
within the City of Cloquet without first obtaining a license in compliance with the provisions of this Section and, if a
County license is required, from the County of Carlton.
Subd 1. License Application. All peddlers and transient merchants not excepted pursuant to Minnesota
Statute §329.14, or other exceptions set forth in this section, must apply for a license from the City and
shall file with the City Administrator a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the City
Administrator. In addition, each applicant will provide the City with the following information.
A. Full legal name and physical description of applicant and a complete list of the legal
names and description of each individual that will be conducting business on behalf of
the applicant.
B. All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to which applicant
officially answers.
C. Complete permanent home and local address, social security number, date of birth, and
state driver’s license number of the applicant and each individual conducting business on
behalf of applicant and the places of residence of each for the three (3) years preceding
the date of application.
D. Telephone number of applicant's permanent address and the local number at which
applicant can be reached.
E. In the case of transient merchants, the local address from which proposed sales will be
made and the written consent of the landowner upon whose premises this activity is to be
conducted.
F. A general description of the nature of the business and the items to be sold or the services
to be provided.
G. The name and address of the employer, principal or supplier of the applicant, together
with credential or written verification therefrom establishing the exact relationship.
H. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired and the hours of during
which business will be conducted.
I. The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the
sale thereof, where such goods or products are located at the time said application is filed,
and the proposed method of delivery.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.6: Licensing of Peddlers, Solicitors, Itinerant Businesses, and 43
Transient Merchants
J. The last three (3) communities where applicant carried on business immediately
preceding date of application and the addresses from which such business was conducted
in those municipalities.
K. A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or anyone conducting business on behalf
of the applicant has been convicted within the last five (5) years of any felony, gross
misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for violation of any federal, state, or local Code or
Ordinance other than minor traffic offenses.
L. The applicant shall provide on his/her application a current Minnesota Sales Tax
Identification Number.
M. The applicant shall provide the make, model, year, color and state license number of each
motor vehicle to be used by the business.
N. A recent photograph of the applicant and anyone conducting business on behalf of the
applicant which picture will be at least 2" by 2" showing the head and shoulders of the
individual in a clear and distinguishing manner.
O. A certificate of insurance with bodily injury limits of $100,000 to $300,000 is also
required.
6.6.04 License Fee and Terms
Subd. 1. License Fee. No license shall be issued under this section until the appropriate license fee shall
be paid in full. The fee for license under this section shall be established by resolution as adopted from
time to time by the City Council.
A. A farmers market, as defined under Section 6.6.02, Subd. 7, shall be exempt from the
annual license fee.
Subd. 2. License Term. Each license issued under the provisions of this section shall be valid for the
period of time stated therein:
A. An annual license, which may be issued only to the owner or proprietor of a private
premise such as a hotel, motel, shopping mall, banquet facility, service club, armory, ice
arena, etc., and a farmers market, wherein a transient merchant as defined in Section
6.6.02, Subd. 2, may lease or otherwise occupy space to engage in said temporary
business. An applicant for an annual license must provide the City with assurances that
each transient merchant engaged in business upon his/her premise meets the minimum
requirements of this and all other applicable ordinances
B. A license, not to exceed thirty (30) days, shall be issued for all other peddlers and
transient merchants in compliance with the provisions of this section.
C. All licenses shall expire on the last date specified on the license. Annual licenses shall
expire on December 31st of each year.
Subd. 3. License Transfers. No license shall be transferred or sold. Each peddler or transient merchant
must individually secure a personal license. No license shall be used at any time by any person other than
the one to whom it is issued.
6.6.05 Investigation.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.6: Licensing of Peddlers, Solicitors, Itinerant Businesses, and 44
Transient Merchants
Subd. 1. The applicant shall pay a non-refundable investigation fee at the time of filing the application.
The investigation fee shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council.
A. A farmers market, as defined under Section 6.6.02, Subd. 7, shall be exempt from the
investigation fee.
Subd. 2. Upon receipt of each license application by the City Administrator, it shall be referred to the
Chief of Police who shall immediately institute such investigation into the applicant's business and moral
character and that of those involved as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. The Chief
shall endorse the application in the manner prescribed in this section within fourteen (14) days after it has
been filed by the applicant with the City Administrator not including Saturdays, Sundays or holidays. If, as
a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be
unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the
same, and return the said application to the City Administrator, who shall notify the applicant that the
application is disapproved and that no license will be issued.
Subd. 3. Upon receipt of each license application by the City Administrator, it shall be referred to the
Zoning Administrator who shall immediately evaluate the application for compliance with Chapter 17 of
this Code. The Zoning Administrator shall endorse the application in the manner prescribed in this section
within fourteen (14) days after it has been filed by the applicant with the City Administrator not including
Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicants proposed site plan is
found to be unsatisfactory, the Zoning Administrator shall endorse on such application his disapproval and
his reasons for the same, and return the said application to the City Administrator, who shall notify the
applicant that the application is disapproved and that no license will be issued.
6.6.06 License Approval.
Subd. 1. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are
found to be satisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on the application his approval and return the
application to the City Administrator, who shall present the license for approval to the City Council at the
next regularly scheduled meeting.
Subd. 2. Once approved by the City Council, the City Administrator will deliver the license to the
applicant within five (5) business days. Such license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and
shall show the name, address, and the kinds of goods to be sold or services provided thereunder, the date of
issuance and the length of time from the date of issuance that the same shall be operative.
6.6.07 Exhibition of License. Licensees are required to publicly display and exhibit their license and it must be
provided at the request of any citizen.
6.6.08 License Restrictions
Subd. 1. Prohibited Activities. No licensee, business registrant, or anyone acting on their behalf, or any
person or organization exempt from the licensing provisions of this section, shall:
A. Shout, cry out, blow a horn, or use any sound amplifying device anywhere within the
City of Cloquet for any purpose sufficient to cause a public nuisance.
B. Conduct business before 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on any day unless authorized by the
City Council.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.6: Licensing of Peddlers, Solicitors, Itinerant Businesses, and 45
Transient Merchants
Subd. 2. Use of Streets, Parks or Other Public Lands Prohibition. The practice of selling goods, wares
and produce whether from fruit or vegetable stands and portable shelters or from vehicles and/or trailers
while parked on City streets, parks, other public lands and park rights-of-way is hereby prohibited unless
otherwise exempted under Section 6.6.09 or such sales are part of a farmers market which has otherwise
been authorized or approved by the City Council to sell in such public areas; it being in the public interest
to avoid traffic hazards, parking congestion and health hazards that such practices create and to eliminate
damage or disruption of the use of parks or public lands by others.
A. No transient merchant/peddler's license shall be issued unless the applicant submits
written consent of the property owner, as required hereunder along with the license
application.
B. No transient merchant/peddler's license shall be issued for sales from any location which
does not have sufficient parking for customers or for areas where customer parking
would interfere with normal traffic flow or create a traffic hazard.
C. No person or organization, whether required to have a license or business registration or
whether they are exempt from each shall engage in activities regulated by this section
anywhere within the City of Cloquet at any location that does not have sufficient parking
for customers or in areas where customer parking would interfere with normal traffic
flow or cause a traffic hazard.
Subd. 3. Transient Merchant Restrictions - Zoning Compliance.
No transient merchant shall display or offer for sale any merchandise at locations prohibited under Chapter
17 of this Code.
6.6.09 Exemptions. This Section does not apply to the following:
A. The sale of farm or garden products raised on any farm.
B. Vendors who make an uninvited call upon the occupant of a resident, subject, however,
to solicitation as a preliminary step to the establishment of a regular route service for the
sale and delivery of commodities and services to regular customers, such as: vendors of
milk, groceries and other perishable commodities; soft water service; dry cleaning;
newspapers; and beauty products.
C. The sale of goods or merchandise on behalf of a bona fide charitable, religious, civic,
educational or political organization or student activities for area schools.
D. Any sale under Court Order.
E. A bona fide auction sale.
F. Sidewalk sales authorized by the City Council.
G. Garage sales or rummage sales when conducted in or by a non-profit institution, or when
conducted upon the premise of an owner of the articles being offered by sale provided
that such sales do not last longer than forty-eight (48) hours and provided that no more
than four (4) sales be conducted by any given location within one (1) year.
H. Sales at wholesale to a retail dealer.
I. Newspaper delivery persons.
J. The acts of merchants (not transient merchants) or their employees in delivering goods in
the regular course of business.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.6: Licensing of Peddlers, Solicitors, Itinerant Businesses, and 46
Transient Merchants
K. Charitable, religious, educational, political, non-profit and local sports and recreational
organization solicitations by such organizations or their volunteers.
L. Non-repeating sales from organized multi-person (multi-vendor) sales such as craft
shows, bazaars, gun shows, etc. if held on private premise with the consent of the
property owner for use.
M. Vendors and transient merchants as described in Section 6.6.02, Subd. 2 participating in
an event officially designated as a community festival by the City Council within a
sponsored City Park property event. The event organizer must provide the City with
assurances that each transient merchant engaged in business upon his/her premise meets
the minimum requirements of this and all of the applicable ordinances.
N. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict door-to-door advocacy.
Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to register. The term
door-to-door advocacy includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as vehicles
for the dissemination of religious and political ideas.
6.6.10 Business Registration.
Subd. 1. Registration Requirement. It is unlawful for any "solicitor", “canvasser” or persons conducting
"contribution soliciting" to engage in any such business within the City of Cloquet without first registering
with the City Administrator's office in compliance with the provisions of this Section.
A. All solicitors and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of this Code under
Section 6.6.09 shall be required to register with the City prior to engaging in those
activities.
B. Registration shall be made on the same form required for a license application, but no fee
shall be required.
C. Upon completion of the registration form, the City Administrator shall issue to the
registrant a certificate of registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of
registration shall be non-transferrable.
D. Individuals that will be engaging in non-commercial door-to-door advocacy shall not be
required to register.
6.6.11 Canvassing for Religious, Educational, Recreational, Political and Charitable purposes. Any
organization, society, association or corporation desiring to solicit or to have solicited in its name money, donations
of money or property, or financial assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any item of literature or
merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited from persons other than members of such organizations upon the
streets, in office of business buildings, by house to house canvass, or in public places for a charitable, religious,
patriotic, political or philanthropic purpose shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section, provided there is
filed a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the City Administrator which shall give the
following information:
A. Name and purpose of the cause involved.
B. Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization.
C. Period during which the canvassing or solicitation is to be carried on.
D. Whether or not any commission, fee, wages or emoluments are to be expended in
connection with such solicitation and the amount thereof.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.6: Licensing of Peddlers, Solicitors, Itinerant Businesses, and 47
Transient Merchants
E. Where funds collected, if any, will be used and by what organizations.
F. Names, ages and addresses of all persons soliciting or canvassing for said organizations.
Upon being satisfied that such organization, association or corporation is a religious, charitable, political, patriotic or
philanthropic organization, no further information will be required. Such organization, association or corporation
shall furnish all of its members, agents or representatives conducting solicitation credentials in writing stating the
name of the organization, name of the agent and purpose of solicitation.
6.6.12 Removal from Premises, Private and Business. Any resident of the City who wishes to exclude peddlers,
solicitors or transient merchants from premises occupied by him may place upon or near the usual entrance to such
premises a printed placard or sign bearing the following, or comparable, notice: "Peddlers, Transient Merchants and
Solicitors Prohibited." Such placard shall be at least 3-3/4" long and 3-3/4" wide and the printing thereon shall not
be smaller than forty-eight (48) point type. No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall enter in or upon any
premises or attempt to enter in or upon any premises, where such placard or sign is placed and maintained. Premises
shall include the sidewalks, parking lots or halls of any businesses. No person other than the person occupying such
premises shall remove, injure or deface such placard or sign.
6.6.13 Records. The Chief of Police shall report to the City Administrator all observed violations and convictions
for violations of this Section and the City Administrator shall maintain a record for each license issued and record
the reports of violation therein.
6.6.14 Denial and Suspension or Revocation of License.
Subd. 1. License Denial. The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this section:
A. Failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having obtained any required County
license.
B. The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide the information requested by the City as
part of the application, or the failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the
required fee, or provide proof of insurance as requested at the time of application.
C. The conviction of the applicant within the last five (5) years from the date of application,
for any violation of Federal, State or local Code or Ordinance which adversely impacts
the person's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an
honest and legal manner or that will not adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the City. Such violations shall include, but are not limited to crimes
involving moral turpitude which necessarily include burglary, theft, larceny, swindling,
fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm
against another person.
D. The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the applicant for the
purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant.
Subd. 2. License Suspension or Revocation. Licenses issued under the provision of this Section may be
suspended or revoked by the Council of the City of Cloquet after notice and hearing, for any of the
following causes:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement contained in the application for license.
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement made in the course of carrying on his
business as solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient merchant, itinerant merchant or
itinerant vendor.
C. Any violation of this Section.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.6: Licensing of Peddlers, Solicitors, Itinerant Businesses, and 48
Transient Merchants
D. Conducting the business of peddler or transient merchant in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a menace to health, safety or general welfare of the public.
E. Emergency revocation or suspension. If in the discretion of the City Administrator or
City Police Department, an imminent harm to the health, safety and public welfare may
occur because of the actions of a peddler or transient merchant licensed under this
section, the Chief of Police or City Administrator may immediately suspend the person's
license and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing at the next
regularly scheduled City Council meeting.
6.6.15 Public Hearing Procedure. Any applicant that is denied a license or who receives notice of a suspension or
revocation of a license has a right to request a public hearing. In order to request a public hearing, the person
affected must provide written notice to the City Administrator setting forth specifically the grounds of their
complaint and the action contested. The written notice must be received by the City Administrator within ten (10)
business days of the action being contested. If no request is received within ten (10) business days, the action will
be deemed final. For purposes of mailed notices, receipt will be considered complete as of the date the notice was
placed in the mail. Any hearing will be scheduled within twenty (20) days of the date the notice is received. Such
notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the person requesting the hearing at his last known address at least five
(5) days prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a Summons
at least three (3) days prior to the date set for hearing.
The hearing will be conducted by an independent hearing examiner appointed by the City Council consistent with
the City's administrative hearing procedure as set out in Chapter 15 of this Code. If a hearing is requested, the
hearing will not be recorded and will only be transcribed if all financial arrangements are made in advance with a
certified court reporter. Those arrangements and all costs must be paid by the person requesting the hearing.
Furthermore, any person requesting that the hearing be transcribed agrees to provide the City with a copy of the
transcript at no cost to the City. The suspension or revocation of any license issued for the purpose of authorizing
multiple persons to conduct business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee, shall serve as a
suspension or revocation of each such authorized person's authority to conduct business as a peddler or transient
merchant on behalf of the licensee whose license is being suspended or revoked.
6.6.16. Judicial Review. Any person aggrieved by a decision rendered pursuant to this section may have the
decision reviewed by the district court consistent with Minn. Stat. §462.361.
6.6.17 Violations; Penalties. Any person or business who violates any provision of this Section while conducting
business as a transient merchant or as a peddler without first obtaining a license as required shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor under Minnesota law.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.7: Regulation and Licensing of Gambling 49
SECTION 6.7: REGULATION AND LICENSING OF GAMBLING
6.7.01 Pull-tabs.
Subd. 1 Scope. This Section shall regulate all pull-tab games operated pursuant to Minn. Stat. Chapter
349.
Subd. 2 State Regulations Adopted. Chapter 7861 of Minnesota Rules shall be incorporated by
reference into this Section, provided that nothing in the rules shall be deemed to amend or change any
provision of this Code unless that provision is deemed to be contrary to state law. No person shall violate
any provision of Chapter 7861 of Minnesota Rules or any amendments thereto.
Subd. 3 Age Restrictions.
A. No person under the age of eighteen (18) may conduct or participate in the playing of the
game of pull-tabs.
B. No person shall sell pull-tabs to any person under the age of eighteen (18).
C. Proof of age for purchasing pull-tabs may be established only by a valid driver's license
or Minnesota identification card, or in the case of a foreign national by a valid passport.
Subd. 4 Sale of Pull-Tabs.
A. In the playing of pull-tabs, no person shall sell or purchase pull-tabs except on a cash or
check basis. Credit cards and all other forms of payment shall not be allowed.
B. A seller may refuse to sell pull-tabs to any person if the seller believes the sale would be
in violation of any law or regulation.
C. The seller shall hand the pull-tabs that are purchased to the player. A player shall never
be allowed to reach into the container to select pull-tabs.
D. Under no circumstances shall a seller assist a player in the opening of pull tabs.
E. No person shall evade or circumvent or attempt to evade or circumvent any of the
provisions of this Section of any State law or regulation by having someone else purchase
pull-tabs for the person.
F. No seller or other gambling employee of the organization operating the gambling shall
either orally, in writing or otherwise provide any information to any other person about
the total number of winners played or the number or denominations of winners left in the
box, except that the seller may post in clear legible type the number of winners played
and the number of winners left in the box.
G. No single deal of pull-tabs which has been taken out of play shall thereafter be returned
to play.
H. In licensed liquor establishments, sales of pull-tabs shall cease at least fifteen minutes
before sales of alcoholic beverages are required by law to cease.
6.7.02 Other Lawful Gambling.
Subd. 1 Purpose. The purpose of this Subsection shall be to closely regulate and control the conduct of
lawful gambling, other than pull-tabs as regulated in Subsection 6.7.01.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.7: Regulation and Licensing of Gambling 50
Subd. 2 Provisions of State Law Adopted. The provisions of Minn. Stat. Chapter 349, relating to
definition of terms, licensing and restrictions of gambling shall be adopted and made a part of this section
as if set out in full.
Subd. 3 License Requirement. No person shall directly or indirectly operate a gambling device or
conduct a raffle without a license to do so as provided in this section.
Subd. 4 Persons Eligible for a License. A license shall be issued only to fraternal, religious, and veterans
organizations, or any corporation, trust, or association organized for exclusively scientific, literary,
charitable, educational, or artistic purposes, or any club which is organized and operated exclusively for
pleasure or recreation. The organization shall have been in existence for at least three years and shall have
at least thirty active members.
Subd. 5 Raffles, Paddle Wheels, Tip Boards; License Required.
A. No person or organization shall conduct a raffle or operate a paddle wheel or tip board, as
defined in Chapter 349, without having first obtained a license as provided in this section.
B. All licenses issued for raffles, paddle wheels and tip boards shall be approved by City
Resolution.
C. All licenses issued under this Section shall be subject to all of the regulations and
restrictions contained in Chapter 349 of the Minnesota Statutes, and any amendments
thereto or thereafter adopted.
Subd. 6 Reporting Requirements. Each licensee shall be responsible for reporting requirements.
Subd. 7 Penalties. Violation of the provisions of this Subsection shall be a misdemeanor.
6.7.03 General Requirements, Expenditures.
Subd. 1 Required Expenditures. A licensed organization conducting lawful gambling within the City
limits shall expend 80% of all of its quarterly expenditures for lawful purposes on lawful purposes
conducted or located within the City's trade area.
A. Trade Area Defined. For the purposes of this section, the City's trade area shall be
defined as set forth in Minnesota Statutes §349.213 subd. 1(g) which will include the city
limits of the City of Cloquet, the City of Scanlon, and the Townships of Brevator,
Thomson, Twin Lakes, and Perch Lake.
B. Required Donation. Ten percent (10%) of the net profits from the operation of
gambling equipment in the City by charitable organizations shall be donated to the City.
The intent of the City shall be to utilize the monies donated under this Section to fund
any permissible public health, safety or welfare purpose deemed proper by the Council.
The
donation from monthly profits from the licensee shall be made in a check payable to the
City of Cloquet and delivered to the City Administrator on or before the last day of the
following month. This donation shall be included in the computation of 80% required
expenditures. All donations required to be paid to the City will be advised of the source
of the funds comprising the donation.
C. Records and Reports. All qualified organizations operating gambling equipment in the
City shall keep monthly financial records of gambling proceeds and disbursements and
shall submit copies of same to the City Administrator monthly.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.7: Regulation and Licensing of Gambling 51
Subd. 2 Rent Limitations for Leased Premises.
A. Leased Premises. "Leased Premises" shall mean a building or place of business, or a
portion of a building or place of business not owned by a gambling organization, that is
leased in its entirety by a gambling organization for use by the organization and its
members, which use may include lawful gambling.
B. State of Minnesota Rules for Maximum Annual Rentals of Leased Premises. In the
event that the State adopts rules and regulations for establishing fair rentals for leased
premises, no lessor or gambling organization shall enter into a lease that exceeds the
maximum permitted by the State if that rental is less than the rental established by this
Section.
Subd. 3 General Provisions.
A. Background Information. A copy of all applications and reports required by and
submitted to the Minnesota Gambling Control Board shall also be submitted to the City
Administrator within seven (7) days after they are submitted to the Board.
B. Filing of Lease Agreement. Any organization requesting a license for charitable
gambling shall file with the City Administrator a copy of its signed lease agreement prior
to or at the same time as filing its request for a gambling license with the State.
C. Limitation of Gambling Licenses. No organization shall be permitted to conduct
gambling in more than three (3) establishments within the City.
D. Disapproval. Nothing contained in this Section shall be deemed to limit the City
Council's authority to disapprove a license for lawful gambling.
E. Filing With Gambling Control Board. This Section shall be filed with the Minnesota
Charitable Gambling Control Board.
Subd. 4 Penalties. Except as otherwise provided, violation of any part of this Section shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.8: Regulation and Licensing of Game Rooms/Arcades/Poolhalls 52
and Amusement Devices
SECTION 6.8: REGULATION AND LICENSING OF GAME ROOMS/ARCADES/POOLHALLS
AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
6.8.01 Applicability and Purpose.
Subd. 1 Purpose. The purpose of this Section shall be to establish municipal regulatory powers which
will allow the City to regulate certain types of gaming activities in furtherance of the City’s interest to
promote the public health, safety, morals and welfare relating to the existence and operation of public game
rooms/arcades/poolhalls and amusement devices.
Subd. 2 Intent. The intent of this Section shall be:
A. To regulate and provide for the licensing of game room/arcade/poolhall locations.
B. To regulate and provide for the licensing of amusement devices located and operated in
the City and each location providing amusement devices.
C. To provide for administrative procedures as shall be necessary for implementation of the
various provisions of this Section.
D. To provide for administrative fees and penalties necessary for the enforcement of this
Section.
Subd. 3 Scope and Qualifications.
A. Jurisdiction. This Section shall apply to all game rooms/arcades/poolhalls and
amusement devices located inside the corporate limits of the City.
B. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Section shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare. Where the provisions of this Section impose greater
restrictions than those of any statute, other Code or Ordinance or regulation, or where any
other statute, ordinance or regulation imposes greater restrictions than this Section, the
provisions of the statute, other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
C. Compliance. All game rooms/arcades/poolhalls and amusement devices owned, leased
and/or operated after the enactment of this Code shall be subject to all regulations of this
Section which shall be applicable.
6.8.02 Definitions and Interpretations.
Subd. 1 Definitions. When used in this section, the following terms shall be deemed to have the meanings
ascribed to them:
A. “Game Room/arcade/poolhall” shall mean any business establishment, building
structure or tract of land which devotes 30 percent or more of its floor space to the public
used for the following amusement or any combination of any of the following
amusements:
1. Foosball, air hockey or pigeon hole tables;
2. Pinball machines;
3. Shooting gallery machines;
4. Pool tables.
5. Any electric or electronic device or game patterned after table tennis, hockey,
and similar games, including electric rifle or gun ranges;
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.8: Regulation and Licensing of Game Rooms/Arcades/Poolhalls 53
and Amusement Devices
6. Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed to be played by a
contestant or contestants and upon which the contestants receive a score or
rating based upon their performance.
The calculation of floor space shall include the area occupied by or reserved for persons
who use or are waiting to use the amusements.
B. “Amusement Device” shall mean any machine, table, apparatus or device intended for
use by the public for entertainment, recreation and/or amusement, including, but not
limited to, "pinball" machines, mechanical and non-mechanical pool tables whether
miniature or otherwise, billiard tables, ping pong tables, bowling machines, shuffle
boards, electric rifle or gun ranges, miniature mechanical or computer devices and games
or amusements patterned after basketball, hockey and similar games or war games and
like devices, machines or games which shall be played solely for amusement, recreation
and/or entertainment and not as gambling devices and which machines shall be played
either by the insertion of a coin or other token or by payment of a fixed fee directly to the
supervisor of the establishment in which the machines are located.
C. “Operator” shall mean a person who keeps or allows amusement devices as hereinabove
defined to be kept on premises owned by him or under his control, where the same may
be played by members of the public legally upon such premises upon payment of the
charge therefore.
D. “Owner” shall mean any person who owns and places amusement devices, as
hereinabove defined, by whatever arrangements, on the operator’s premises. May also be
referred to as a “vendor.”
E. “Supervisor” shall mean the individual of at least eighteen (18) years of age who is in
charge of supervising, managing, controlling and regulating all activities and conduct in
the game room/arcade/poolhall during lawful hours of doing business, whether he or she
be the person who owns, leases and/or operates the game room/arcade/poolhall or
amusement devices or the person's agent or employee.
6.8.03 Licenses Required. No person shall own, operate or permit operation of a game room/arcade/poolhall or
amusement device on any part of the premises owned, leased or operated by him/her or engage in the business of
operating a game room/arcade/poolhall in the City unless the person shall have first procured an annual game
room/arcade/poolhall license and/or a license for each location/operator providing amusement devices as provided
for in this Section. The City may require an additional license fee for each company that leases amusement devices
within the City and may impose a license fee for each amusement device operated on any premises located within
the City whether or not a separate game room/arcade/poolhall license is required under this Section. However, all
license fees imposed by the City are subject to the license fee limitations set by Minnesota Statute. A game
room/arcade/poolhall license shall be in addition to all other licenses required by this Section, and any other licenses
required by any City Code provision or ordinance of the City and/or statute, rule or regulation of the State with
regard to operations conducted on the site on which the amusement devices are operated.
6.8.04 Application and Procedure.
Subd. 1 Application. Every application for a license shall be made to the City Administrator on a form
provided by the City. It shall be accompanied by payment to the City Administrator of the prescribed fee.
Subd. 2 Content. The application for a license under this Section shall, at a minimum, contain the
following information:
A. Full legal name, address, and date and place of birth of the applicant;
B. Address or location where amusement device(s) shall be located, displayed or operated;
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.8: Regulation and Licensing of Game Rooms/Arcades/Poolhalls 54
and Amusement Devices
C. Type of business conducted or that shall be conducted at the place each amusement
device is being operated;
D. The number, type and location of each amusement device being operated for purposes of
licensing whether located in a game room/arcade/poolhall or not;
E. Full legal name, address and date of birth of all other persons having any ownership
interest in the premises upon which the game room/arcade/poolhall or amusement
device(s) shall be located; any ownership interest in the business that is being conducted
upon the premises; and the location where the game room/arcade/poolhall shall be
located;
F. Names and addresses of any other persons having any ownership interest or control,
either directly or indirectly, in the amusement device(s) to be kept, maintained or
operated at such place;
G. A diagram of the proposed floor plan of the premise for a game room/arcade/poolhall;
H. The full legal name, address and date of birth of the manager or managers who will
supervise the licensed activity;
I. Whether any of the persons listed have been engaged in the business of operating a game
room/arcade/poolhall in the last five years;
J. Whether any of the persons listed have been convicted of a crime or have had an
application for a game room/arcade/poolhall license denied, revoked or suspended within
the last five years;
K. Signature of applicant and all other interested persons as set forth above.
6.8.05 Insurance. A licensee of any game room/arcade/poolhall as defined herein shall be required to have in force
a policy of liability insurance, which shall be approved as to substance and form by the City Attorney. The policy
shall provide that it shall not be cancelled without fifteen (15) days written notice to the City, and the coverage shall
be for the term of the license. Satisfactory evidence of coverage by insurance shall be filed with the City
Administrator before the license shall be issued. Each license issued under this Section shall automatically
terminate upon termination of the insurance coverage required herein. Unless otherwise provided in this Section, a
required policy of liability insurance shall provide for protection in at least the following amounts:
A. For injuries, including death there from, sustained by any one person - $100,000.00
B. For property damage - $10,000.00
6.8.06 License Terms and Fees.
Subd. 1 License Fee. Each applicant for a license of the types described in this section shall pay an
annual license fee for each amusement device operated and for each location and/or game
room/arcade/poolhall required to be licensed. The amount of the license fee for each shall be established
by ordinance or resolution as adopted by the City Council from time to time but in no event will exceed the
limits permitted by Minnesota Statute.
Subd. 2 License Term. Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of time of one year. All
licenses shall expire on the last day of June of each calendar year regardless of when the license was issued.
No refund shall be made for the unexpired portion of any license surrendered to the City or revoked as
provided in this Section.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.8: Regulation and Licensing of Game Rooms/Arcades/Poolhalls 55
and Amusement Devices
Subd. 3 License Transfers. A license provided for by this Section shall be purely a personal privilege
and shall not constitute property. A licensee shall not sell, lend or give to any other person his or her
license or license insignia as the license shall not be transferable in any manner.
Subd 4 License Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be handled in the same
manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days but no
more than sixty (60) days before the expiration of the current license.
6.8.07 Inspection. Any City official or employee having a duty to perform with reference to a license under this
Section and any police officer may inspect and examine any licensee, his or her business or premises for purposes of
enforcing compliance with applicable provisions of this Section. Pursuant to the provisions herein, he or she may, at
any reasonable time, enter any licensed premises or premises for which a license shall be required in order to
enforce compliance with this Section.
6.8.08 Approval. If, after investigation, the City Administrator and the Chief of Police are satisfied that all
requirements of law and this Code have been met, he or she shall present the application to the City Council for
action.
6.8.09 Issuance of License. Upon receipt and approval by the City Council of the application, the City
Administrator shall issue the appropriate license(s) to the applicant in conformity to and with the provisions of this
Section. Every amusement device licensed under this Section shall be listed on the application filed with the City
and the operator will have to provide a copy of the license if requested by the City. A license for a game
room/arcade/poolhall under this Section shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premise.
6.8.10 Certain Machines Not Regulated. Nothing in this Section shall be held to apply to the licensing of any
machine held or kept for storage for later sale or distribution, nor shall it be construed to require licensing of coin
operated music boxes more commonly known as "juke boxes.”
6.8.11 Location of Machines. No amusement device shall be located, placed, maintained or operated on any
public street, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley or other public ground within the City. In addition, no amusement
device shall be so located that its operation shall create a nuisance.
6.8.12 Use for Gambling. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any amusement device, or for the owner or
operator of any establishment where it is located, to permit the same to be used for gambling or for the making of
bets or wagers.
6.8.13 Payoffs. It shall be unlawful for the licensee or for the owner or operator of any game room/arcade/poolhall
or any establishment where the device is located to give any money, token, merchandise, or any other thing of value
or any reward or prize in lieu of free games registered on the devices, and all free games so registered shall be
played on the device registering the free game. In addition, there shall be no device on the amusement machinery
whereby the owner or operator can cancel registered free games.
6.8.14 Automatic Payoffs. No person shall keep, maintain, sell or permit to be operated in his or her, its, or their
place of business any device which has been converted into an automatic payoff device which shall automatically
award money, prizes, tokens, merchandise, gifts or anything of value, other than free games to the operator or player
of the device. No person shall convert any device into an automatic payoff device.
6.8.15 Destruction of Illegally Operated Machines. Any amusement devices which shall have been made use of
in violation of this Section may be seized and destroyed in compliance with the provisions of State Statutes relating
to gambling devices.
6.8.16 Conditions of License.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.8: Regulation and Licensing of Game Rooms/Arcades/Poolhalls 56
and Amusement Devices
Subd. 1. Amusement Device Location and/or Game Room/Arcade/Poolhall Restrictions.
A. Noise. No game room, amusement devices, nor any musical device whether or not
located in a licensed game room/arcade/poolhall shall be operated so as to constitute a
public nuisance.
B. Order, Loitering, Littering and Vandalism. It shall be the responsibility of the
licensee to maintain order on the licensed premises at all times, and to prohibit outside
loitering and littering by the public. The licensee must also take steps to protect against
vandalism by his or her patrons and customers with regard to adjoining and neighboring
properties. Failure to comply with the same shall constitute a public nuisance which may
result in legal consequences.
C. Tobacco, Liquor, Drugs. No licensee shall keep on his or her premises, sell, offer for
sale, consume, or knowingly permit other persons to keep, sell, offer for sale or consume
any tobacco or tobacco related products, intoxicating or non-intoxicating alcoholic
beverages, narcotic drugs or other illegal substances or contraband upon the licensed
premises unless such activity is separately licensed and permitted by the City.
D. Compliance with Law. The licensee shall comply with all laws, City Code provisions or
Ordinances and regulations applicable to the licensed business, activity or property, and
the enumeration of specific duties or restrictions in this Section shall not be to the
exclusion of any other law, Code or Ordinance, rule and regulation which may apply.
Subd. 2. Game Room/Arcade/Poolhall Restrictions.
A. Only premises which are located in a zoning district where the licensed business is
authorized in the City may be licensed.
B. Adequate off-street parking for automobiles must be provided in compliance with the
current Code requirements.
C. No premises may be licensed unless sufficient visibility exists from outside the entrance
to the premises for a person of average stature to visually survey the entire premises and
all possible locations of patrons therein.
D. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to see that the licensed premises shall not
become overcrowded so as to constitute a hazard to the health or safety of persons on the
premises. The City fire chief, or designee, may designate the maximum number of
persons to be permitted on the licensed premises.
E. The licensee shall provide for a full time supervisor of the minimum age prescribed by
this Section to be upon the licensed premises during all business hours.
6.8.17 Hours of Operation of Licensed Game Rooms/Arcade/Poolhalls. No Game Room/arcade/poolhall
licensed by the City shall open prior to 9:00 a.m. on weekdays and noon on Sundays and legal holidays, and shall
close not later than 11:00 p.m. each weekday night and not later than 12:00 midnight on Fridays, Saturdays, and
legal holidays. This limitation will not apply to amusement devices located in an establishment that is not defined as
a game room/arcade/poolhall pursuant to these provisions.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.8: Regulation and Licensing of Game Rooms/Arcades/Poolhalls 57
and Amusement Devices
6.8.18 Relationship to Conditional Use Permit. A Game Room/arcade/poolhall license shall not be issued unless
the licensee has obtained a Conditional Use Permit from the City, pursuant to the City Zoning Code or Ordinance,
and all amendments thereto for the purpose of operating a “game room.” No Conditional Use Permit shall be
required for issuance of a Game Room license where it is determined by the Zoning Administrator of the City of
Cloquet that the licensee's premises constitutes a valid non-conforming use pursuant to the Zoning Code or
Ordinance, and all amendments thereto. A Game Room license issued after obtaining a Conditional Use Permit
shall be valid for a period of 180 days, after which the license shall be revoked in the event the licensee has not
commenced operation of the Game Room in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit.
6.8.19 Suspension or Revocation. The Council may revoke or suspend, for a time to be determined by the Council
based upon the severity of the violation, any license issued pursuant to this Section for violation of any provision of
this Section. Except where mandatory revocation shall be provided without notice and hearing by law, and except
where a suspension may be made without a hearing, the holder of the license or permit shall be granted a hearing
before a representative designated by the City Council upon at least ten (10) days' notice before revocation or
suspension shall become effective. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the nature of the
charges against the licensee.
6.8.20 Penalty. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and may also be assessed with the costs of prosecution at the discretion of the Court. Any penalty
imposed under this Section may also be in addition to a revocation or suspension of any license issued under this
section. The game room licensee required to be licensed under this Section, may be charged for any alleged
violation of this Section whether or not he/she is in direct control of a machine described in 6.8.02, or the premises
upon which any machine is located by virtue of his/her responsibility as licensee under this Section, and by virtue of
his/her indirect control of the amusement game machine(s) located on the premises. Each day of violation or failure
to comply with any provision of this Section may be considered a separate and distinct offense and shall be
punishable as such.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.9: Regulation and Licensing of Professional Therapeutic Massage 58
SECTION 6.9: REGULATION AND LICENSING OF
PROFESSIONAL THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE
6.9.01 Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to expand the availability of therapeutic massage services and to
provide for the separate licensing of therapeutic massage businesses and massage therapists within the City of
Cloquet. The City Council finds that individuals and commercial enterprises conducting massage in private by and
between members of the same or opposite sex and employing personnel with no specialized training are susceptible
to operation in a manner contravening, subverting, or endangering the morals of the community. It is the further
purpose of this Section to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public by strictly regulating the
profession of therapeutic massage within the City of Cloquet.
Accordingly, this section provides for a method of making therapeutic massage available but requires inspection,
licensing and regulation. The City Council also finds that it is important that certain levels of specialized training
exist in order to safely and properly provide therapeutic massage services to the public.
6.9.02 Definitions: In this section the following words and terms have the following meanings as set forth below:
A. Therapeutic Massage: Means the rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, or rolling of the body of
another with the hands or objects for the exclusive purpose of physical fitness, relaxation, or
beautification, and for no other purpose.
Subd. 1. Therapeutic Massage Distinguished: The practice of therapeutic massage is hereby
declared to be distinct from the practice of medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical
therapy or podiatry, by persons duly licensed in this state to practice medicine, surgery,
osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy or podiatry.
a. Exceptions.
1. Persons duly licensed or registered to practice medicine, surgery, osteopathy,
chiropractic, physical therapy or podiatry, registered nurses and nurses who
work under the direction of such persons, are hereby expressly excluded from
the requirements of this section, provided the massage is administered in the
regular course of a prescribed or authorized medical treatment and not provided
as part of a separate and distinct massage business, shall be exempt from
obtaining a license under this section.
2. Athletic directors or trainers under contract to a school district, private or public
college, are hereby expressly excluded from the provisions of this section.
3. Beauty culturists and barbers who do not give, or hold themselves out to give,
massage services other than are customarily given in such shops or places of
business shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
B. Therapeutic Massage Therapist: Means a person who practices or administers therapeutic
massage and who has received a minimum of 500 hours of certified therapeutic massage training
and certification which has been recognized and accepted by a national or state professional
therapeutic massage organization.
C. Therapeutic Massage Services: Means a business or person offering or providing therapeutic
massages to others where a fee is charged directly or indirectly, whether or not the massage
services are rendered at a licensed premises.
D. Therapeutic Massage Business: Means any business establishment located in the City of
Cloquet that provides to the public at large therapeutic massage services.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.9: Regulation and Licensing of Professional Therapeutic Massage 59
6.9.03 License Required. No person may conduct therapeutic massage within the City of Cloquet without first
obtaining a license from the City. Such license shall be in the form of a Therapeutic Massage Business license for
the establishment and a Massage Therapist license for each individual practicing therapeutic massage.
Subd. 1. License Application. All applications shall be made at City Hall to the City Administrator by
filing an application form which shall contain the following information:
A. Therapeutic Massage Business License.
1. A description, sketch or floor plan, and the location of the premises where the licensed
activity is to be conducted, including the full legal description of the property. If the
premise is not constructed and furnished at the time the application is submitted, detailed
plans of the premises and furnishing shall be attached to the application. No license will
be issued for a Therapeutic Massage Business until a final certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the City of Cloquet; and
2. Names and addresses of the applicant(s), together with the names and addresses of the
property owner (if different), the business owner (if different), the lessee (if different), the
manager or operator (if different), and if a corporation, where the licensed activity will
take place; and
3. A description of any crime or other offense, including the time, date, place, and
disposition, for which any of the persons named above have been arrested or convicted;
and
4. A description of the services offered by the therapeutic massage business; and
5. A non-refundable investigation fee in an amount established by resolution as adopted
from time to time by the City Council; and
6. All necessary release forms to allow for the required background, education, and criminal
checks; and
7. Any premises proposed to be licensed shall be first inspected by the City’s building
official. These premises must comply with all applicable building codes, fire codes, and
health codes of the City of Cloquet, Carlton County and State of Minnesota; and
8. Evidence that the applicant and property being licensed are not delinquent in property
taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the City; and
9. Evidence that the business has professional liability insurance coverage with liability
limits of at least $1,000,000. Such insurance must remain in force and effect during the
term of the license and proof of that insurance must be provided to the City with the
application and must be updated as long as the license is in effect; and
10. Proof of Workers Compensation Insurance coverage in the State of Minnesota; and
11. Applicant’s Social Security Number and Minnesota Business Identification Number.
12. The applicant for a therapeutic massage business license shall furnish the City with a list
of current employees, listing their names, addresses, and the designated duties of the
employee. The licensee shall promptly notify the City of any additions or changes to the
list of employees and their job descriptions or duties.
13. Any other such information as the City Council may require.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.9: Regulation and Licensing of Professional Therapeutic Massage 60
B. Massage Therapist License.
1. The applicant’s name, social security number, Minnesota Business Identification
Number, and date of birth; and
2. The applicant’s residence address and home telephone number; and
3. If the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other than the applicant’s name,
and if so, the name or means and information concerning the dates and places where
used; and
4. The type, name, and location of every business or occupation the applicant has been
engaged in during the preceding five (5) years; and
5. Residence addresses of the applicant during the five (5) years preceding the date of
application; and
6. Evidence that the applicant:
a. Can document at least 500 hours of certified therapeutic massage training
recognized and accepted by a national or state professional therapeutic massage
organization and any and all continuing education requirements so required by
that organization; and
b. Proof of membership in good standing in a recognized national and/or state
professional therapeutic massage organization; and
c. Has current professional liability insurance coverage with liability limits of at
least $1,000,000. Such insurance must remain in force and effect during the
term of the license and proof of that insurance must be provided to the City with
the application and must be updated as long as the license is in effect.
7. All necessary release forms to allow for the required background, education, and criminal
checks; and
8. A non-refundable investigation fee in an amount established by resolution as adopted
from time to time by the City Council; and
9. Any other such information as the City Council may require.
6.9.04 Issuance of Therapeutic Massage Business and Therapist License. The City Council may issue a license
under this section if all of the following conditions are met:
1. If the applicant is 18 years of age or older; and,
2. If the applicant and property being licensed is not delinquent in payment of property
taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the City; and
3. The applicant has provided the information for the application and has truthfully
answered the questions and request for information on the application form; and,
4. An applicant has not been convicted of a violation of provision of this section or a related
state or federal law within ten years immediately preceding the application; and,
5. The premises to be used for the business are properly zoned and are in compliance with
the applicable laws and Code or Ordinances; and,
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.9: Regulation and Licensing of Professional Therapeutic Massage 61
6. All license fees have been paid; and,
7. The applicant has not been convicted of a sexually oriented crime within ten years of the
date of the application for a license with the City; and,
6.9.05 Premise Inspection.
Subd. 1. By applying for a license pursuant to this section, an applicant shall be deemed to have consented
to have the Police or other appropriate City authorized representatives inspect any premises on which
therapeutic massage services will be provided for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law at any
time during normal business hours even if the premises is the residence of the therapist to be licensed.
Subd. 2. A licensee or any person employed by the licensee who is involved in the operation of a
therapeutic massage business commits an offense if the person refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the
premises by a City representative or the Police Department at any time the business is occupied or open for
business during business hours. Each such occasion will be considered a separate misdemeanor offense.
6.9.06 License Terms and Fee. Therapeutic Massage Business License and Therapeutic Massage Therapist
License.
Subd. 1. License Fee. No license shall be issued under this section until the appropriate license fee shall be
paid in full. The fee for license under this section shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to
time by the City Council.
Subd. 2. License Term. Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of time of one year. All such
licenses under this article shall expire on December 31st of each calendar year or portion thereof regardless of
when the license was issued.
Subd. 3. License Transfers. No license shall be transferred or sold. A licensee under this section shall not
transfer a license to another. A licensee of a therapeutic massage business or massage therapist may not change
the location licensed for massage therapy without prior approval of the City. No refund shall be made for the
unexpired portion of any license surrendered to the City or revoked as provided in this Section.
Subd. 4. Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be handled in the same manner as
the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days but no more than sixty
(60) days before the expiration of the current license.
6.9.07 Suspension and Revocation.
Subd. 1. Suspension of License: The City Council may suspend a license if the City Council determines
the licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
a. Violated any provisions of this Code;
b. Engaged in the use of alcoholic beverages or use of illegal drugs while
performing therapeutic massage services during business hours;
c. Refused to allow an inspection of premises as authorized by this section;
d. Demonstrated an inability to operate or manage the enterprise in a peaceful and law
abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers.
Subd. 2. Revocation: The City Council may revoke a license if a cause for suspension occurs and the
license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. The City Council may also revoke the license
if the City Council determines that:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.9: Regulation and Licensing of Professional Therapeutic Massage 62
a. The licensee gave false or misleading information during the application process, and in
such instance, all fees that have been paid for the application of said licensee will be
forfeited by the applicant to the City.
b. A licensee or employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the premises.
c. A licensee or employee knowingly operated the business during the period of time when
the licensee's license was suspended or during hours not authorized for the operation of
the business by this Section.
d. The City determines that the licensee has been convicted of an offense which would
prohibit them from obtaining a license.
e. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the City for ad valorem taxes or other taxes or
fees.
f. There is a violation or regulation relating to the building, safety, or health of the licensed
therapist.
g. There is a lapse, revocation, or discontinuance of the professional liability insurance
required by this Section.
6.9.08. License Restrictions.
Subd. 1. Compliance with Law: The licensee and any person in the employee of the licensee or agent or
officer thereof and any and all persons with an interest in said business shall comply with this section; and,
all other applicable section and regulations of the City Code, State of Minnesota and the United States.
Subd. 2. Hours of Operation: A licensed therapist shall not perform massages, nor shall massage
patients be permitted on the premises of the massage therapist between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Subd. 3. Age: No person under the age of 18 years of age may be employed by a massage therapist
required to be licensed under the provisions of this Section.
Subd. 4. Cleanliness: The premises and contents where therapeutic massage will be conducted must be
kept and maintained in a sanitary condition.
Subd. 5. Clothing: At all times during the conducting of therapeutic massage services, massage therapists
and all employees must remain fully clothed in non-transparent clothing and customers must remain
reasonably covered in non-transparent material.
Subd. 6. Zoning: Therapeutic massage business licenses shall be granted only for the operation of
therapeutic massage upon fixed premises which are properly zoned according to the City code.
Subd. 7. Alcohol, Drugs, Etc: No beer, liquor, narcotic drug, or controlled substances as such terms are
defined by state statutes or the City Code shall be served, sold or consumed on the premises and during the
hours of operation of therapeutic massage licensed herein.
Subd. 8. Violations: Violations of any law or regulation relating to the building, safety, or health shall be
grounds for revocation of any license issued under this Section in addition to any criminal prosecution that
may result.
Subd. 9. Locks: It is a specific restriction of any license so issued under this Section that there will be no
locks on the doors of massage rooms where massage services are being conducted pursuant to this license.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.9: Regulation and Licensing of Professional Therapeutic Massage 63
Subd. 10. Practicing Therapists: Only massage therapists who are licensed by the City shall engage in
massage services pursuant to this Section.
Subd. 11. Discrimination: No massage therapy business established shall discriminate between persons
on the basis of race, color, creed, sex, or national origin or ancestry.
Subd. 12. Compliance: All licensed persons conducting therapeutic massage must comply with any and
all amendments to this Section. Failure to do so is grounds for revocation of a license issued under this
Section.
Subd. 13. Minors: Therapeutic massage services shall not be administered on any person who is under
the age of 18 years, unless the parent or guardian of such person is present at the time that the therapeutic
massage services are being administered.
Subd. 14. Location of Therapeutic Massage Services: Therapeutic massage services may be conducted
at any place of business properly licensed for such purpose. If the therapeutic massage services are
conducted at the residence of the licensee, only the owner/occupant of that residence who is a duly licensed
therapist may perform therapeutic massage services at that location. Provided, however, a licensed
massage therapist may administer massage services at the following other additional locations:
a. Rest Homes.
b. Nursing Homes.
c. Hospitals.
d. Assisted Living Facility.
e. The private residence of patrons.
f. The location of the patron's place of employment provided that the place of employment
does not serve or sell intoxicating or non-intoxicating malt beverages.
g. Onsite - chair massage at a public location (such as a fundraiser event, craft shows, grand
openings) focusing on back, shoulders, neck , arms and hands. Chair massage is done
fully clothed.
6.9.09 Health and Disease Control. No person while afflicted with any disease in a communicable form or while
a carrier of such disease or while afflicted with boils, infected wounds, sores, or any acute respiratory infection, may
work administer therapeutic massage services. No persons known, suspected, or being afflicted with any such
disease or condition shall be employed or permitted in such an area or capacity to perform therapeutic massage
services by the licensee.
6.9.10 Penalties and Enforcement.
Subd. 1. Any person violating the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Subd. 2. Injunction: The person who operates or causes to be operated a therapeutic massage business or
engages in massage services without a valid license or otherwise in violation of this section is subject to a
civil suit or injunction as well as prosecution for any criminal violation.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.10: Regulations Regarding the Licensing of Sexually Oriented Businesses 64
Section 6.10: REGULATIONS REGARDING THE
LICENSING OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
6.10.01 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prescribe licensing requirements for sexually-oriented
businesses in order to protect the general health, safety, and welfare and to control certain land uses that may have a
direct and detrimental effect on the character of the City's residential and commercial neighborhoods.
6.10.02 Findings of the City Council. The City Council makes the following findings regarding the need to
license sexually-oriented businesses. The findings are based upon the experiences of other cities where such
businesses have located, as studied by a City staff committee. It is apparent from that review and the data compiled
by staff that there are a number of issues that must be addressed:
A. Sexually oriented businesses can exert a dehumanizing influence on persons attending
places of worship, children attending state licensed family day care home, state licensed
group family day care homes, and state licensed childcare centers; student attending
school; and people using public parks and libraries.
B. Sexually-oriented businesses can be used as fronts for prostitution and other criminal
activity. The experience of other cities indicates that the proper management and
operation of such businesses can, however, minimize this risk, provided the owners and
operators of such facilities are regulated by licensing or other procedures.
C. Sexually oriented businesses can significantly contribute to the deterioration of
residential neighborhoods and can impair the character and quality of the residential
housing in the area in which such businesses are located, thereby exacerbating the
shortage of affordable and habitable housing for City residents.
D. The concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area can have a substantially
detrimental effect on the area in which such businesses are concentrated and on the
overall quality of life in the community. A cycle of decay can result from the influx and
concentration of sexually oriented businesses. The presence of such businesses is often
perceived by others as an indication that the community or area is deteriorating and the
result can be devastating to other businesses that may be required to move out of the
vicinity and which could influence residents to relocate from the area. It has been noted
that the presence of such businesses can have the overall effect of causing declining real
estate values, which result can be exacerbated by the concentration of such businesses,
which can erode the City 's tax base and contribute to overall community blight.
E. Sexually-oriented businesses can increase the risk of exposure to communicable diseases
including but not limited to Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) for which
currently there is no cure. Experiences of other cities indicate that such businesses can
facilitate the spread of communicable diseases by virtue of the design and use of the
premises, thereby endangering not only the patrons of such establishments but also the
general public.
F. Sexually-oriented businesses can cause or contribute to public health problems by the
presence of live adult entertainment in conjunction with food and/or drink on the same
premises.
6.10.03 Conclusions of the City Council. In direct furtherance of the substantial goals of public health, safety,
and welfare, the City Council adopts this section, recognizing that it has a great interest in the present and future
character of the City's residential and commercial neighborhoods.
6.10.04 Definitions: The following words and terms when used in this section shall have the following meanings
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.10: Regulations Regarding the Licensing of Sexually Oriented Businesses 65
A. Adult Body Painting Studio - An establishment or business which provides the service
of applying paint or other substances, whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the
body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified
anatomical area as defined herein.
B. Adult Book Store - An establishment that has forty percent (40%) or greater of its
current store stock in merchandise, videos, books, magazines, and/or other periodicals
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as
herein defined.
C. Adult Oriented Cabaret - A building or space wherein a portion of the business is used
for providing dancing, modeling or other live entertainment, if such dancing or modeling
or live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, as defined herein, for observation or participation
by patrons.
D. Adult Car Wash - A wash facility for any type of motor vehicle that allows employees,
agents, independent contractors, or persons to appear in a state of partial or total nudity in
terms of specified anatomical areas as defined herein.
E. Adult Companionship Establishment - A companionship establishment which excludes
minors by reason of age, or which provides the service for a fee of engaging in or
listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the establishment
and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexually activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein.
F. Adult Entertainment Facility - A building or space wherein an admission is charged for
entrance, or food or alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages are sold or intended for
consumption, and wherein may be observed live presentation of entertainment, including
nude dancing, nude modeling or nudity, or which include other activities distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein.
G. Adult Modeling Studio - An establishment whose major business is the provision to
customers of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in specified sexual
activities as defined herein or display specified anatomical areas as define herein while
being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or
otherwise depicted by such customers.
H. Adult Motion Picture Theater - A building or space with a capacity of fifty (50) or
more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas as herein defined, for observation by patrons therein. The phrase "used
for" in the definition shall mean a regular and substantial course of conduct and not a
one-time presentation of such material.
I. Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater - A building or space with a capacity for fewer
than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas as herein defined, for observation by patrons therein. The
phrase "used for" in this definition shall mean a regular and substantial course of conduct
and not a one-time presentation of such material.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.10: Regulations Regarding the Licensing of Sexually Oriented Businesses 66
J. Adult Sauna - A sauna which excludes by reason of age, or which provides a steam bath
or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing
steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the
sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas as defined herein.
K. City - City of Cloquet, Minnesota.
L. Dwelling Unit - One or more rooms arranged for residential use containing cooking,
living, sanitary and sleeping facilities and physically separated from any other rooms or
dwelling units which may be in the same structure.
M. Issuing Authority - City Council of the City of Cloquet.
N. Minor - Any natural person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
O. Nudity - The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with less than
fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque
covering below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or the depiction or
showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
P. Person - One (1) or more natural persons; a partnership, including a limited partnership;
a corporation, including a foreign, domestic, or nonprofit corporation; a trust; a political
subdivision of the State; or any other business organization.
Q. Public Library - Any library that provides fee access to all residents of a city or county
without discrimination, received at least half of its financial support from public funds,
and is organized under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 134.
R. Public Park - A park, reservation, open space, playground, beach, or recreation center in
the City owned, leased, or used, wholly or in part, by a City, County, State, School
District or Federal Government for recreation purposes.
S. Place of Worship - A building or space that is principally used as a place where people
of the same faith or religion regularly assemble for worship or religious educational
purposes.
T. Sadomasochistic abuse - Flagellation or torture by or upon a person unclad or partially
clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered,
bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one.
U. School - A building or space that is principally used as a place where persons receive a
full course of educational instruction. Any post-secondary or post-high school
educational building, including any college or any vocational-technical college, shall not
be deemed a school for purposes of this Code.
V. Sign - A name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is affixed to,
painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon a building or other outdoor surface or
piece of land which directs attention to an object, project, place, activity, person,
institution, organization, or business. However, a "sign" shall not include any display or
official court or government office notices nor shall it include the flag, emblem, or
insignia of a nation, political unit, school, or religious group. A "sign" shall not include a
sign located completely within an enclosed building unless the context shall so indicate.
Each display surface of a sign shall be considered a "sign".
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.10: Regulations Regarding the Licensing of Sexually Oriented Businesses 67
W. Single Family Dwelling - A residential building containing one dwelling unit as herein
defined, including detached, semi-detached and attached dwellings, which is intended to
be used as a residence.
X. State Licensed Family Day Care Home, State Licensed Group Family Day Care
Home, State Licensed Child Care Center - A facility holding a license from the State
of Minnesota pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 245A, and/or Minnesota Rules,
Chapter 9502 or Chapter 9503, as amended.
Y. Sexually Oriented Business - An adult book store, adult body painting studio, adult
companionship establishment, adult motion picture theater, adult entertainment facility,
adult modeling studio, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult car wash, adult-oriented
cabaret, or adult sauna as herein defined.
Z. Specified Sexual Activities - For the purposes of this Code, sexual activities include the
following:
(1) Human genitals in a discernible state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sadomasochistic behavior or
sodomy; or
(3) Fondling of or other erotic touching of human genitals, the pubic region or pubic
hair, buttock, or female breast or breast; or
(4) Any combination of the foregoing.
ZZ. Specified Anatomical Areas - For purposes of this Code, this means:
(a) Less than completely or opaquely covered:
(1) human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; or
(2) buttock; or
(3) female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; or
(4) any combination of the foregoing; and/or,
(b) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely or opaquely
covered.
6.10.05 License Required. No person shall own or operate a sexually-oriented business within the City unless
such person is currently licensed under this section.
6.10.06 License Application. The application for a license under this section shall be made on a form supplied by
the issuing Authority and shall request the following information:
Subd. 1 All Applicants. For all applicants:
A. Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership, or other form of
organization.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.10: Regulations Regarding the Licensing of Sexually Oriented Businesses 68
B. The legal description of the premises to be licensed, along with a floor plan of the
premises. The floor plan of the premises shall detail all internal operations and activities,
including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business. The floor plan
need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn
with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six (6) inches.
C. The name and street address of the business. If the business is to be conducted under a
designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant, a certified copy of the
certificate required by Minnesota Statutes, Section 333.01 shall be submitted.
Subd. 2 Applicants Who Are Natural Persons. If the applicant is a natural person:
A. The name, place and date of birth, street and city address, and phone number of the
applicant.
B. Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name other than the
applicant's name, and if so, the name or names used and information concerning dates
and places where used.
C. The street and city addresses at which the applicant has lived during the preceding two
(2) years.
D. The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant has
been engaged during the preceding two (2) years and the name(s) and address(es) of the
applicant's employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding two (2) years.
E. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or violation of any
Code other than a petty misdemeanor traffic Code. If so, the applicant shall furnish
information as to the time, place, and offense for which convictions were had.
Subd. 3. Applicants That Are Partnerships. If the applicant is a partnership:
A. The name(s) and address(es) of all general partners and all of the information concerning
each general partner that is required of applicants in subpart (2) of this Section.
B. The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the interest of each partner in the business.
C. A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application. If the
partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade name pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes, Section 333.01, a certified copy of such certificate shall be attached to the
application.
Subd. 4. Corporate or Other Applicants. If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
A. The name of the corporation or business form, and if incorporated, the state of
incorporation.
B. A true copy of the Certificate of Incorporation, Articles of Incorporation or Association
Agreement, and By-laws shall be attached to the application. If the applicant is a foreign
corporation, a Certificate of Authority as required by Minnesota Statutes, Section 303.06,
shall be attached.
C. The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or other agent(s) in charge of the business and
all of the information concerning each manager, proprietor, or agent that is required of
the applicants in subpart (2) of this Section.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.10: Regulations Regarding the Licensing of Sexually Oriented Businesses 69
6.10.07 License Application Execution. If the application is that of a natural person, the application shall be
signed and sworn to by that person; if of a corporation, by an officer thereof; if of a partnership, by one of the
general partners; if of an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof.
6.10.08 License Application Verification. Applications for licenses under this section shall be submitted to the
City Council (hereinafter referred to as the "Issuing Authority"). Within twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of a
complete application and payment of all license application fees, agents and/or employees of the Issuing Authority
shall verify any and all of the information requested of the applicant in the application, including the ordering of
criminal background checks, and conduct any necessary investigation to assure compliance with this section.
6.10.09 License Application Consideration. No later than ten (10) calendar days after the completion of the
license application verification and investigation by the Issuing Authority or its agents and employees, as prescribed
in this section, the Issuing Authority shall accept or deny the license application in accordance with this Section. If
the application is denied, the Issuing Authority shall notify the applicant of the determination in writing. The notice
shall be mailed by certified and regular mail to the applicant at the address provided on the application form and it
shall inform the applicant of the applicant's right within twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of the notice by the
applicant, to request an appeal of the determination for reconsideration by the City Council or to immediately
challenge the determination in a court of law. If an appeal to the City Council is timely received, the hearing before
the City Council shall take place within twenty (20) calendar days of the receipt of the appeal. If an application is
granted for a location where a building is under construction or not ready for occupancy, the license shall not be
delivered to the licensee until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the licensed premises by the City
Planning Department.
During the application consideration process prescribed herein an applicant operating a business not previously
subject to the license provisions of this Section may remain operating pending the outcome of the application
consideration by the Issuing Authority.
6.10.10 License Fees.
Subd. 1. Application fee.
A. The license application fee shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to
time by the City Council.
B. The application license fee shall be paid in full before the application for a license is
considered. All fees shall be paid to the Issuing Authority for deposit into the general
fund of the City. Upon rejection of any application for a license or upon withdrawal of
application before approval of the Issuing Authority the license fee shall be refunded to
the applicant.
C. When the license is for premises where the building is not ready for occupancy, the time
fixed for computation of the license fee for the initial license period shall be ninety (90)
days after approval of the license by the Issuing Authority or upon the date an occupancy
permit is issued for the building.
Subd. 2. Investigation fee.
A. An applicant for any license under this Division shall deposit with the Issuing Authority,
at the time an original application is submitted, which shall be established by resolution
as adopted from time to time by the City Council, to cover the costs involved in verifying
the license application and to cover the expense of any investigation needed to assure
compliance with this Division. The investigation fee shall be nonrefundable.
6.10.11 Persons and Locations Ineligible for a License. The Issuing Authority shall issue a license under this
subsection to an applicant unless one (1) or more of the following conditions exits:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.10: Regulations Regarding the Licensing of Sexually Oriented Businesses 70
A. The applicant is not eighteen (18) years of age or older on the date the application is
submitted to the Issuing Authority;
B. The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the license application;
C. The applicant gave false, fraudulent, or untruthful information on the license application;
D. The applicant has had a sexually-oriented license revoked from the City or any other
jurisdiction within a one (1) year period immediately preceding the date the application
was submitted;
E. The applicant has had a conviction of a felony or gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor
relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or adult uses in the past five (5) years;
F. The sexually-oriented business does not meet the zoning requirements prescribed in this
Code;
G. The premises to be licensed as a sexually-oriented business is currently licensed by the
City as a tanning facility, tattoo establishment, pawnshop, therapeutic massage enterprise,
or an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages;
H. The applicant has not paid the license and investigation fees required in section.
6.10.12 License Restrictions.
Subd. 1. Posting of License. A license issued under this section must be posted in a conspicuous place in
the premises for which it is used.
Subd. 2. Effect of License. A license issued under this Section is only effective for the compact and
contiguous space specified in the approved license application.
Subd. 3. Maintenance of Order. A licensee under this section shall be responsible for the conduct of the
business being operated and shall not allow any illegal activity to take place on or near the licensed
premises including but not limited to prostitution, public indecency, indecent exposure, disorderly conduct,
or the sale or use of illegal drugs. Every act or omission by an employee or independent contractor of the
licensee constituting a violation of this Section shall be deemed the act or omission of the licensee if such
act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the licensee, or as a result of
the licensee's negligent failure to supervise the employee's or independent contractor's conduct.
Subd. 4. Distance Requirement for Live Adult Entertainment. All performers, dancers, and persons
providing live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in the licensed facility or
in areas adjoining the licensed facility where such entertainment can be seen by patrons of the licensed
facility shall remain at all times a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from all patrons, customers, or
spectators and shall dance or provide such entertainment on a platform intended for that purpose, which
shall be raised at least two (2) feet from the level of the floor on which patrons or spectators are located.
Subd. 5. Interaction with Patrons. No dancer, performer, or person providing live entertainment
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in the licensed facility or in areas adjoining the licensed
facility where the entertainment can be seen by patrons of the licensed facility shall fondle or caress any
spectator or patron.
Subd. 6. Gratuity Prohibition. No customers, spectator, or patron of a licensed facility shall directly pay
or give any gratuity to any dancer or performer, and no dancer or performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity
from any patron or spectator.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.10: Regulations Regarding the Licensing of Sexually Oriented Businesses 71
Subd. 7. Adult Car Wash Requirements. Sexually-oriented businesses that are adult car washes shall
meet all of the requirements of this Section.
6.10.13 Restrictions Regarding License Transfer.
A. The license granted under this section is for the person and the premises named on the
approved license application. No transfer of a license shall be permitted from place to
place or from person to person without complying with the requirements of an original
application.
B. When a sexually-oriented business licensed under this section is sold or transferred, the
existing licensee shall immediately notify the Issuing Authority of the sale or transfer. If
the new owner or operator is to continue operating the sexually-oriented business, the
new owner or operator must immediately apply for a license under this section.
6.10.14 Restrictions Regarding Hours of Operation. A licensee shall not be open for business to the public
during the following hours on the following days:
A. Adult Body Painting Studio, Adult Book Stores, Adult Companionship Establishment,
Adult Modeling Studio, Adult Motion Picture Theaters, Adult Mini-Motion Picture
Theaters, Adult Sauna, Adult Car Wash: Monday through Sunday - Not open before 6:00
a.m. nor after 11:00 p.m.
B. Adult Entertainment Facilities, including Adult Oriented Cabarets: Monday through
Sunday - Not open before 6:00 a.m. nor after 1:00 a.m.
6.10.15 Restrictions Regarding Minors. No licensee shall allow minors to enter the licensed premises. The
licensee shall request proof of age of all persons the licensee believes to be under the age of eighteen (18) years.
Proof of age may be established only by; a valid driver's license or identification card issued by Minnesota, another
state; or a province of Canada, and including the photograph and date of birth of the licensed person; a valid military
identification card issued by the United States Department of Defense; or in the case of a foreign national from a
nation other than Canada, a valid passport.
6.10.16 Renewal Application.
Subd. 1. Annual Licenses: Deadline for Renewal Applications. All licenses issued under this Division
shall be effective for only one (1) year commencing with the date of approval by the Issuing Authority or
City Council. An application for the renewal of an existing license shall be submitted to the Issuing
Authority at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the expiration date of the license.
Subd. 2. Verification, Investigation and Consideration of Renewal Application. Within twenty (20)
calendar days of receipt by the Issuing Authority of a fully completed renewal application, the Issuing
Authority shall verify any and all of the information requested of the applicant in the renewal application,
including the ordering of criminal background checks, and shall conduct any necessary investigation to
assure compliance with this Section. No later than ten (10) calendar days after the completion of the
renewal application verification and investigation by the Issuing Authority, as prescribed herein, the Issuing
Authority shall issue a renewal license unless one (1) or more of the following conditions exist:
A. The applicant is a minor at the time the application is submitted.
B. The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the renewal application;
C. The applicant gave false, fraudulent, or untruthful information on the renewal
application;
D. The sexually-oriented business was found in the immediately preceding license year to
have violated the license restrictions prescribed in this Code;
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.10: Regulations Regarding the Licensing of Sexually Oriented Businesses 72
E. The sexually-oriented business does not meet the zoning requirements prescribed in the
Code;
F. The premises licensed as a sexually-oriented business is currently licensed by the City as
a tanning facility, tattoo establishment, pawnshop, therapeutic massage enterprise, or an
establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages;
G. The applicant has had a conviction of any crime listed in this Division; or
H. The Applicant has had a sexually-oriented license revoked within a one (1) year period
immediately preceding the date the application was submitted.
(1) Notice of Denial. If the Issuing Authority denies a renewal application, the
Issuing Authority shall notify the applicant in accordance with this Section and
the notice shall, in addition, state the grounds for the denial.
(2) Appeal to City Council or Court of Law. After the denial of a renewal
application by the Issuing Authority, the applicant may appeal the determination
to the City Council for reconsideration or by immediately challenging the
determination in a court of law. If the City denies renewal of a license under
this Division, the applicant shall not be issued a license under this Division for
one (1) year from the date of the denial. If, subsequent to the denial, the City
Council finds that the basis for the denial of the renewal license has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90)
days have elapsed since the date the denial became final.
6.10.17 Sanctions for License Violations.
Subd. 1. Suspension. The City Council may suspend a license issued pursuant to this Code for a violation
of:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in a license application or a
renewal application.
B. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on the
licensed occupation or business.
C. Any violation of this Code or related state law.
D. A licensee's criminal conviction that is directly related to the occupation or business
licensed as defined by Minnesota Statutes, Section 364.02, Subdivision 2, provided that
the licensee cannot show competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present
fitness to perform the duties of the licensed occupation or business as defined by
Minnesota Statutes, Section 364.03, subdivision 3.
E. Conducting the licensed business or occupation in an unlawful manner or in such a
manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health,
safety or general welfare of the community.
Subd. 2. Revocation. The City Council may revoke a license if the City Council determines that:
A. The licensee's license was suspended in the preceding fourteen (14) months and an
additional cause for suspension as detailed in (a) above is found by the City Council to
have occurred within the fourteen (14) month period;
B. The licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the City
during the application process;
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.10: Regulations Regarding the Licensing of Sexually Oriented Businesses 73
C. The licensee or an employee or independent contractor of the licensee has knowingly
allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
D. A licensee or an employee or independent contractor has knowingly allowed prostitution
on the premises;
E. A licensee violated any of the provisions of Minnesota Statutes §617.241 to §617.299
relating to the illegal distribution, possession or sale of obscene materials;
F. A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually-oriented business during a
period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
G. A licensee has been convicted of an offense prescribed in Section 13 and/or 14 of this
Code for which the time period required has not elapsed;
H. One two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or persons has/have
committed an offense prescribed in Section 13 and/or Section 14 of this Code, in or on
the license premises, for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons
were employees or independent contractors of the licensee at the time the offenses were
committed;
I. A licensee or an employee or independent contractor of the licensee has knowingly
allowed specified sexual activities to occur in or on the licensed premises; or
J. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the City, County, State or Federal Governments
for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, sales taxes, or other financial obligations.
Subd. 3. Notice of Hearing. A revocation or suspension shall be preceded by written notice to the licensee
and a public hearing. The notice shall give a least eight (8) days' notice of the time and place of the public
hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The notice shall be mailed to the
licensee by regular and certified mail at the most recent address listed on the application.
6.10.18 Penalty. A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor under Minnesota law and each day that a
prohibited violation occurs or exists will constitute a separate violation.
6.10.19 Zoning Regulations. (See Chapter 12 Zoning - Section 12.8)
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.11: Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers 74
SECTION 6.11: REGULATION AND LICENSING OF PAWN BROKERS
6.11.01 Declaration of Findings and Intent
Subd. 1. The City Council hereby finds that the business of a pawnbroker has the potential for developing
or degenerating into a public nuisance. The City Council further finds that the protection of the public
welfare requires the business of a pawnbroker be licensed and regulated. In addition, the City Council
finds that the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section, and all other applicable laws
with respect to pawnbrokers, shall require substantial direct and indirect expenditures of funds by the City.
Subd. 2. The City Council hereby declares that the intent of this section shall be to provide for the
licensing and regulation of pawnbrokers within the City.
Subd. 3. Accordingly, the following provisions are intended to comply with the legislative authority given
to municipalities to regulate pawn shops (Minn. Stat. 3251, et. seq., and its provisions) and to help the
police department better regulate current and future pawn businesses, decrease and stabilize costs
associated with the regulation of the pawn industry, and to increase identification of criminal activities in
the pawn industry through the timely-collection and sharing of pawn transaction information through
implementation of the required use of an automated pawn system. The format for computerized
pawnbroker records shall be the "interchange file specification format" specified in Minnesota Statutes
Section 3251.05 (b & c) or its successor.
(Ordinance 479A)
6.11.02 Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
Subd. 1. Pawnshop. "Pawnshop" means the location at which or the premises in which a pawnbroker
regularly conducts business.
Subd. 2. Pawnbroker.
(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b), "pawnbroker" means a person engaged in whole or
in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods left in pawn, or
in the business of purchasing tangible personal property to be left in pawn on the
condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a
fixed period of time.
This definition includes any natural person, partnership or corporation, either as principal,
or agent or employee thereof, who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal
property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property, or
other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price, or
who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on personal property, taking possession of
the property or any part thereof so mortgaged. To the extent that a pawnbroker's business
includes buying personal property previously used, rented or leased, or selling it on
consignment, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable.
(b) The following are exempt from the definition of "pawnbroker":
1. Any bank regulated by the State of Minnesota, the Comptroller of the Currency
of the United States, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System or any other federal or state authority
and their affiliates;
2. Any bank or savings association whose deposits or accounts are eligible for
insurance by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or any successor to it
and all affiliates of those banks and savings associations;
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.11: Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers 75
3. Any state or federally chartered credit union; and any industrial loan and thrift
company or regulated lender subject to licensing and regulation by the
department of commerce.
Subd. 3. Pawn transaction. "Pawn transaction" means any loan on the security of pledged goods or any
purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods are left with the pawnbroker and may be
redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time.
Subd. 4. Person. "Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, joint
venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity, however organized.
Subd. 5. Pledged goods. "Pledged goods" means tangible personal property other than choses in action,
securities, bank drafts, or printed evidence of indebtedness, that are purchased by, deposited with, or
otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction.
Subd. 6. Reportable transactions. Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in which merchandise is
received through a pawn, purchase, consignment or trade, or in which a pawn is renewed, extended or
redeemed, or for which a unique transaction number or identifier is generated by their point-of-sale
software, or an item is confiscated by law enforcement, is reportable except:
(1) The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a
merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler having an established permanent place of
business, and the retail sale of said merchandise; provided, the pawnbroker must
maintain a record of such purchase or consignment which describes each item,
and must mark each item in a manner which relates it to that transaction record.
(2) Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by pawn or
purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods have
expired.
Subd. 7. Billable transactions. Every reportable transaction conducted by a pawnbroker except
renewals, redemptions or extensions of existing pawns on items previously reported and continuously in
the licensee's possession is a billable transaction.
6.11.03 License Required; Number Allowed.
Subd. 1. No person shall engage in the business of pawnbroking or act as a pawnbroker or hold himself or
herself out to be a pawnbroker or advertise such services within the City without first having obtained a
license to do so. The license shall authorize the licensee to engage in the pawnbroking business at the
premises named on the license. A separate license shall be required for each separate premises utilized for
the business of the pawnbroker.
Subd. 2. No more than one license shall be issued under this section for each full 5,000 persons who reside
in the City.
6.11.04 Application.
Subd.1. Application for a pawnbroker's license shall be made to the City Clerk and shall state on the
application the name of the applicant; the place of business; and the number of employees intended to be
engaged in the operation of the business. If the applicant shall be a corporation, partnership, association or
other organization of any kind then the names and percentage of ownership in applicant of each and every
individual having any ownership interest in applicant shall be provided.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.11: Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers 76
Subd. 2. The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall investigate each applicant for the license and each
individual owner or applicant if it be a corporation, partnership, association or other organization of any
kind and shall report back to the City Council whether or not the applicant or its owner(s) is (are) of good
character.
Subd. 3. Application Information Required.
A. Contents. An application form provided by the City must be completed by every
applicant for a new license or for renewal of an existing license. Every new applicant
must provide all the following information:
(1) If the applicant is a natural person:
a. The name, place and date of birth, street resident address, and phone
number of applicant.
b. Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or resident alien.
c. Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name
other than the applicant's name, and if so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places used.
d. The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation,
name, or style other than the name of the applicant and a certified copy
of the certificate as required by Minnesota Statutes, Section 333.01.
e. The street address at which the applicant has lived during the preceding
five (5) years.
f. The type, name and location of every business or occupation in which
the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five (5) years and
the name(s) and address(es) of the applicant's employer(s) and
partner(s), if any, for the preceding five (5) years.
g. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or
violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the
applicant must furnish information as to the time, place, and offense of
all such convictions.
h. The physical description of the applicant.
i. Applicant's current personal financial statement and true copies of the
applicant's federal and state tax returns for the two (2) years preceding
the application but only upon request by the Chief of Police and/or the
City of Cloquet.
j. If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the
manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all
information concerning each of them required in a. through h. of
subdivision (1) of this section.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership:
a. The name(s) and address(es) of all general and limited partners and all
information concerning each general partner required in subdivision (1)
of this section.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.11: Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers 77
b. The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the interest of each partner
in the licensed business.
c. A copy of the partnership agreement under which the partnership is
operating shall be submitted with the application. If the partnership is
required to file a certificate as to a trade name pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes, Section 333.01, a certified copy of such certificate must be
attached to the application.
d. A true copy of the federal and state tax returns for partnership for the
two (2) years preceding the application but only upon request by the
Chief of Police and/or the City of Cloquet.
e. If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the
manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all
information concerning each of them required in a. through h. of
subdivision (1) of this section.
(3) If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
a. The name of the corporation or business form, and if incorporated, the
state of incorporation.
b. A true copy of the Certificate of Incorporation, Articles of
Incorporation or Association Agreement, and By-laws shall be attached
to the application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a Certificate
of Authority as required by Minnesota Statutes, Section 303.06, must
be attached.
c. The name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business
and all information concerning each manager, proprietor, or agent
required in a. through h. of subdivision (1) of this section.
d. A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess of five (5)
percent in such organization or business form or who are officers of the
corporation or business form and all information concerning said
persons required in subdivision (1) above. This subdivision (d),
however, shall not apply to a corporation whose stock is publicly traded
on a stock exchange and is applying for a license to be owned and
operated by it.
(4) For all applicants they must additionally indicate:
a. Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker, precious metal
dealer or second-hand goods dealer license from any other
governmental unit.
b. Whether the applicant has previously been denied, or had revoked or
suspended, a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer, or secondhand dealer
license from any other governmental unit.
c. The location of the proposed business premises.
d. If the applicant does not own the business premises, a copy of the
executed lease or rental agreement pertaining to the proposed business
premises.
e. The legal description of the premises to be licensed.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.11: Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers 78
f. Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and
payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid,
the years and amounts that are unpaid.
g. Whenever the application is for premises either planned or under
construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the application must
be accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the design of the
proposed premises to be licensed.
h. Such other information as the city councilor issuing authority may
require.
B. New manager. When a licensee places a manager in charge of a business, or if the
named manager(s) in charge of a licensed business changes, the licensee must complete
and submit the appropriate application, on forms provided by the City, within fourteen
(14) days. The application must include all appropriate information required in Section 4.
(1) Upon completion of an investigation of a new manager, the licensee must pay an
amount equal to the cost of the investigation to assure compliance with this
chapter. If the investigation process is conducted solely within the State of
Minnesota, the fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). If the investigation is
conducted outside the State of Minnesota, the issuing authority may recover the
actual investigation costs not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
C. Application execution. All applications for a license under this chapter must be signed
and sworn to under oath or affirmation by the applicant. If the application is that of a
natural person, it must be signed and sworn to by such person; if that of a corporation, by
an officer thereof; if that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of an
unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof.
D. Investigation. The Police Department must investigate into the truthfulness of the
statements set forth in the application and shall endorse the findings thereon. The
applicant must furnish to the Police Department such evidence as the inspector may
reasonably require in support of the statements set forth in the application.
E. Public hearing. The council member of the ward in which the proposed business wou1d
be located may request a public hearing before the council, at a regularly scheduled
council meeting at City Hall.
F. Persons ineligible for a license. No licenses under this chapter will be issued partnership
if such applicant has any general partner or managing partner, a corporation or other
organization if such applicant has any manager, proprietor or agent in charge of the
business to be licensed, if the applicant:
(1) Is a minor at the time that the application is filed;
(2) Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as
prescribed by Minnesota Statutes, Section 364.03, Subd. 2, and has not shown
competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the
duties of a licensee under this chapter as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes,
Section 364.03, Subd. 3; or,
(3) Is not of good moral character or repute.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.11: Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers 79
6.11.05 Fees.
Subd. 1. License Fee. The annual fee for a license shall be Three Hundred Dollars ($300) or at such amount
as adopted from time to time by the City Council and this fee shall be payable in advance and no license shall
be issued until the fee shall be paid. The license fee shall be payable annually in accordance with procedures
established by the City Administrator's Office.
Subd. 2. Duration. All licenses issued hereunder expire on the 1st day of January of each year. If the license
period is for less than one year, the fee to be paid by the applicant shall not be pro rated. The payment of the
fee in installments shall not be allowed.
Subd. 3. Investigative Fee. An applicant for a new license under this chapter, or for the renewal of an
existing license that is more than six (6) months past due, shall deposit five hundred dollars ($500.00) with the
Police Department at the time an original application is submitted to cover the costs involved in verifying the
license application and to cover the expense of any investigation needed to assure compliance with this
chapter. If the investigation is conducted outside the State of Minnesota, the issuing authority may recover the
actual investigation costs not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
Subd. 4. Billable Transaction License Fee.
(1) The billable transaction license fee shall reflect the cost of processing transactions from
the respective classifications and other related regulatory expenses as determined by the
City Council.
(2) The billable transaction license fee shall be reviewed and adjusted as necessary.
Licensees shall be notified in writing thirty (30) days before any adjustment is
implemented. The billable transaction fee for modem transactions shall not exceed the
billable transaction fee for manual transactions.
(3) Billable transaction fees shall be automatically remitted monthly and are due and payable
within thirty (30) days. Failure to do so is a violation of this chapter.
6.11.06 Bond and Workers Compensation Certificate.
Subd. 1. Every applicant for a license to be issued under this section shall provide with his or her
application a bond in the sum of $5,000, by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this state,
conditioned upon observance of and compliance with the conditions and provisions of this section. The
bond shall be for the benefit of the City or any person who shall suffer damage through the act of the
pawnbroker. The bond shall have the same term as the license which the applicant is seeking.
Subd. 2. Every applicant for a license to be issued under this section shall provide with his or her
application a certificate evidencing that applicant has in force and effect workers compensation insurance
required under the laws of the state or that the insurance shall not be required to be maintained by
applicant.
6.11.07 Payment of Taxes and Other Charges. No license shall be granted under this section for the operation on
any premises, on which real estate taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the City are delinquent and unpaid.
6.11.08 Qualifications of Licensee.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.11: Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers 80
Subd. 1. No license shall be issued to an applicant if the individual applicant or any individual owner of an
applicant that is a corporation, partnership, association or other organization of any type shall have been
previously convicted of a misdemeanor, gross misdemeanor or felony. Provided, however, that the
applicant may apply to the City Council for a waiver of this provision in the case of misdemeanor
convictions. The City Council may, in its discretion, grant the waiver for misdemeanor convictions upon
demonstration by the applicant that the conviction does not bear a substantial relationship to the character
or ability of the applicant to conduct the business of pawnbroking consistent with the provisions of this
section and all other applicable laws; or if there is a relationship that the applicant is sufficiently
rehabilitated pursuant to M.S. Section 364.03, as it may be amended from time to time.
Subd. 2. No person ineligible under M.S. Section 325D.03, as it may be amended from time to time, shall
be granted a license.
6.11.09 Records Required. At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals, extensions or
redemptions, every licensee must immediately record in English on a pawn ticket the following information by using
ink or other indelible medium on forms or in a computerized record approved by the Chief of Police including all
information prescribed in Minnesota Statutes Section 3251.04:
(1) A complete and accurate description of each item including, but not limited to,
any trade-mark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand
name, or other identifying mark on such an item.
(2) The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, or pledged therefor.
(3) The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including monthly and
annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges.
(4) Date, time and place the item of property was received by the licensee, and the
unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all
other transactions in the licensee's records.
(5) Full name, residence address, residence telephone number, date of birth and
accurate description of the person from whom the item of the property was
received, including: sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair.
(6) The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of
identification of the seller:
a. Current valid Minnesota driver's license.
b. Current valid Minnesota identification card.
c. Current valid photo identification card issued by another state,
Indian Tribe or tribal government or another recognized
federal or state governmental entity.
(7) The signature of the person identified in the transaction.
(8) The monthly annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and charges.
(9) Effective sixty (60) days from the date of notification by the chief of police of
acceptable video standards, but no sooner than January 1, 2005, the licensee
must also take a color photograph or color video recording of:
a. Each customer involved in a billable transaction.
b. Every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial or
identification number permanently engraved or affixed.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.11: Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers 81
If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two (2) inches in length by two
(2)inches in width and must be maintained in such a manner that the photograph
can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction to
which they relate. Such photographs must be available to the Chief of Police, or
the Chief's designee, upon request. The major portion of the photograph must
include an identifiable front facial close-up of the person who pawned or sold
the item. Items photographed must be accurately depicted. The licensee must
inform the person that he or she is being photographed by displaying a sign of
sufficient size in a conspicuous place in the premises. If a video photograph is
taken, the video camera must zoom in on the person pawning or selling the item
to include an identifiable close-up of that person's face. Items photographed by
video must be accurately depicted.
Video photographs must be electronically referenced by time and date so they
can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction to
which they relate. The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being
videotaped orally and by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous
place on the premises. The licensee must keep the exposed videotape for three
(3) months.
A passive video system may be used in place of a digital photograph. All
passive video surveillance must be kept for a minimum of ninety (90) days.
(10) Digitized photographs. Effective sixty (60) days from the date of notification by
the police license inspector, but no sooner than January 1, 2005, licensees must
meet the photograph requirement above by submitting them as digital images, in
a format specified by the issuing authority, electronically crossreferenced
to
the reportable transaction they are associated with. Notwithstanding the digital
images may be captured from required video recordings, this provision does not
alter or amend the requirements in subdivision (8).
(11) Renewals, extensions and redemptions. For renewals, extensions and
redemptions, the licensee shall provide the original transaction identifier, the
date of the current transaction, and the type of transaction
(12) Inspection of records. The records must at all reasonable times be open to
inspection by the police department or department of licenses and consumer
services. Data entries shall be retained for at least three (3) years from the date
of transaction. Entries of required digital images shall be retained a minimum of
ninety (90) days.
6.11.10 PRINTED PAWN TICKET REQUIREMENTS.
Subd. 1. The following information including all information required by Minnesota Statutes Section
3251.04 Subd. 2 shall be printed on all pawn tickets:
(1) the statement that "Any personal property pledged to a pawnbroker within this
state is subject to sale or disposal when there has been no payment made on the
account for a period of not less than sixty (60) days past the date of the pawn
transaction, renewal, or extension; no further notice is necessary. There is no
obligation for the pledgor to redeem pledged goods.''
(2) the statement that "The pledgor of this item attests that it is not stolen, it has no
liens or encumbrances against it, and the pledgor has the right to sell or pawn the
item."
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.11: Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers 82
(3) the statement that "This item is redeemable only by the pledgor to whom the
receipt was issued, or any person identified in a written and notarized
authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or a person
identified in writing by the pledgor at the time of the initial transaction and
signed by the pledgor. Written authorization for release of property to persons
other than the original pledgor must be maintained along with the original
transaction record."
(4) a blank line for the pledgor's signature. Signed pawn tickets conforming with the
requirements of M.S. Section 325J.04 (2), as it may be amended from time to
time, shall be issued to the pledger and a copy retained by the pawn broker.
6.11.11 DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE.
Subd. 1. Effective no later than ninety (90) days after the police department provides licensees with the
current version of the automated pawn system interchange file specification format or similar automated
record system as may be specified by the City, licensees must submit every reportable transaction to the
police department daily in the following manner:
(1) Licensees must provide to the police department all reportable transaction information by
transferring it from their computer to the automated pawn system interchange file specification
format or similar automated record system as specified by the City via modem using the current
version. All required records must be transmitted completely and accurately after the close of
business each day in accordance with standards and procedures established by the issuing
authority. Any transaction that does not meet the proper automated pawn system interchange file
specification format must be corrected and resubmitted the next business day. The licensee must
display a sign of sufficient size, in a conspicuous place in the premises, which informs patrons that
all transactions are reported to the police department daily.
Subd. 2. Subd. 2. Billable transaction fees. Licensees will be charged a fee by the City which will be set
by the City from time to time for each billable transaction reported to the police department.
This fee will be imposed to offset the costs of implementation and the ongoing operation of the pawnbroker
reporting system.
(1) If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required reports by modem, the licensee must
provide the police department, upon request, printed copies of all reportable transactions along
with the video tape(s) for that date, by noon the next business day;
(2) If the problem is determined to be in the licensee's system and is not corrected by the close of the
first business day following the failure, the licensee must continue to provide the required reports
as detailed in section 9 (b)(l), and must be charged a fifty dollar ($50.00) reporting failure penalty,
daily, until the error is corrected; or
(3) If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee's system, the licensee must continue to
provide the required reports in section 11 (b)(1), and resubmit all such transactions via modem
when the error is corrected.
(4) If a licensee is unable to capture, digitize or transmit the photographs required in Section 9, the
licensee must immediately take all required photographs with a still camera, cross-reference the
photographs to the correct transaction, and make the pictures available to the police department
upon request.
(5) Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that prevented the licensee from
uploading their reportable transactions, upon correction of the problem, the licensee shall upload
every reportable transaction from every business day the problem had existed.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.11: Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers 83
(6) Section 11 (b) (1) through (3) notwithstanding, the police department may, upon presentation of
extenuating circumstances, delay the implementation of the daily reporting penalty.
It is further intended that all existing provisions in Section 6.11 of the City Code not replaced by this Ordinance will
remain in full force and effect.
6.11.12 RECEIPT REQUIRED
Subd. 1. Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in every reportable transaction and
must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three (3) years. The receipt must include at least the following
information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the licensed business.
(2) The date and time the item was received by the licensee.
(3) Whether the item was pawned or sold. or the nature of the transaction.
(4) An accurate description of each item received including, but not limited to, any
trademark, identification number. serial number. model number, brand name. or
other identifying mark on such an item.
(5) The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee that conducted the
transaction.
(6) The amount advanced or paid.
(7) The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and charges.
(8) The last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed by the
pledger without risk that the item will be sold, and the amount necessary to
redeem the pawned item on that date.
(9) The full name, residence address, residence telephone number, and date of birth
of the pledger or seller.
(10) The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of
identification of the seller:
a. Current valid Minnesota driver's license.
b. Current valid Minnesota identification card.
c. Current valid photo driver's license or identification card
issued by another state.
(11) Description of the pledger or seller including approximate sex, height, weight,
race, color of eyes and color of hair.
(12) The signature of the pledger or seller.
(13) All printed statements as required by State Statute 325J.04 subdivision 2, or any
other applicable statutes.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.11: Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers 84
6.11.13. REDEMPTION PERIOD.
Subd. 1. Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an item for security must have a minimum of sixty
(60) days from the date of that transaction to redeem the item before it may be forfeited and sold. During
the sixty (60) day holding period, items may not be removed from the licensed location except as provided
in section 19. Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any item to anyone other than the person to whom
the receipt was issued or, to any person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the
property identified in the receipt, or to a person identified in writing by the pledger at the time of the initial
transaction and signed by the pledger, or with approval of the police license inspector. Written
authorization for release of property to persons other than original pledger must be maintained along with
original transaction record in accordance with section 9. A pawn transaction that involves holding only the
title to property is subject to Minnesota Statutes Chapters 168A and 336.
6.11.14 HOLDING PERIOD.
Subd. 1. Any item purchased by a licensee must not be sold or otherwise transferred for seventy-two
hours(72)hours from the date of the transaction. An individual may redeem an item seventy-two (72)
hours after the item was received on deposit, excluding Sundays and legal holidays.
6.11.15 POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.
Subd. 1. Investigative hold. Whenever a law enforcement official from any agency notifies a licensee not to
sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the premises. The investigative hold shall be confirmed
in writing by the originating agency within seventy-two (72) hours and will remain in effect for fifteen (15)
days from the date of initial notification, or until the investigative order is canceled, or until an order to
hold/confiscate is issued, whichever comes first.
Subd. 2. Order to hold. Whenever the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, notifies a licensee not to sell
an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by the
chief or the chiefs designee. The order to hold shall expire ninety (90) days from the date it is placed unless the
chief of police or the Chief's designee determines the hold is still necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.
Subd. 3. Order to confiscate. If an item is identified as stolen or evidence in a criminal case, the chief or
chiefs designee may:
(1) Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to a written order
from the chief or the chiefs designee, or
(2) Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided herein and leave it in the
shop.
When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall provide identification upon request of the licensee, and
shall provide the licensee the name and phone number of the confiscating agency and investigator, and the case
number related to the confiscation.
When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, the Chief of Police, or Chief's designee shall so notify
the licensee.
6.11.16. INSPECTION OF ITEMS.
Subd. 1. At all times during the terms of the license, the licensee must allow the police license inspector or
his designee(s) to enter the premises where the licensed business is located, including all off- site storage
facilities as authorized herein, during normal business hours, except in an emergency, for the purpose of
inspecting such premises and inspecting the items, ware and merchandise and records therein to verify
compliance with this chapter or other applicable laws.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.11: Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers 85
6.11.17. LABEL REQUIRED.
Subd. 1. Licensees must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned, purchased or received in
inventory from any reportable transaction. Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or name
that identifies the transaction in the shop's records, the transaction date, the name of the item and the
description or the model and serial number of the item as reported to the police department, whichever is
applicable, and the date the item is out of pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not be re-used.
6.11.18 DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
Subd. 1. Any license under this chapter may be denied, suspended for up to sixty (60) days or revoked for
good cause shown at a regular or special meeting of the City Council on five (5) days written notice for one
or more of the following reasons:
(1) The proposed use does not comply with the City Zoning Code.
(2) The proposed use does not comply with any health, building, building
maintenance or other provisions of this Code of Ordinances, federal or state law.
(3) The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one or more provisions of
this chapter.
(4) The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon
whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a background or financial
investigation due to the unavailability of information.
(5) Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing or renewing a license.
(6) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the application and
investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant's business.
(7) Violation within the preceding five (5) years, of any law relating to theft,
damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance, or operation of a
business.
(8) The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not qualify for a
license under the terms of this chapter.
Subd. 2. For the purposes of this section, "good cause" shall include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Conviction of pawnbroker, any of its owners, or any of his or her employees of
any crime relating to the operation of a pawnbroking business;
(2) Violation by the pawnbroker, any of its owners, or his or her employees of any
of the provisions of this section or any other Code or Ordinance or statute
relating to the operation of a pawnbroking business;
(3) Failure to cooperate fully with any lawful police investigation;
(4) Falsely stating any material fact on the license application; and
(5) Submitting a false or incomplete record to the police.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.11: Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers 86
6.11.19. BUSINESS AT ONLY ONE PLACE/LOCATION.
Subd. 1. A license under this chapter authorizes the licensee to carry on its business only at the permanent
place of business designated in the license. However, upon written request, the police license inspector may
approve an off-site locked and secured storage facility. The licensee shall permit inspection of the facility
in accordance with this ordinance. All provisions of this chapter regarding record keeping and reporting
apply to the facility and its contents. Property shall be stored in compliance with all provisions of the city
code.
Subd. 2. The licensee must either own the building in which the business is conducted, and any approved
off-site storage facility, or have a lease on the business premises which extends for more than six (6)
months.
Subd. 3. Consistent with Minn. Stat. §325J.10 no new pawnshop shall be located within ten (10) driving
miles of any gambling casino. However, if the pawnshop was lawfully operating as of April 2, 1996, that
existing business shall not be required to relocate or close as a result of this section and if it chooses or is
required to relocate, the business must obtain the prior approval and consent of the City.
6.11.20. PAWNBROKER PERMITTED CHARGES.
Subd. 1. Notwithstanding any other statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or section herein, a pawnbroker
may contract for and receive a pawnshop charge not to exceed three percent per month of the principal
amount
advanced in the pawn transaction plus a reasonable fee for storage and services. A fee for storage and
services may not exceed $20.00 if the property is not in the possession of the pawnbroker.
Subd. 2. The pawnshop charge allowed under paragraph (1) above shall be deemed earned due, and owing
as of the date of the pawn transaction and a like sum shall be deemed earned, due and owing on the same
day of the succeeding month. However, if full payment is made more than two weeks before the next
succeeding date, the pawnbroker shall remit one-half of the pawnshop charge for that month to the pledgor.
Subd. 3. Interest shall not be deducted in advance, nor shall any loan be divided or split so as to yield
greater interest or fees than would be permitted upon a single, consolidated loan or for otherwise evading
any provisions of this section.
Subd. 4. Any interest, charge, or fees contracted for or received, directly or indirectly, in excess of the
amount permitted under this section, shall be uncollectible and the pawn transaction shall be void.
Subd. 5. A schedule of charges permitted by this section shall be posted on the pawnshop premises in a
place clearly visible to the general public.
6.11.21 PROHIBITED ACTS.
Subd. 1. A pawnbroker and any clerk, agent, or employee of a pawnbroker shall not:
(A) Make any false entry in the records of pawn transactions.
(B) Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place of business the records, books, or
accounts relating to the licensee's pawn transactions.
(C) Refuse to allow the appropriate law enforcement agency, the attorney general, or any
other duly authorized state or federal law enforcement officer to inspect the pawn records
or any pawn goods in the person's possession during the ordinary hours of business or
other times acceptable to both parties.
(D) Fail to maintain a record of each pawn transaction for three years.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.11: Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers 87
(E) Accept a pledge or purchase property from a person under the age of 18 years.
(F) Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a pledgor or seller, or waiving any
provision of this section, or providing for a maturity date less than sixty (60) days after
the date of the pawn transaction.
(G) Fail to return pledged goods to a pledgor or seller, or provide compensation as set forth in
section 22 herein, upon payment in full of the amount due the pawnbroker unless either
the date of redemption is more than sixty (60) days past the date of the pawn transaction,
renewal, or extension and the pawnbroker has sold the pledged goods pursuant to section
13 and the appropriate provisions of this ordinance, or the pledged goods have been taken
into custody by a court or a law enforcement officer or agency.
(H) Sell or lease, or agree to sell or lease, pledged or purchased goods back to the pledgor or
seller in the same, or a related, transaction.
(I) Sell or otherwise charge for insurance in connection with a pawn transaction.
(J) Remove pledged goods from the pawnshop premises or other storage place approved by a
municipality at any time before unredeemed, pledged goods are sold pursuant to this
ordinance.
(K) No licensee may receive any goods from a person of unsound mind or an intoxicated
person.
(L) No licensee may receive any goods, unless the seller presents identification in the form of
a valid driver's license, a valid State of Minnesota identification card, or current valid
photo driver's license or identification card issued by the state of residency of the person
from whom the item was received.
(M) No licensee may receive any item of property that possesses an altered or obliterated
serial number or operation identification number or any item of property that has had its
serial number removed.
(N) No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property not
their own; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit the property
of another, whether with permission or without; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell,
consign, leave, or deposit any article of property in which another has a security interest;
with any licensee.
(O) No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property
with any licensee shall give a false or fictitious name; nor give a false date of birth; nor
give a false or out of date address of residence or telephone number; nor present a false or
altered identification, or the identification of another; to any licensee.
6.11.22. REDEMPTION; RISK OF LOSS.
Subd. 1. Any person to whom the receipt for pledged goods was issued, or any person identified in a
written and notarized authorization to redeem the pledged goods identified in the receipt, or any person
identified in writing by the pledgor at the time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledgor shall be
entitled to redeem or repurchase the pledged goods described on the ticket. In the event the goods are lost
or damaged while in possession of the pawnbroker, the pawnbroker shall compensate the pledgor, in cash
or replacement of goods acceptable to pledgor, for the fair market value of the lost or damaged goods.
Proof of compensation shall be a defense to any prosecution or civil action.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.11: Regulation and Licensing of Pawn Brokers 88
6.11.23. MOTOR VEHICLE TITLE PAWN TRANSACTIONS; SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
Subd. 1. In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a pawnbroker who holds a title to a motor
vehicle as part of a pawn transaction shall:
(a) Be licensed as a used motor vehicle dealer under Minnesota Statutes Section 168.27, and
post such license on the pawnshop premises.
(b) Verify that there are no liens or encumbrances against the motor vehicle with the
department of public safety.
(c) Verify that the pledgor has automobile insurance on the motor vehicle as required by law.
Subd. 2. A pawnbroker may not sell a motor vehicle covered by a pawn transaction until 90 days after
recovery of the motor vehicle.
Subd. 3. The pawn of any motor vehicle shall conform with the requirements of M.S. Section 325J.095,
as it may be amended from time to time.
6.11.24. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
Subd. 1. Misdemeanor. A violation of the provisions of this ordinance by a pawnbroker or pledgor is a
misdemeanor.
6.11.25. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
Subd. 1. Hours of Operation. No pawnbroker shall receive a pledge or pawn or purchase any goods
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. on Saturdays and 9:00 a.m. on Monday or between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 9:00 a.m. on any other day of the week.
Subd. 2. Identification Requirements. Each person pawning, pledging or selling items in an
establishment licensed pursuant to this section shall identify himself or herself as provided in this section to
the pawnbroker or pawnbroker's agent accepting the pawn, pledge or sale. Neither the pawnbroker nor any
of his or her agents shall transact any business with any person who fails to identify himself or herself as
provided in this section. Identification shall be made as follows:
A. By a showing of a Minnesota driver's license or non- qualification certificate which shall
have been duly issued to the person presenting it by the state.
B. In the event the person has no Minnesota driver's license or non-qualification certificate,
then by a showing of some other form of identification issued to him or her by a
governmental body which shows either his or her picture or a physical description of him
or her or both.
Subd. 3. The pawnbroker or his or her agent transacting the pawn, pledge or sale shall have the affirmative
duty to compare all pictures, physical descriptions and signatures on the identification presented with the
physical features and signature of the person presenting the identification and shall not transact any
business with any person who appears to be presenting false identification.
6.11.26. SEPARABILITY.
Subd. 1. Council Intent. Should any section, subsection, clause or other provision of this chapter be
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid such decision shall not effect the validity of the
remaining portion of this Section pertaining to the regulation of pawnshops as a whole or any part other
than the part so declared invalid.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.12: Licensing and Regulation of Businesses or Commercial Enterprises Involved 89
in the Process of Tattooing and Body Piercing
SECTION 6.12: LICENSING AND REGULATION OF BUSINESSES OR
COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISES INVOLVED IN THE PROCESS OF
TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING
6.12.01 Purpose. The City Council finds that it is necessary to regulate the business of tattooing and body piercing
in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens and the general public. The City Council finds that
the experience of other cities indicates that there is a connection between tattooing and body piercing, and hepatitis
and other health related problems.
6.12.02 License Required. Effective January 1, 2011, all persons or entities wishing to conduct any activity
defined in Chapter 146B of Minnesota Statutes will be required to obtain a license and the approval of the
Minnesota Department of Health consistent with the general provisions of Chapter 146B and the City hereby cedes
authority to the Department of Health to license and enforce those provisions.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.13: Licensing of Solid Waste and Recycling 90
SECTION 6.13: LICENSING OF SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
6.13.01 Purpose and Application. The Sanitary Board of the Western Lake Superior Sanitary District (the
"District"), which includes the City of Cloquet (the "City") within its boundaries; is empowered by its enabling
legislation to regulate the disposal of Solid Waste within its boundaries; Laws of Minnesota 1989, 1st Special
Session, Chapter 1, (the "Score Legislation"). To reduce the volume of Solid Waste requiring disposal, the Score
Legislation requires the District and other governmental agencies in the State of Minnesota responsible for disposal
of Solid Waste to provide residents an opportunity to recycle which shall include:
A. Local recycling center in the District and sites for collecting recyclable materials that are located
in areas convenient for persons to use them; and,
B. Curbside pickup, centralized drop-off, or a local recycling center for recyclable materials in cities
with a population of 5,000 or more persons.
The District has adopted a Code Relating to Mixed Municipal Solid Waste Management and Recycling which is
effective within the City unless the City adopts an ordinance which: (1) creates a system of licensing Collectors; (2)
regulates rates for collection; (3) mandates collection of Mixed Municipal Solid Waste; (4) provides residents an
opportunity to recycle as required by Minn. Stat. Section 115A.552, Subd. 1 and 2; (5) supplies the District copies of
all license applications for Collectors on a monthly basis; and (6) provides a certified copy of the ordinance to the
District within five (5) days following enactment.
The City supports the goals of the Score Legislation and believes it is in the best interest of its residents to design
methods of accomplishing the goals consistent with factors unique to the City.
6.13.02 Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall be defined as follows, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
Subd. 1 Administrator. "Administrator" shall mean the duly appointed Administrator of the City.
Subd. 2 Ashes. "Ashes" shall mean cinders and all solid products of complete combustion of wood, coal
or other material; provided the same has been completely burned and shall not be mixed with other solid
waste.
Subd. 3 Backyard Compost Site. "Backyard Compost Site" shall mean a site used to compost food
scraps or Yard Waste from a single family or household, apartment building, or a single commercial office.
Subd. 4 Board. " Board" shall mean the Board of the Western Lake Superior Sanitary District.
Subd. 5 Bulky Items. "Bulky Items" shall mean items of Solid Waste which do not fit within a container,
including major appliances.
Subd. 6 City. "City" shall mean the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 7 City Council. "City Council" shall mean the City Council of the City.
Subd. 8 Collector. "Collector" shall mean the person or entity specifically licensed by the City to collect
Garbage, Rubbish, other Mixed Municipal Solid Waste and Recyclable Materials and to dispose of same.
Subd. 9 Composting. "Composting" shall mean the controlled microbial degradation of organic waste to
yield a humus-like product.
Subd. 10 Construction Debris. "Construction Debris" shall mean waste building materials, packaging
and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition of buildings and roads.
Construction Debris does not include Solid Waste or Asbestos Waste.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.13: Licensing of Solid Waste and Recycling 91
Subd. 11 Container. "Container" shall mean a container for Solid Waste which meets the requirements
set forth in this Section.
Subd. 12 District. "District" shall mean the Western Lake Superior Sanitary District.
Subd. 13 Facility. "Facility" shall mean the land, structures, monitoring devices, and other improvements
on the land used for monitoring, treating, processing, storing, or disposing of Solid Waste, leachate, or
residual from Solid Waste processing.
Subd. 14 Garbage. "Garbage" shall mean discarded material resulting from the handling, processing,
storage, preparation, serving, and consumption of food.
Subd. 15 Hazardous Substance. "Hazardous Substance" shall mean:
A. Any commercial chemical designated pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, under United States Code, Title 33, Section 1321(b)(2)(A);
B. Any hazardous air pollutant listed pursuant to the Clean Air Act, under the United States
Code, Title 42, Section 7412; and
C. Any other substance which constitutes a hazardous waste under Minnesota law Section
116. 06, Subdivision 11 or Federal law.
Hazardous Substance shall not include natural gas, natural gas liquids, liquefied natural gas, synthetic gas
usable for fuel, or mixtures of the synthetic gas and natural gas, nor shall it include petroleum, including
crude oil or any fraction thereof which is not otherwise a hazardous waste. Hazardous Substance shall not
include Household Hazardous Waste as defined in this Section.
Subd. 16 Hospital Waste. "Hospital Waste" shall mean all Solid Waste generated by a hospital except
Infectious Waste and Pathological Waste.
Subd. 17 Household Hazardous Waste. "Household Hazardous Waste" shall mean those waste
chemicals and compounds which would be considered Hazardous Substances under State law and are
generated by residential dwelling units.
Subd. 18 Industrial Waste. "Industrial Waste" shall mean all Solid Waste resulting from an industrial,
manufacturing, service or commercial activity that is managed as a separate waste stream.
Subd. 19 Infectious Waste. "Infectious Waste" shall mean laboratory waste, blood, regulated body fluids,
Medical Sharps, and research animal waste that have not been decontaminated. For purposes of this
definition, laboratory waste shall mean waste cultures and stocks of agents that are generated from a
laboratory and are infectious to humans; discarded contaminated items used to inoculate, transfer, or
otherwise manipulate cultures or stocks of agents that are infectious to humans; wastes from the production
of biological agents that are infectious to humans; and discarded live or attenuated vaccines that are
infectious to humans. For purposes of this definition, regulated body human fluids means cerebrospinal
fluid, synovial fluid, pleural fluid, peritoneal fluid, pericardial fluid, and amniotic fluid that are in
containers or that drip freely from body fluid soaked solid waste items. For purposes of this definition,
research animal waste means carcasses, body parts, and blood derived from animals knowingly and
intentionally exposed to agents that are infectious to humans for the purpose of research, production of
biologicals, or testing of pharmaceuticals.
Subd. 20 Institutional Facilities. "Institutional Facilities" shall mean schools, courthouses, hospitals,
"in-house" municipal programs, etc., for collecting Recyclable Materials.
Subd. 21 Major Appliances. "Major Appliances" shall generally have the meaning given it in Minn.
Stat., Section 115A.03, Subd. 17a, and shall also include boilers and commercial furnaces.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.13: Licensing of Solid Waste and Recycling 92
Subd. 22 Medical Sharps. "Medical Sharps" shall mean:
A. Discarded items that can cause subdermal inoculation of infectious agents, including
needles, scalpel blades, pipettes, and other items derived from human or animal patient
care, blood banks, laboratories, mortuaries, research facilities, and industrial operation;
and,
B. Discarded glass or rigid plastic vials containing infectious agents.
Subd. 23 Mixed Municipal Solid Waste. "Mixed Municipal Solid Waste" shall mean garbage, refuse,
and other solid waste from residential, commercial, industrial, and community activities that the generator
of the waste aggregates for collection, but does not include auto hulks, street sweepings, ash, construction
debris, mining waste, sludges, tree and agriculture wastes, tires, lead acid batteries, used oil, and other
materials collected, processed, and disposed of as separate waste streams.
Subd. 24 Owner and Occupant. "Owner" and "Occupant" shall mean the person(s) or entity(s) which
hold legal or beneficial title to a property and the person(s) or entity(s) which have or exercise possession
or occupancy of a property, respectively.
Subd. 25 Pathological Waste. "Pathological Waste" shall mean human tissues and human body parts
removed accidentally or during surgery or autopsy intended for disposal. Pathological waste shall not
include teeth.
Subd. 26 Recyclable Materials. "Recyclable Materials" for purposes of this Section shall mean materials
that are separated from mixed municipal Solid Waste for the purpose of recycling. Recyclable Materials
shall generally have the meaning set forth in Minn. Stat., Section 155A.03. However, the City of Cloquet
acknowledges the need for the Executive Director of the Western Lake Superior Sanitary District to adjust
to changing technology and inter-governmental requirements and, therefore, directs that recyclable
materials for purposes of this Section shall include those materials which the Executive Director deems
necessary and for which the Executive Director has established and posted a list. Each list shall be
effective upon publication once in a newspaper having general circulation within the District.
Subd. 27 Recycling Facility. "Recycling Facility" shall mean a site permitted by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency, used to collect, process, and prepare Recyclable Materials and reuse them in their original
form or use them in manufacturing processes.
Subd. 28 Rubbish. "Rubbish" shall mean non-putrescible solid wastes, including ashes, consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood,
glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind. Rubbish does not include Recyclable Materials.
Subd. 29 Solid Waste. "Solid Waste" shall mean Garbage, Refuse, sludge from a water supply treatment
plant or air contaminant treatment facility and other discarded waste materials and sludges, in solid,
semi-solid, liquid, or contained gaseous form, resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and
agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include hazardous waste; animal waste
used as fertilizer; earthen fill, boulders, rocks; sewage sludge; solid or dissolved material in domestic
sewage or other, pollutants in water resources such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial
wastewater effluents or discharges which are point source subject to permits under Sec. 402 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, dissolved materials in irrigation return flow; or source, special
nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by The Atomic Energy Act of 1954 as amended.
Subd. 30 Solid Waste Collection Officer. "Solid Waste Collection Officer" shall mean the City official
or employee designated by the Council to administer this Section.
Subd. 31 Unacceptable Waste. "Unacceptable Waste" shall mean Solid Waste designated as
Unacceptable Waste by regulation of the District.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.13: Licensing of Solid Waste and Recycling 93
Subd. 32 Yard Waste. "Yard Waste" shall mean garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds and
prunings generated at residential or commercial properties.
Subd. 33 Yard Waste Compost Facility. "Yard Waste Compost Facility" shall mean a site used for the
Composting of Yard Waste which is (I) operated by the District or the City or (ii) operated by a private
person or entity and permitted by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency to accept Yard Waste.
6.13.03 Licensing Collectors of Solid Waste and Recyclable Materials. For the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the City, the following regulations applicable to all Mixed Municipal Solid Waste removal and disposal
and handling of Recyclable Materials shall be continued:
Subd. 1 Collector's License Required. No person shall engage in the business of collecting or removing
Garbage, Rubbish, other Mixed Municipal Solid Waste and Recyclable Materials within the City without
first obtaining a license to do so. Charitable, religious, fraternal and other eleemosynary organizations may
collect Recyclable Materials without compliance with this section.
The Administrator shall be empowered to issue the licenses, upon approval by the City Council, after the person or
entity seeking the license has proved compliance with the provisions of this section.
Subd. 2 License Application. All persons or entities applying for a Collector's license, as set forth above
shall be required to provide to the Administrator, with the license application, the following:
A. A letter of certification signed by the Applicant verifying that the vehicle(s) to be utilized
for collection conform to the requirements of the District and the City. Vehicular
requirements of the City, if any, shall be recommended by the Chief of Police, and if
adopted by the City Council, added to this Section as amendments. Pending adoption of
any vehicular requirements by the City, the vehicular requirements of the District shall be
applicable in the City.
B. Certificate(s) of an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of
Minnesota certifying (I) that each vehicle used by the applicant or its agents is insured by
the company in the amount of Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily
injuries to any person, One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injuries in any one
accident, and One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage in
any one accident; and (ii) that the applicant is insured by the company under a
comprehensive general liability policy in the amount of One Million Dollars
($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury in any one year and One Hundred Thousand Dollars
($100,000.00) for property damage in any one year. The insurance shall not be subject
to cancellation or modification without fifteen (15) days written notice to the City.
Subd 3. License Fee. No license shall be issued under this section until the appropriate license fee shall
be paid in full. The fee for license under this section shall be established by resolution as adopted from
time to time by the City Council.
Subd. 4. License Term. Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of time of one year. All such
licenses under this article shall expire on December 31st of each calendar year or portion thereof.
Subd. 5. Transfers. No license shall be transferred or sold. No refund shall be made for the unexpired
portion of any license surrendered to the City or revoked as provided in this section.
Subd. 6. Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be handled in the same
manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days but no
more than sixty (60) days before the expiration of the current license.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.13: Licensing of Solid Waste and Recycling 94
Subd. 7 Approval. Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Administrator shall forward the
application to the City Council for action at its next regularly scheduled Council meeting. If the
Administrator shall determine that an application is incomplete, the Administrator shall return the
application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete.
Subd. 8 Issuance of License. Upon receipt and approval by the City Council of the application, the City
Administrator shall issue a license to the applicant in conformity to and with the provisions of this section.
Subd. 9 Continuing Obligations of Licensee. All Collectors, in addition to any other requirements
contained in this Section, shall comply with the following:
A. All vehicles used by the Collectors shall be inspected on a semiannual basis by the
Minnesota State Patrol, Commercial Vehicle Inspection Division or any State certified or
State approved inspector. Inspection reports shall be forwarded to the Solid Waste
Collection Officer. The Collector shall maintain the vehicles in good repair and shall
comply with all laws, rules and regulations applicable to the vehicles.
B. Insurance specified in this Section shall be maintained and the Collector shall provide
evidence of maintenance of insurance upon request by the Administrator.
C. Any Collector shall notify the Administrator in writing within thirty (30) days of any
change in ownership, name or location of business offices.
D. Any Collector shall notify the Administrator in writing immediately upon loss of liability
insurance coverage.
E. A Collector shall accept assignment of collection duties for residential and commercial
structures as provided in this Section.
Subd. 10 Suspension of License. Any license issued pursuant to this Section may be suspended for not
longer than sixty (60) days by the City Council for violation of any provision of this Section. Suspension
shall not occur earlier than ten (10) calendar days after written notice of suspension has been personally
served on the Collector, or, if a hearing is requested, until the written decision of the City Council has been
served on the Collector by certified mail with return receipt. The written notice shall contain the effective
date of suspension, the nature of the violation or violations constituting the basis for the suspension, the
facts which support the conclusion that a violation or violations have occurred and a statement that the
Collector shall be entitled to a hearing provided that it request the hearing in writing by serving the request
personally on the City Council within ten (10) calendar days of service of the notice, exclusive of the day
of service. If the Collector fails to request a hearing within the time prescribed, it shall forfeit any right to a
public hearing. Following receipt of a request for a hearing, the City Council shall set a hearing date which
shall be set at a time convenient for the City Council. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the
procedures established in Chapter 15. If the suspension is upheld and the Collector has not demonstrated
within the sixty (60) day period that full compliance with this Section has been attained and that the
compliance shall be continued, the City Council may serve Notice of Suspension once again or initiate the
revocation procedures in this Section.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.13: Licensing of Solid Waste and Recycling 95
Subd. 11 Revocation of License. Any license issued pursuant to this Section may be revoked by the City
Council for violation of any provision of this Code. Without excluding other sufficient grounds for
revocation, the filing of an application containing any statement of information known to the applicant to
be false, the failure to comply with any rule or requirement in this Section or the failure to remain in
compliance with Federal or State laws, rules or regulations shall each be sufficient cause for revocation.
Revocation shall not occur earlier than ten (10) calendar days after written notice of revocation has been
personally served on the Collector, or, if a hearing is requested, until the written decision of the City
Council has been served on the Collector by registered mail. The written notice shall contain the effective
date of the revocation, the nature of the violation or violations constituting the basis for revocation, the
facts which support the conclusions that a violation or violations have occurred, and a statement that the
Collector shall be entitled to a hearing provided that it request the hearing in writing by serving the request
personally on the City Council within ten (10) calendar days of service of the notice, exclusive of the day
of service. If the Collector fails to request a hearing within the time prescribed, it shall forfeit any right to a
public hearing. Upon receipt of a written request of a hearing, the City Council shall set a hearing not
earlier than ten (10) days and not later than thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the request.
Subd. 12 Hearing. Whenever a hearing shall be requested in regard to an application, renewal,
suspension or revocation of a license, the hearing shall be governed by the procedures as set forth in
Chapter 15 of this Code.
Subd. 13 Removal of Suspension. In the case of suspension, upon written notification from the Collector
that all violations for which the suspension was invoked have been corrected, the City shall re-inspect the
licensee within five (5) working days after receipt of the notice from the Collector. If the City finds on the
re-inspection that the violations constituting the grounds for suspension have been corrected, the City shall
immediately terminate the suspension by written notice to the Collector and the City Council.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.14: Licensing of Excavation Work on Public Property 96
SECTION 6.14: LICENSING OF EXCAVATION WORK ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
6.14.01 Definitions. The following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given
them in this subsection. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future,
words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given
their common and ordinary meaning.
Subd. 1 "City" shall mean the City of Cloquet, Minnesota.
Subd. 2. "City Attorney" shall mean that person designated by the City Council as the City Attorney.
Subd. 3. "City Council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 4. "City Engineer" shall mean that person designated by the City Council as the City Engineer.
Subd. 5. "City Superintendent" shall mean that person designated by the City Council as the City Street
Superintendent.
Subd. 6. "Excavating contractor" shall mean any person who shall be issued an excavating contractor
license pursuant to this section.
Subd. 7. "Excavating contractor license" shall mean the annual license required to be
obtained by an excavating contractor under this section.
Subd. 8. "Excavating permit" shall mean the permit required to be obtained by a licensed excavating
contractor under this section before the excavating contractor performs any work in any City street.
Subd. 9. "Person" shall mean any corporation, partnership, proprietorship or any natural person.
Subd. 10. "Public property" shall mean any real property owned by the City or any other governmental
unit, other than a street.
Subd. 11. "Public utility" shall mean the companies providing basic utility services to the community
which include, but are not limited to, Minnesota Power, Aquila, Mediacom and various phone companies.
Subd. 12. "Street" shall mean the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road,
cartway, col de sac, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way, alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway,
drive or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by the City.
6.14.02 Excavating Contractor License and Excavating Permits Required. No person shall make any
excavation for any purpose or perform any other construction work in any street or on any public property without
first having applied for and obtained an excavating contractor license and an excavating permit covering the work to
be performed. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, no excavating contractor's license
or permit shall be required for any work performed on behalf of the City by any employee of the City; any work
performed by any person for the purpose of completing a contract awarded by the City; or work performed by or on
behalf of any public utility, provided that the public utility shall have complied with all other applicable Code or
Ordinances, regulations and franchise or other agreements between the public utility and the City.
6.14.03 Fees.
Subd. 1. Excavating Contractor License. The fee for an excavating contractor license shall be $100 but
may be modified by resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council. License fees shall not be
prorated for fractions of a year.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.14: Licensing of Excavation Work on Public Property 97
Subd. 2. Excavating Permit Fee. The fee for an excavating permit shall be $10 but may be modified by
resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council for each excavating permit issued by the City
Superintendent under this section.
Subd. 3. City Engineer Fee. Where any work done pursuant to an excavating permit requires an
inspection from the City Engineer, the excavating contractor, as a condition to the issuance of an
excavating permit, shall agree to pay the cost incurred by the City in connection with the City Engineer
inspecting the work. The City Superintendent may require, as a condition to issuing an excavating permit to
an excavating contractor in such situation, that the excavating contractor deposit an amount of cash equal to
an estimate made by the City Engineer of the costs of inspecting the work.
6.14.04 Excavating Contractor License.
Subd. 1. Application. Any person desiring to obtain an excavating contractor's license shall make written
application to the City Superintendent for the license on a form provided by the City Superintendent.
Subd. 2. Procedure. Upon presentation to the City Superintendent of an application for an excavating
contractor license, the City Superintendent shall issue the excavating contractor license to the applicant
upon the applicant filing with the City Superintendent the bond and insurance certificates required under
this section in form and substance acceptable to the City Attorney, and paying the required license fee.
Subd. 3. Excavations Permitted. An excavating contractor license shall entitle the holder thereof to
engage in the business of making excavations or performing other work in any street or public property,
subject to the provisions of this section and subject to the provisions of other applicable Code or
Ordinances, laws, rules and regulations.
Subd. 4. Excavating Permit Required. The holder of an excavating contractor license shall be required to
obtain an excavating permit for any excavation or work performed in any street or public property, in
addition to the excavating contractor license.
A. Bond Required.
1. With each application for an excavating contractor license, the applicant shall
file with the City Superintendent a surety bond in the amount of $5,000 in favor
of the City. The required surety bond shall be:
a. With good and sufficient surety by a surety company authorized to do
business in the State of Minnesota;
b. Satisfactory to the City Attorney in form and substance;
c. Conditioned that the applicant shall faithfully comply with all the terms
and conditions of this section; all other applicable rules, regulations and
requirements of the City or any other governmental body;
d. Conditioned that the applicant shall secure and hold the City and its
officers harmless against any and all claims, judgments or other costs
arising out of any work performed pursuant to the excavating
contractor license or any excavating permit issued to the applicant
pursuant to this section or for which the City, the City Council or any
City officer or employee may be made liable by reason of any accident
or injury to persons or property through the fault of the applicant;
e. Conditioned that the applicant in all material, equipment and appliances
furnished by him or her, and in all work done or performed by him or
her, or all work to be performed, which shall be subject to the provision
of this section, shall fully conform to the revisions of this section.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.14: Licensing of Excavation Work on Public Property 98
2. With each application for an excavating contractor license, the applicant shall
file with the City Superintendent a certificate of an insurance company duly
authorized by the laws of the state to transact business as an insurance company,
duly certifying to the fact that the applicant shall have in force with the company
a comprehensive general liability policy, including completed operations,
products liability coverage and collapse and underground property damage
coverage to cover applicant's operations under the excavating contractor license.
If any excavating permit is issued that authorizes blasting, the insurance policy
shall have explosion, collapse and underground property damage coverage in
addition to the coverage stated above.
3. All policies shall have a combined single limit of coverage of at least the same
as the statutory tort liability limits of the city or $1,000,000 for any one incident
and shall name the City of Cloquet as an additional insured.
4. The certificates of insurance shall be approved as to form, correctiveness and
validity by the City Attorney.
B. Cancellation Requirements of Bond; Insurance.
1. The insurance certificates required shall contain the following provision: "The
above-described policies shall not be canceled, materially altered or not renewed
unless 30 days written notice of the cancellation, material alteration or
non-renewal shall be given to the City."
2. The bond required by this section shall be non- cancellable and shall be for a
term extending one year beyond the expiration date of the excavating contractor
license for which the bond was filed.
C. Expiration of Licenses. All excavating contractor licenses issued pursuant to this section
shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year for which it was issued.
D. Use of Licenses; Subletting.
1. No person licensed under this section who has been issued an excavating permit
for a particular job shall sublet or assign any work contemplated by the
excavating permit to any person not licensed under this section, and any such
attempted subletting or assignment shall be void.
2. In the event the person holding any excavating permit sublets any portion of the
work to be done under the excavating permit to any other person holding an
excavating contractor license, the person holding the excavating permit shall
remain responsible for the completion of all work under the excavating permit in
accordance with the provisions of this section, and he or she and the person so
doing the work shall be subject to prosecution for the violation of any provision
of this section.
E. Maintenance of Bond and Insurance. If any person to whom an excavating contractor
license has been issued pursuant to this section fails to maintain in full force and effect
the bond and insurance required by this section, the excavating contractor license issued
to the person shall become void immediately upon the bond or insurance ceasing to be in
full force and effect.
F. Fraud or Error in Issuance. Any excavating contractor license issued shall be null and
void if the license was obtained through fraud or error.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.14: Licensing of Excavation Work on Public Property 99
6.14.05 Excavating Permit.
Subd. 1. Permits. Any person holding an excavating contractor license issued pursuant to this section
shall obtain all required permits from the City and other appropriate government units before commencing
any work on any street or public property.
Subd. 2. Procedure for Excavating Permit.
A. Application. Any person holding an excavating contractor license who desires to obtain
an excavating permit shall make written application to the City Superintendent for the
permit on a form provided for such purpose by the City Superintendent.
B. Procedure. Upon presentation to the City Superintendent of an application for an
excavating permit, the City Superintendent shall issue the permit to the applicant if the
applicant has an excavating contractor license in full force and effect, pays the required
permit fee and if the work to be done pursuant to the permit complies with all applicable
codes, rules and regulations.
C. Excavation Permit. An excavating permit shall entitle the holder thereof to perform the
work described on the permit.
D. Other Requirements; Card with Permit Number; Posting.
1. The City Superintendent, before granting an excavating permit, may require the
applicant to furnish a drawing of the area proposed to be excavated, occupied or
obstructed in any street or public property and an estimate of the length of time
of the excavation, occupation or obstruction.
2. The City Superintendent, at the time of granting an excavating permit, shall
assign to the applicant a number, and shall give to the applicant a card or board
upon which shall be plainly written or printed, in letters at least one inch high,
the following: "Street Department Permit No.____________
Expires___________." In the first blank space shall be inserted the number of
the permit. After the word "Expires," the time when the permit expires shall be
stated. Any person receiving the permit shall keep posted in a conspicuous place
at the excavation or obstruction the card or board. No person or his or her agents
shall misstate upon any such board or card the number of the permit or the time
when the permit expires.
E. Additional Authorization Required for Work on Water and Sewer Mains. If the
application for an excavating permit under this section is for excavations to be used for
the purpose of making water or sewer connections to City water or sewer mains, prior
approval must be obtained from the City Engineer. All work done and materials used in
installing the connections shall conform to the rules, regulations and specifications as
required by the City Engineer as of the date of the commencement of the work.
F. Blasting. If blasting is to be performed in conjunction with any excavating or work
performed pursuant to an excavating permit issued pursuant to this section, the
excavating permit shall state on the face of the permit that the permit authorizes blasting
provided other required permits have been obtained from all other appropriate
governmental units and agencies.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.14: Licensing of Excavation Work on Public Property 100
6.14.06 Suspension and Revocation of Licenses. Upon notice to the City Council that a person holding an
excavating contractor license has been convicted of a violation of this section, and that the conviction has become
final, the City Council may suspend the person's excavating contractor license for such period of time as the City
Council may deem proper under the circumstances, or the City Council may revoke said excavating contractor
license and order that no new excavating contractor license shall be granted to the person for a period not to exceed
six months from the date that the action is ordered by the Council.
6.14.07 Notice of Hearing upon Revocation. Before the City Council shall revoke any excavating contractor
license, the person holding the excavating contractor license shall be entitled to a hearing by the City Council upon
ten days written notice to the person holding the excavating contractor license by regular mail addressed to that
person's place of business, or by serving notice upon the person holding the excavating contractor license in the
manner prescribed by statute for serving summons in the district court.
6.14.08 Hold Harmless Agreement. The person holding any excavating contractor license or excavating permit
shall defend, indemnify and secure and hold the City and its officers harmless against any and all claims, judgments
or other costs arising from the excavation and other work covered by an excavating permit issued to the person to
whom the permit was issued or for which the City, the City Council or any City officer or employee may be made
liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the person to whom the
excavating permit was issued for the work giving rise to the injury or damage either in not properly guarding the
excavation or for any other injury resulting from the negligence of the person to whom the excavating permit was
issued. In the event of any suit or claim against the City by reason of the negligence or default of the person to
whom the excavating permit was issued for the work giving rise to the injury or damage, upon the City giving
written notice to the person to whom the excavating permit was issued for the work giving rise to the injury or
damage of the suit or claim, any final judgment against the City requiring it to pay for the damage shall be
conclusive upon the person to whom the excavating permit was issued for the work giving rise to the injury or
damage.
6.14.09 City Liability. This section shall not be construed as imposing upon the City or any official or employee of
the City of any liability or responsibility for damages to any person imposed by the performance of any work for
which an excavating permit shall be issued under this section; nor shall the City or any official or employee of the
City be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of any inspections authorized under
this section or the issuance of any licenses or permits under this section.
6.14.10 Other Regulations.
(See Chapter 9: Public Works Section 9.1 Street Excavation;
and Chapter 14: Public Property Section 14.1 - Use of Public Property)
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.15: Hunting Deer by Bow and Arrow in Cloquet City Limits 101
SECTION 6.15 - HUNTING DEER BY BOW AND ARROW IN CLOQUET CITY LIMITS
6.15.01. Definitions.
A. "Bow and arrow” means a bow and arrow which is held and used manually.
B. "Hunt" or "hunting" means the taking, pursuing, stalking, chasing, driving or tracking of deer
while in possession of a bow and arrow.
6.15.02 Prohibitions Against Hunting: Discharge of Bow and Arrow. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be
unlawful to hunt or discharge any bow and arrow within the City limits.
A. The hunting or discharge of a bow and arrow is permitted within the areas of the City as provided
in this section upon securing a permit to do so from the City. An application for such permit shall
be obtained from the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative. The permitted areas in
which a permit holder will be allowed to hunt are as follows:
1. In any platted or un-platted portion of the City in specific hunting zones approved by the
City Council and in such other areas outside of those zones as are annually and
specifically approved by the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative which
are deemed safe for such activity.
6.15.03. No bow and arrow shall be discharged in any of the following areas within the permitted hunting areas:
A. Within any park or industrial park located in the City unless specifically allowed;
B. Within 250 feet of any dwelling or other building (residential or commercial) occupied by or
intended for human habitation;
C. Within 500 feet of any property owned by Independent School District No. 94, the Cloquet School
District;
D. On any other land owned by the City of Cloquet other than parcels on which hunting is
particularly permitted;
E. Within 100 feet of any publicly maintained City trail or improved public roadway.
6.15.04. No hunting of bears with a bow and arrow shall be allowed within the City.
6.15.05. No hunter shall attempt to shoot a deer that is beyond the effective range of the bow being discharged by
that particular hunter.
6.15.06. Each hunter must repair or pay for any damage to the property of another that arises from his/her hunting
activities and the use of ATV’s is not permitted.
6.15.07. No carcass or entrails shall be allowed to remain in open view to the public.
6.15.08. Any hunter that is successful in taking a deer with a bow and arrow within the City shall report that fact to
the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative within 24 hours after taking the deer. In addition to any
other remedies available to the City, no permit shall be issued to any hunter who has failed to report the taking of a
deer in any prior year.
6.15.09. In addition to reporting harvested deer to the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative, the
hunter must also register his/her harvested deer with the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources through the
Big Game Registration process as prescribed by Minnesota State law.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.15: Hunting Deer by Bow and Arrow in Cloquet City Limits 102
6.15.10. A hunter may hunt within the permitted areas only on the land described on the application made by the
hunter for a permit under this section and only on lands as permitted by the City Council. The applications for
permits and the number of hunters allowed per permitted zone will be determined and limited by the Chief. If the
number of applications for permits exceeds the number of permits available, the Chief my give preference to
residents of the City of Cloquet.
6.15.11. The City of Cloquet requires hunters to first harvest, register through the State of Minnesota - DNR Big
Game Registration Process, and report to the Chief of Police and/ or his or her designee one (1) antler-less deer (as
defined by the State of Minnesota - "those without an antler at least three inches long") prior to being allowed to
harvest an antlered buck. Harvesting more than one antler-less deer is encouraged. The Chief of Police and/or his or
her designee will also check hunter records through the State of Minnesota registration process to confirm the
harvest of antler-less deer.
6.15.12. The City of Cloquet hunt shall run concurrent with the State of Minnesota's archery hunting season.
6.15.13. Exceptions.
A. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the discharge of any bow and arrow when
discharged within a "bow and arrow" practice' range or facility.
B. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the use of any bow and arrow in the lawful
defense of the person, property, family or in the defense or enforcement of the laws of the City,
county, state or United States.
C. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the use of any bow and arrow for archery practice.
D. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the taking of deer by the Chief of Police or his or
her designee by the use of any bow and arrow or any other weapon authorized by the Chief of
Police or his or her designee, provided, that such taking of deer is made in compliance with all
other applicable State laws, rules or regulations.
6.15.14. Chief of Police to Report.
A. The Chief of Police shall regularly provide a report to the Council with respect to the operation
and effect of this section.
B. This report shall include the number of deer taken, a description of any incidents, conf1icts or
problems that occurred with respect to this section during the preceding bow-hunting season and
any recommendations for the modifications or the continuation of this section.
6.15.15. Penalty for Violations
A. Any violation of this ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall also entitle the Chief to
permanently terminate the violating hunter’s privilege to hunt within the City of Cloquet.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.16: Regulation and Licensing of Bowling Alleys 103
SECTION 6.16: REGULATION AND LICENSING OF BOWLING ALLEYS
6.16.01 Applicability and Purpose.
Subd. 1 Purpose. The purpose of this Section shall be to establish municipal regulatory powers which
will allow the City to regulate bowling alley activities in furtherance of the City’s interest to promote the
public health, safety, morals and welfare relating to the existence and operation of public bowling alleys.
Subd. 2 Intent. The intent of this Section shall be:
A. To regulate bowling alleys located and operated in the City.
B. To provide for administrative procedures as shall be necessary for implementation of the
various provisions of this Section.
C. To provide for administrative fees and penalties necessary for the enforcement of this
Section.
6.16.02 Business License Required. No person shall own, operate or permit operation of a bowling alley on any
part of the premises owned, leased or operated by him/her or engage in the business of operating a bowling alley in
the City without being licensed by the City pursuant to this section.
6.16.03 Application and Procedure.
Subd. 1 Application. Every application for a license shall be made to the City Administrator on a form
provided by the City. It shall be accompanied by payment to the City Administrator of the required license
fee.
Subd. 2 Content. The application for a license under this Section shall, at a minimum, contain the
following information:
A. The name and address of the owner or owners of the property in which the bowling alley
is located.
B. The name and address of the person or persons who intend to operate the bowling alley.
C. Names and addresses of any and all other persons having any ownership interest in the
premise upon which the bowling alley shall be located, any ownership interest in the
business that is being conducted upon the premise.
D. The location of the bowling alley and legal description of premise to be licensed.
E. Evidence that the applicant and property being licensed are not delinquent in property
taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the City.
6.16.04 Insurance. A licensee of any bowling alley shall be required to have in force a policy of liability
insurance. Satisfactory evidence of coverage by insurance shall be filed with the City Administrator before the
license shall be issued. Unless otherwise provided in this Section, a required policy of liability insurance shall
provide for protection in at least the following amounts:
A. For injuries, including death there from, sustained by any one person - $100,000.00
B. For property damage - $10,000.00
6.16.05 License Terms and Fees.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.16: Regulation and Licensing of Bowling Alleys 104
Subd. 1 License Fee. Each applicant shall pay an annual license fee for each bowling alley business. The
amount of the license fee for each shall be established by resolution as adopted by the City Council from
time to time.
Subd. 2 License Term. Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of time of one year. All
licenses shall expire on the last day of June of each calendar year regardless of when the license was issued.
Subd. 3 License Transfers. No license shall be transferred or sold. No refund shall be made for the
unexpired portion of any license surrendered to the City or revoked as provided in this section.
Subd. 4 Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be handled in the same manner
as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days but no more
than sixty (60) days before the expiration of the current license.
6.16.06 Inspection. Any premise proposed to be licensed shall be first inspected by the City’s building official,
police department, and/or fire department. The premise must comply with all applicable building codes, fire codes,
and health codes of the City of Cloquet, Carlton County and State of Minnesota.
6.16.07 Approval. If, after investigation, the City Administrator and the Chief of Police are satisfied that all
requirements of law and this Code have been met, he or she shall present the application to the City Council for
action.
6.16.08 Issuance of License. Upon receipt and approval by the City Council of the application, the City
Administrator shall issue the appropriate license to the applicant in conformity to and with the provisions of this
Section. The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises.
6.16.09 Capacity To Be Posted. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to see that the licensed premises shall
not become overcrowded so as to constitute a hazard to the health or safety of persons on the premises. The City
fire chief, or designee, may designate the maximum number of persons to be permitted on the licensed premises.
Such facility shall post the capacity limitation for their premise in a conspicuous place.
6.16.10 Conduct Of Business.
Subd. 1. Truants. Truants from school shall not be permitted to enter and remain on the premises.
Subd. 2. Curfew. No person violating any curfew law or ordinance shall be permitted to enter or remain
on the licensed premises.
Subd. 3. Unlawful Purpose. No person soliciting to or any other unlawful purpose shall be permitted to
enter or remain on the licensed premises.
Subd. 4. Controlled Substances. No person selling, transferring, giving, using or in possession of any
controlled substance as defined by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 152 shall be permitted to enter or remain on
the premises or remain in the area directly adjacent to premises.
Subd. 5. Harassment. No person shall be permitted to harass, threaten or annoy any persons including
the use of profanity, and obscene or indecent language.
Subd. 6. Gambling. No person shall be permitted to use the premises for gambling or for the making of
bets or wagers.
6.16.11 Persons On Duty. There shall be on duty at all times that the operation of a bowling alley is open to the
public, an adult operator or manager who understands the operation of all equipment on the premises. It shall be the
duty of the licensee and his/her manager(s) to remain on the premises at all times and enforce the provision of
Section 6.16.10 above.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 6 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section 6.16: Regulation and Licensing of Bowling Alleys 105
6.16.12 Suspension And Revocation. If an owner or operator and/or anyone under their direction is convicted of
any violation of any of the ordinances of the City of Cloquet or the laws of the State of Minnesota in connection
with the operation of said bowling alley, the City Council may revoke said license or cause the same to be
suspended for a time to be determined by the Council based upon the severity of the violation.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
1
CHAPTER 7. PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section 7.1: General Provisions
7.1.01 Public Nuisance Defined. Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty
intentionally does any of the following shall be guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which
shall be punishable as a misdemeanor:
A. Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys or endangers the
safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable number of members
of the public; or
B. Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage, any public highway or
right of way, or waters used by the public; or
C. Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or this Section to be a public
nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically provided; or
D. Is guilty of any violation of State law included in Minnesota Statutes 609.74, the
same being incorporated in this Section by reference.
State law references: Public Nuisance, Minn. Stats. §609.74.
7.1.02 Public Nuisances Affecting Health. The following shall be hereby declared to be
nuisances affecting health:
A. Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable matter;
B. All diseased animals running at large;
C. All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
D. Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within twenty-four (24) hours after
death;
E. Excessive accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;
F. Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent free or fly tight or which are so
maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and disagreeable odors;
G. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or body of water
by sewage, industrial waste, or other substances;
H. All excessive accumulations of noxious weeds and non-native vegetation and
other rank growths of vegetation upon public or private property;
I. Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities;
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
2
J. All public exposure of persons knowingly having a dangerous contagious disease;
K. Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not licensed by the Carlton
County Board of Health as defined by law;
L. All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public;
M. All excavations made for foundations, basements, wells, or any other purposes
which are permitted to remain uncovered or protected so as to be accessible to
children or to the public, except when the same is made for purposes of
construction which is in progress. In situations where construction is in progress,
the owner or contractor shall exercise all reasonable methods to prevent
accessibility to the sites by children or the general public;
N. All other acts, omissions of acts, occupations and uses of property which are
deemed by the Board of Health or the City Inspector to be a menace to the health
of any inhabitant or inhabitants of this City, or any considerable number thereof.
7.1.03 Public Nuisances Affecting Morals and Decency. The following shall be hereby
declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
A. All unlawful and unlicensed gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards;
B. Betting through bookmaking and all apparatus used in the operations;
C. All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse,
gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
D. All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in violation of
law or where, in violation of law, persons are permitted to resort for the purpose
of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or
other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and other property used for
maintaining such a place;
E. Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating liquor, or for
promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal purpose.
7.1.04 Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety. The following shall be declared to be
nuisances affecting public peace and safety;
A. All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons from
having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection which have been
identified by the City Inspector or a peace officer as posing a danger to safety;
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
3
B. All limbs of trees which are less than eight (8) feet above the surface of any public
sidewalk or less than nine (9) feet above the surface of any street, and all other
limbs or trees which are so close to the surface of the sidewalk or street so as to
constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles as identified by the City Inspector or
a peace officer;
C. All wires which are strung upon streets, alleys or highways less than fifteen (15)
feet above the surface of the ground;
D. All unnecessary excessive noises and annoying vibrations as deemed such by a
peace officer;
E. Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of streets,
alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under such conditions as shall be
permitted by this Code or other applicable law;
F. Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a dangerous manner;
G. Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public
street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing
traffic and the free uses of the streets or sidewalks unless authorized by the City
Council or its authorized agent;
H. All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets and sidewalks,
or so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed and maintained as
provided by Code;
I. The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or structure upon
any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk such that it creates a
hazardous risk to members of the public in the opinion of a peace officer;
J. Any barbed wire fence less than six (6) feet above the ground and within three (3)
feet of a public sidewalk or right of way;
K. All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated or
operated on private property as to attract the public;
L. Wastewater cast upon or permitted to flow upon the streets or other public
property;
M. Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, abandoned
vehicles, household appliances, excess refuse, non-licensed automobile bodies,
non-running vehicles, not worked on for a length of time, or not more than one of
these vehicles per property, or other material, in a manner conducive to the
harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or to fire, health or safety hazards from
such accumulation or from the rank growth of excessive or noxious vegetation
among the items so accumulated;
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
4
N. Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in such other
condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or third person coming onto the
premises where it is located;
O. Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public street drain,
gutter or ditch with trash or other materials;
P. The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public property of any
glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substances which may injure any person or
animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over the item or substance;
Q. The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on adjacent
private property;
R. All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay
or otherwise, to the extent exceeding one-half the original value, and which are so
situated as to endanger the safety of the public;
S. All other objectionable conditions or things as determined by a peace officer
which are likely to cause injury to the person or the property of anyone.
T. Strewing, scattering, littering, throwing or disposing of any garbage or refuse onto
any premises except into receptacles provided for such purposes.
U. Blocking the doorway of any building, or standing, sitting, lying down upon the
steps, window sills, railing, fence, entry area, patio or parking area adjacent to any
building in such a manner as to obstruct or partially obstruct ingress to or egress
from such building or obstruct or partially obstruct use of the parking area, patio,
or entry area of such building.
V. Obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic or otherwise causing an obstruction or
interference with premises or rendering any premise danger for passage, unless
done for the sole purpose of facilitating public safety in cases of emergency.
W. Failing or refusing to vacate or leave any dangerous or unsafe premises after being
requested or ordered, either orally, in writing or by posted sign, to do so by the
owner, agent, manager or person in charge thereof, or by any law enforcement
agent or official, and also the return at any time thereafter to any such premises
after having been so requested or ordered to vacate or leave such premises.
X. For the purposes of this section, premises shall include any yard, lot, parcel,
sidewalk, boulevard, street, highway, alley, park, playground, restaurant, café,
church, school, any car or other motor vehicle, parking lot, drive-in, building used
for business, commercial or industrial purposes, washroom, restroom, or lavatory,
apartment hallway or other location whether public or private in the City.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
5
Y. Races the motor of any motor vehicle so as to cause unnecessary and unreasonable
noise. Violations of this provision shall constitute a petty misdemeanor and may
in the discretion of a peace officer be treated as an administrative offense.
Z. Causes, produces or creates any unnecessary and unreasonable noise by shouting,
by mechanical means, by the blowing of motor vehicle horns, or by other similar
noise. Violations of this provisions shall constitute a petty misdemeanor and may,
in the discretion of a peace officer be treated as an administrative offense.
AA. Improper or annoying use of spot lights by focusing them onto persons or
premises constitutes a petty misdemeanor of an administrative offense in the
discretion of a peace officer;
BB. Using profane, abusive, indecent or threatening language in public constitutes a
petty misdemeanor or city administrative offense in the discretion of a peace
officer.
(Ordinance No. 166A, 120A, 40A)
7.1.05 Prohibited Attractive Nuisances. No person within the City shall keep a dwelling,
gaming area, party room or meeting area which attracts people to the neighborhood at times or in
such a manner that their arrival or leaving or activities while in the neighborhood results in an
unreasonable disturbance of the peace, quiet, comfort or decency of the neighborhood. Nor shall
any person, his or her agent or owner, let a building or portion thereof, knowing it is intended to
be used for any purpose prohibited by this Section or permit a building, or any portion thereof, to
be used for any such prohibited purpose. A violation of this Subpart shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ordinance No. 180A, 40A)
7.1.06 Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor unless otherwise specifically indicated to be a petty misdemeanor or administrative
violation. Each day of violation shall be a separate and distinct violation of this Section. In
addition to any penalty assessed upon conviction, the City can seek abatement as provided herein
and may seek reimbursement for all costs necessarily incurred in abating the nuisance as
permitted by law.
Section 7.1.07 Abatement of a Public Nuisance. Upon being cited by a police officer or
designated agent of the City of maintaining a public nuisance in violation of this section, the City
Attorney will be notified. If the City Attorney has reason to believe, based upon the evidence,
that a nuisance condition exists and determines that abatement is necessary, the City Attorney
will provide written notice consistent with Minn. Stat. §617.81 of the conditions to be abated. If
the conditions identified are not abated within thirty (30) days of the service of said notice, a
complaint seeking judicial relief consistent with the provisions of Minn. Stat. §617.80 to §617.87
may be sought in District Court.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
6
Subd. 1. Immediate Abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the City, with or
without notice, of immediately abating a condition which poses an imminent and serious
hazard to human life or safety.
Subd. 2. Recovery of Costs. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been
abated by the City consistent with this section shall be personally liable for the costs
incurred by the City to abate the nuisance condition, including administrative costs. As
soon as the work has been completed and the cost determined, the City Administrator (or
his/her designee) shall prepare a bill and mail it to the owner by certified mail.
Thereupon the amount due shall be immediately due and payable at City Hall.
(A) Assessment of Unpaid Costs. If the costs of abatement remain unpaid, the
City Administrator shall, on or before November 30th next following the
abatement, list the total unpaid costs along with all other charges (as well as other
charges for current services to be assessed under Minn. Stat. §429.101 as it may
be amended from time to time) against each separate lot or parcel to which
charges are attributable. As authorized by the City Council, any amounts assessed
may be spread against such property for certification to the County Auditor for
collection with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not
exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
7
Section 7.2: Public Health and Safety Concerns Involving Grass, Weeds and Trees
7.2.01 Definitions.
A. Street Trees. "Street Trees" shall be defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all
other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines or within the rightof-
way lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the City.
B. Park Trees. "Park Trees" shall be defined as trees, shrubs, bushes and all other
wood vegetation in public parks or areas owned by the City not defined as "Street
Trees".
C. Grass. Any natural occurring or seeded or sodded vegetative ground cover that
does not include “noxious weeds” as defined by state statute or Anatural area@ as
defined in this section.
D. Noxious Weeds. “Noxious weeds” means an annual, biennial, or perennial plant
that the commissioner of agriculture designates to be injurious to public health,
the environment, public roads, crops, livestock, or person or property.
(Minn. Stat. §18.77 Subd. 8).
E. Natural Area. An area that does not include noxious weeds and that is purposely
left to grow in a natural state and contains vegetation that can maintain itself in a
stable condition.
F. Weed Inspector. The individual designated by the City Administrator to
undertake the responsibilities of inspecting conditions to determine a violation of
this section.
G. Heavily Forested Area. Any area in a planted or natural state that is impractical
to maintain due to the density of trees.
H. Vegetation Public Nuisance. Any weeds or grass growing to a height greater
than six (6) inches or which have gone or are about to go to seed, all
accumulations of noxious weeds, other rank growths of vegetation, fallen trees,
dead tree limbs or invasive brush that is injurious to managed landscapes, lawns
and the natural flora of the City, are declared to be a nuisance condition and a
hazard to the public health, safety and good order of the City, whether found upon
public or private property. (Ord. 448A)
7.2.02 Utilities. No tree shall be planted under any overhead utility wire or over any
underground waterline, sewer line, transmission line or other utility line without being reviewed
and approved by the controlling public agency, including the City Inspector, or any affected
utility.
7.2.03 Permitted Public Tree Care. The City shall have the right to plant, maintain, spray and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within all City of Cloquet areas of ownership as may be
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
8
necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of the public
grounds. The City may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is
in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electrical power
lines, gas lines, waterlines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious
fungus, insect or other pest.
7.2.04 Required Pruning, Corner Clearance. Trees overhanging any street or right of way
within the City shall be pruned so that the branches shall not obstruct the light from any street
lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of
fourteen (14) feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. All tree pruning shall be done in a
manner consistent with approved practices and shall be at the expense of the landowner.
Specifically, and where possible, branches should be cut flush to the stem or point of intersection
with another branch without a stub being left. Severe tree topping which destroys the normal
shape of the tree shall not be practiced except in instances where required such as emergency
cleanup following a storm or when utility or other obstruction prevents normal pruning practice.
7.2.05 Maintenance and Removal of Tree Stumps . All stumps of street and park trees shall be
flush with the surface of ground and as practical removed below the surface of the ground.
7.2.06 Grass and Weeds on Private Property.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, or agent of the owner of any lot or
parcel of land in the City to allow noxious weeds to grow on any such lot or parcel
or to allow grass and weeds upon any such lot or parcel to grow to a height in
excess of six (6) inches or to allow such weeds or grass to go to seed, or to
otherwise maintain a vegetation public nuisance. Grass or weeds can be grown to
a height in excess of six (6) inches or allowed to go to seed without being deemed
a vegetation public nuisance in the following circumstances:
The area of the lot or parcel constitutes wetlands or a wetland buffer area;
The area in question is a storm water pond;
The area in question is heavily forested;
The area in question is a park or nature preserve;
The area in question is a natural area not to exceed a quarter of the lot;
The area in question is deemed agricultural land and is used as such;
The area in question is on a slope in excess of a slope ratio of 3 to 1.
B. If any such owner, occupant or agent fails to comply with this height limitation or
otherwise maintains a vegetation public nuisance, and after an abatement notice
given by the City Administrator or his designee, has not within five (5) days
following service of such notice complied, the City shall cause such grass or
weeds to be cut or otherwise abate such vegetation public nuisance and the
expenses thus incurred shall be billed to the property owner, and any outstanding
charges unpaid on the fifteenth (15th) of November following said abatement
shall be made a special assessment and become a lien upon such real estate. The
notice shall contain a description of the nuisance condition to be abated and a
general notice that the City may abate future violations of Section 7.2.06(A)
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
9
throughout the rest of the growing season without providing additional specific
notice for the same type of vegetation public nuisance violation. This notice shall
remain in effect through October 31st of the year in which it is sent. The City
Administrator shall be authorized to certify to the Carlton County Auditor a
statement of the amount of the cost incurred by the City. Such amount together
with interest shall be entered as a special assessment against such lot or parcel of
land and shall be collected in the same manner as real estate taxes.
C. All individual notices provided for herein may be served personally or may be
served by mail. Service by mail shall be complete upon mailing to the property
owner at the address listed on the current property tax statement for that parcel, as
found in the records of the County Auditor or Treasurer’s office, and following
posting of the notice upon the premises.
D. The bill to the property owner for the abatement of a vegetation public nuisance
shall state the amount and basis for the costs, and shall include the same general
notice as contained within the abatement notice, that the City may abate future
violations of Section 7.2.06(A) throughout the rest of the growing season without
providing additional specific notice for the same type of vegetation public
nuisance violation. The bill shall further provide notice that any outstanding
charges unpaid on the fifteenth (15th) of November following said abatement
shall be made a special assessment against such lot or parcel of land and shall be
collected in the same manner as real estate taxes, and that any objection to such
assessment must be made in writing to the City Administrator prior to that date.
The notice shall also provide the time, place and date of a hearing before the City
Council to determine the validity and the amount of the proposed assessments,
and shall state that no objections thereto shall be heard unless properly made in
writing to the City Administrator as provided above. (Ord. 448A)
7.2.07 Tree Maintenance on Private Property.
A. General. The City shall have the authority to order the trimming, treatment and
removal of trees, shrubs or plants upon private property when such action is
necessary to public safety or to prevent the spread of disease or insects to trees,
shrubs or plants located on public property. The cost of removal in such instances
will be at the expense of the landowner.
B. Street/Sidewalk Overhang. Any tree or shrub situated upon private property, but
so situated as to extend its branches over the improved portion of a public street or
highway easement shall be so trimmed by the owner of the real property upon
which the same is located that there is a clear height of fourteen feet over that portion
of the easement that is used for vehicular traffic, and over that portion of the
easement used for pedestrian travel, unobstructed by branches, and such persons
shall remove the dead or diseased branches or stubs of trees which are or may
become a hazard to the public use of the easement. Any trees obstructing traffic
control signs or devices from the view of the pedestrian or motorist shall be
pruned at the expense of the landowner to a height established by the City to
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
10
insure proper safety for motorists or pedestrians.
C. Notice. All orders to trim, remove or treat trees, shrubs or plants given pursuant
to this Section shall be in writing and shall be served by certified mail upon the
owner of the property where the trees, shrubs or plants are located. The orders
shall give the owner of the property not less than twenty (20) days from the date
of mailing of the notice to comply with the order. It shall be unlawful for an
owner of property receiving such an order to fail to comply with the order within
the specified time. Each day of a continuing violation thereafter will constitute a
separate petty misdemeanor violation.
D. Abatement. If the required action is not taken by the property owner within the
specified time, the City may cause the trees, shrubs or plants concerned to be
trimmed, removed or treated, with the costs being borne by the property owners.
If not voluntarily paid to the City by the owner, the costs of the trimming, removal
or treatment may be certified by the City Administrator shall be to the Carlton
County Auditor. Such amount together with interest shall be entered as a special
assessment against such lot or parcel of land and shall be collected in the same
manner as real estate taxes.
E. Appeal. In the event any property owner objects to the order of the City with
regard to the tree or trees in question, he or she shall serve a written notice of
appeal setting forth his or her objections to the order mailed by the City, which
notice of objection shall be served upon the City Administrator within ten (10)
days of the date of mailing of the order by the City to the property owner. The
notice shall set forth specific reasons for the objection to the order of the City.
The Administrative Hearing Officer shall hear the objections to the order of the
City and shall make findings, which shall be submitted to the City Council for
final action within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of the written notice of
objection by the property owner. The City Council shall make a final
determination at its next regular meeting following the written findings of the
Administrative Hearing Officer.
(Ordinance No. 30A)
7.2.08 Storing Elm Wood Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to store elm logs
with bark intact within the City for more than seventy-two (72) hours during the period from
April 1 through September 15 in any year out of concern for the spread of disease. Any logs
stored contrary to the provisions of this Section may be seized and destroyed by the City.
7.2.09 Transporting Elm Wood. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport within the
City any bark bearing elm or diseased wood other than for the direct purpose of authorized
disposal.
7.2.10 Entry on Private Premises. The City Planner or authorized agents of the City may enter
upon private premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties
assigned under this Section and maintain the authority to issue citations for violations.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
11
7.2.11 Interference with City Employees. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay
or interfere with City employees or any authorized agents of the City, while engaging in and
about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any Street Trees,
Park Trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this section.
7.2.12 Arborists License and Bond. It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in
the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the City
without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee shall be established by
resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council; provided, however, that no license
shall be required of any public service company or City employee doing the work in the pursuit
of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first
file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amount of $100,000 for bodily
injury and $50,000 property damage indemnifying the City or any person injured or damaged as a
result of the pursuit of such endeavors as described in this section.
7.2.13 Nuisances Reported by Neighbors. Whenever an adjacent property owner files a
written complaint with the City Administrator that a public nuisance is being maintained or
exists upon adjacent property located within the City, the City Administrator will have the
property inspected to determine the validity of the complaint. If the complaint is valid the city
shall cause the landowner, occupant or agent to be notified in writing of the condition that
requires abatement. The notice shall be served in person or by certified mail. The notice shall
include a description of the nuisance to be abated and the time frame to abate the nuisance at the
landowner or occupant’s expense. When no owner or occupant can be found, notice shall be sent
by certified or registered mail to the person listed on the records of the county auditor or treasurer
as the owner. Service will be complete upon mailing. If the owner does not abate the nuisance
within the time prescribed the City may cause to have the nuisance abated at the cost to the
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
12
landowner and notice shall be served by mail listing the costs and expenses incurred. Such
notice will provide that if the full amount is not paid on or before October 1 the costs and
expenses shall be a lien in favor of the City and the maximum allowable interest will be added
and certified to the County Auditor as a lien upon such property.
7.2.14 Review by City Council. The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct,
acts and decisions of its City employees if a proper request and notice in writing is given to the
Council in care of the City Administrator in a timely fashion. In such an instance, any person
may appeal from any ruling or order of intended action by City employees to the City Council
within ten (10) days of receiving notice of any intended action. Thereafter, and at the discretion
of the Council, the complaining party may be heard on the matter before a decision or order and
final action is taken.
7.2.15 Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be upon conviction or
a plea guilty of a petty misdemeanor and each day the violation exists can be considered a
separate offense. In their discretion, any authorized City employee or any peace officer may also
cite a violation of this section as an administrative offense.
(Ordinance No. 158A, 85A)
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
13
Section 7.3: Weapons
7.3.01 Unlawful Possession, Use or Discharge of Weapons.
A. No person, except a licensed peace officer of the State of Minnesota while acting
in the performance of his or her duties, shall carry, hold or possess a pistol in a
motor vehicle, snowmobile, boat, or on or about the person’s clothes or person, or
otherwise in possession or control in a public place, as defined by state statute
(Minn. Stat. §624.7181 Subd. 1c)) without first having obtained a permit to carry
the pistol consistent with state law. The violation of this provision will constitute
a gross misdemeanor and any subsequent violations will be felonies. (Minn. Stat.
§624.714).
B. In addition, the discharge or use of any pistol, rifle, bow, cross-bow, gun or
firearm of any description within the City limits of Cloquet or the transport of a
firearm (other than a pistol possessed by a person with a state permit or, if not a
pistol unless it is dismantled, unloaded, broken apart or carried in a case in such a
manner that it cannot be discharged) is a misdemeanor upon or within any of the
following areas:
1. "All lands lying within the following lines within the boundaries of the
City described as follows: Commencing at the point of intersection of the
North Road and the easterly boundary line of the City; thence northerly
along the easterly boundary line of the City for a distance of 660 feet to a
point; thence westerly on an extended line parallel to and 660 feet north of
the North Road to the easterly edge of the St. Louis River; thence
southeasterly along the easterly edge of the St. Louis River to the North
Road; thence westerly on an imaginary line across the St. Louis River to
the Jarvi Road on the westerly side of the St. Louis River and continuing
along said Jarvi Road in a westerly direction to the Reservation Road;
thence southerly on an extended line of the Reservation Road to the
intersection of County Road No. 7 and Trettle Lane; thence southerly
along Trettle Lane to Airport Road; thence easterly on Airport Road to
Pinewood Drive; thence southerly on the westerly boundary of Ward No. 1
of the City to the southerly boundary line of the City; thence easterly on
the southerly line of the City limits of the City to the easterly boundary
line of the City; thence northerly on the easterly boundary line of the City,
following the boundary line to the point of intersection with the North
Road, the point of beginning.
2. Any platted lands within the City limits of the City as existing upon the
effective date of this Code; or
3. Anywhere within 500 feet as measured by a straight line from the nearest
point of any platted lands within the City limits of the City as existing
upon the effective date of this Code;
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
14
C. Nor shall any person, other than a licensed peace officer of the State of Minnesota,
discharge any such gun, bow, cross-bow or firearm or use or discharge any air
rifle or slingshot as defined in this section, while within the City limits of Cloquet
which causes personal injury to another or any type of property damage to the real
or personal property of another which other person so injured or other person's
property is situated within any of the above-defined restricted areas.
Subd. 1 Air Rifles, Bows, Cross-Bows & Sling Shots. All restrictions in this
Section shall apply with equal force and effect to the discharge, use or possession
of air rifles, bows, cross-bows and sling shots within the same restricted areas as
provided herein.
Subd. 2 Possession of Weapons. No person under the age of 18 years shall
possess any of the above-described weapons within the restricted areas as
provided herein while not in the presence and under the supervision of his or her
parent or legal guardian, except that it shall be lawful for any person under 18
years who is participating in an approved firearm safety course pursuant to Minn.
Statute §97B.015 as provided through the Minnesota Commissioner of Natural
Resources to possess and carry a properly encased and unloaded firearm to and
from class anywhere within the Cloquet City limits and to handle the same during
the instruction while not being in the presence or under the supervision of his or
her parent or legal guardian. Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted or
construed to make it unlawful for any person over the age of 16 years, but under
the age of 18 years, to possess or carry any of the above-described weapons within
any restricted area set forth above while not in the presence or under the
supervision of his or her parent or legal guardian, so long as the weapon is either
dismantled, unloaded, or broken apart and carried in a case in such a manner that
it cannot be used or discharged, and provided that the person has successfully
completed an approved firearm safety course pursuant to Minn. Statute §97B.015
or similar course of instruction pursuant to Minnesota law.
Subd. 3 Offense by Parent, Guardian or Others. It shall be unlawful for any
parent, legal guardian or other person to furnish any person under the age of 18
years with any of the above-described weapons when the weapon is used by a
person under 18 years of age in a manner which violates any provision of this
Section or to otherwise aid or knowingly permit any person under 18 years of age
to violate any provision of this subsection.
Subd. 4 Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall be a separate and distinct
violation of this Section.
(Ordinance 120A, 40A)
State law references: Dangerous weapons, Minn. Stats. § 609.66; local
regulation of firearms, Minn. Stats. § 471.633
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
15
7.3.02 Exception for Special Permitted Deer Hunting Bow and Arrow Season
A. None of the provisions in this section will apply to prohibit or limit the ability of
an authorized hunter to participate in a special Bow and Arrow Deer Hunting
season approved by the City Council consistent with the provisions of City Code
Section 6.15.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
16
Section 7.4: Postings
7.4.01 Definition. The word "person" shall include individuals, corporations, partnerships and
associations.
7.4.02 Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to nail, paste, glue, or in any manner
affix or fasten any bill, card, advertisement, poster, picture, printed, illustrated or written matter,
or painted sign of any description upon any lamp post, mast, electric wire post, telegraph or
telephone pole or any pole or post in any street boulevard or public alley of the City, with or
without the permission of the owner thereof. It shall be unlawful for any owner of any mast,
electric wire pole, telegraph or telephone pole, or post, in any street, boulevard or public alley of
the City, to grant permission to any person to do any of the aforesaid prohibited acts. It shall be
unlawful for any person to in any manner nail, paste, glue, or fasten any bill, card, advertisement,
poster, picture, printed or illustrated matter, or painted sign of any description upon any fence,
building or structure or any part thereof, not owned or controlled by the person, without first
obtaining the permission of the owner thereof.
7.4.03 Responsibility. Any person who shall employ or procure any other person or persons to
distribute or post up any advertising matter of any of the kinds stated herein shall be deemed to
constitute such person or persons their agents, and shall be responsible under this Section and
subject to the penalties herein described for the acts of the person or persons so procured or
employed, in case of the violation by the person or persons of any of the provisions of this
Section.
7.4.04 Violation. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be deemed
guilty of a petty misdemeanor. A peace officer or an authorized City official may cite an offense
as a City Administrative offense if the circumstances so warrant.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
17
Section 7.5: Curfew
7.5.01 Definitions.
Subd. 1 Curfew Hours. "Curfew Hours" shall mean:
A. 11:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. of the following day on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, or Thursday; and ,
B. 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday.
Subd. 2 Emergency. "Emergency" shall mean an unforeseen combination of
circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes,
but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
Subd. 3 Establishment. "Establishment" shall mean any privately owned place of
business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to
any place of amusement or entertainment.
Subd. 4 Guardian. "Guardian" shall mean:
A. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a juvenile; or,
B. A public or private agency with whom a juvenile has been placed by a court.
Subd. 5 Juvenile. "Juvenile" shall mean any person under 18 years of age.
Subd. 6 Operator. "Operator" shall mean any individual, firm, association, partnership,
or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes
the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
Subd. 7 Parent. "Parent" shall mean a person who is:
A. A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or
B. A person at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have
the care and custody of a juvenile.
Subd. 8 Public Place. "Public Place" shall mean any place to which the public or a
substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
18
Subd. 9 Remain. "Remain" shall mean to:
A. Linger or stay; or,
B. Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner,
operator, or other person in control of the premises.
Subd. 10 Serious Bodily Injury. "Serious Bodily Injury" shall mean bodily injury that
creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement,
or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
7.5.02 Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to remain in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours.
7.5.03 Parent Responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a juvenile to
knowingly permit, or by insufficient control allow, the juvenile to remain in any public place or
on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours. The term "knowingly"
includes knowledge which a parent or guardian should reasonably be expected to have
concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in the legal custody of the parent or guardian.
7.5.04 Operator Responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or any employee
of an establishment to knowingly allow a juvenile to remain upon the premises of the establishment
during curfew hours.
7.5.05 Exceptions. The following shall constitute valid exceptions to the operation of the
curfew. That the juvenile was:
A. Accompanied by the juvenile's parent or guardian;
B. On an errand at the direction of juvenile's parent or guardian, without any detour
or stop;
C. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
D. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an
employment activity, without any detour or stop;
E. Involved in an emergency;
F. On the sidewalk abutting the juvenile's residence or abutting the residence of a
next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department
about the juvenile's presence;
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
19
G. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults or sponsored by the City of Cloquet, a civic organization, or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the juvenile, or going to or returning home
from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults or sponsored by the City of Cloquet, or civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the juvenile;
H. Married or had been married and/or legally emancipated.
7.5.06 Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this Section that the owner, operator
or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a juvenile was
present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
7.5.07 Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this Section, a police officer
is authorized and shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place.
The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this Section unless the officer
reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, no exception listed in section 7.5.05 shall be applicable.
7.5.08 Violation and Penalties. A person who violates a provision of this Chapter shall be
guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed,
continued, or permitted. Any juvenile who is convicted of a violation of this Section after the
case has been referred for prosecution in the trial court, and any adult persons having the care and
custody of such minor who is determined to be in violation of this provision, is guilty of a petty
misdemeanor.
(Ordinance 218A, 167);
State law references: Local curfew ordinances, Minn. Stats. §145A.05, Subds. 7a, 9.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
20
Section 7.6: Trespassing
7.6.01 General Prohibition. No person, without lawful authority, or without the express or
implied consent of the owner or his or her agent, shall enter any building or enter on any enclosed
or improved real estate, lot or parcel of ground in the City; or, being a part of the land of another,
shall fail, or refuse to leave the same when requested to do so by the person lawfully in
possession thereof, his or her agent or representative or by posted sign; or deposit on the
premises of another, or remove therefrom, any material, substance, earth, dirt, ashes, refuse, turf
or other article or thing whatsoever. Provided further, all delivery personnel, including letter
carriers, whether employed by private firm or government agency or government supported
corporation, shall use sidewalks and accepted and approved walkways and shall refrain from
traversing lawns or other private property not normally used as a walkway by the general public
in order to effect delivery.
(Ordinance 62A)
7.6.02 Trespass. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in a public or private school
building or upon the grounds and office of a school after being requested to leave the premises by
the school principal or other persons lawfully responsible for the control of the premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person whether on or off school premises willfully to annoy, disturb,
interfere with, or obstruct any classroom instruction teaching program or other school
organization or assembly being conducted upon the premises of any public or private school.
7.6.03 Violation. Any person who violates this Section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
Each day of violation shall be considered a distinct and separate violation of this Section.
State law references: Trespass, Minn. Stats. §609.605.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
21
Section 7.7: Flammable Liquids
7.7.01 (See Chapter 10 - Fire Code)
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
22
Section 7.8: Junk Yards
7.8.01 Purpose. This Section shall be for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety,
comfort and welfare of the citizens of the City and for the control and abatement of pollution of
land, air, and water of the City.
7.8.02 Permission Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or business to
establish, maintain or operate a junk yard, waste or scrap depository, scrap reclamation facility or
any such other business or operation within the City without the specific authorization and
permission of the City Council.
7.8.03 Motor Vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep any motor vehicle
not used for commercial purposes or that is in a dilapidated or unsightly condition so as to
become obnoxious to the public upon his or her premises except in an enclosed building within
the City.
7.8.04 Notice and Abatement. Whoever, after due notice from the City consistent with the
notice procedure set forth in Section 7.2.12 herein, and by his or her act or failure to abate a
condition identified as a violation of this provision, is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance.
7.8.05 Violation. Any person who shall be in violation of this Section upon the date of
enactment of this Code shall have thirty (30) days thereafter in which to comply with this
Section. However, any non-compliance after said thirty (30) day period shall constitute a
violation of this Section and such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any other person or
entity who shall be found violating any provision of this Section thereafter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and each day the condition exists will be treated as a separate violation.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
23
Section 7.9: Solid Waste and Recycling
7.9.01 Purpose and Application. The Board of the Western Lake Superior Sanitary District (the
"District"), which includes the City of Cloquet (the "City") within its boundaries; is empowered
by its enabling legislation to regulate the disposal of Solid Waste within its boundaries; Laws of
Minnesota 1989, 1st Special Session, Chapter 1, (the "Score Legislation"). To reduce the volume
of Solid Waste requiring disposal, the legislation requires the District and other governmental
agencies in the State of Minnesota to be responsible for the disposal of solid waste to provide
residents an opportunity to recycle which shall include:
A. Local recycling center in the District and sites for collecting recyclable materials
that are located in areas convenient for persons to use them; and,
B. Curbside pickup, centralized drop-off, or a local recycling center for recyclable
materials in cities with a population of 5,000 or more persons.
The District has adopted a code relating to mixed municipal solid waste management and
recycling which is effective within the City unless the City adopts an ordinance modifying or
altering those provisions which: (1) creates a system of licensing collectors; (2) regulates rates
for collection; (3) mandates the collection of mixed municipal solid waste; (4) provides residents
an opportunity to recycle as required by Minn. Stat. Section §115A.552, Subd. 1 and 2; (5)
supplies the District copies of all license applications for collectors on a monthly basis; and (6)
provides a certified copy of the ordinance to the District within five (5) days following
enactment. The City supports the goals of the Score Legislation and believes it is in the best
interest of its residents to design methods of accomplishing the goals consistent with factors
unique to the City. It shall be the express intent of this Section, specifically the mandatory
recycling provision of this Section, to require the recycling of Recyclable Materials within the
City in order to aid the District in meeting the goals specified in Minnesota Statutes §115A.551.
It shall be further the express intent of this Section to recognize that the District has regional
authority for the solid waste generated by residents of the City. Therefore, where this Section is
in contradiction to the rules and regulations of the District, the rules and regulations of the
District shall supersede the specific portions of this Section in contradiction or contravention of
the rules and regulations of the District.
This Chapter shall not govern or control the disposal of Hospital Waste, Pathological Waste,
Infectious Waste, Medical Sharps, Industrial Solid Waste and Hazardous Substances.
State law references: Waste Management Act, Minn. Stats. ch. 115A
7.9.02 Definitions. (See Chapter 6 - License and Permits - 6.15.01 Definitions)
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
24
7.9.03 Disposal of Recyclable Materials
Subd. 1 Separation Required. Every person or entity disposing of solid waste in the
City shall separate recyclable materials from solid waste. The Owner or Occupants of
each single family residence and two-four unit residences and the Owner or Occupant of
each nonresidential, commercial, or industrial premises authorized to place solid waste in
the various waste receiving Facilities of the District, including its sanitary landfill, shall
separate recyclable materials prior to collection.
Subd. 2 Containers. Persons or entities shall provide for the placement of recyclable
materials in approved containers (an approved container can be either a bin or a bag at the
discretion of the licensed hauler) for collection, or, in the alternative, shall deliver
recyclable materials to the recycling facility of their choice. The District or the City may
establish requirements for containers for recyclable materials. At a minimum, every
person or entity shall meet the following requirements:
A. Curbside collection at least monthly of newspaper, glass containers, aluminum
containers, steel containers, PETE plastic containers, HDPE plastic containers,
and either corrugated paper and other container board, or magazines.
B. Curbside or drop off collection of bi-metal containers; waste tires, and corrugated
paper and other container board, or magazines not collected under Subpart 1
above.
Subd. 3 Public Provision. Owners of establishments at which there is public traffic,
including, but not limited to public buildings, hotels, motels, retail stores, theaters,
college dormitories and church social halls, shall provide receptacles for recyclable
materials along with their present public receptacles for solid waste. The owners of these
establishments shall not be required to separate items which the general public places in
receptacles intended for solid waste.
Subd. 4 Collection. No person or entity other than the owner or the occupant of a
residential, commercial, or industrial structure, or the licensed collector which provides
services to the structure, shall collect or gather recyclable materials as set out for
collection by a licensed collector.
7.9.04 Disposal of Yard Waste; Composting. Any person disposing of yard waste shall have
the option of disposing of the waste by one of the following: (1) disposal in a backyard compost
site; or (2) disposal in a yard waste compost facility operated by the City or the District; or (3)
disposal in a privately operated yard waste compost facility. Yard waste shall not be placed in
the waste receiving Facilities of the District. No persons or entity shall cause, allow or permit the
burning of yard waste within the City, notwithstanding any permit which the person or entity may
obtain from the State of Minnesota. Leaf burning shall be prohibited. Yard waste may be
subject to periodic pickup by a licensed collector. Yard waste collected for the purpose of
composting shall not be disposed of in any other manner.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
25
7.9.05 Disposal of Construction Debris. Any person disposing of construction debris shall
transport the waste to any site designated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency for receipt
of the waste.
7.9.06 Disposal of Bulky Items. Any person disposing of bulky items shall transport the waste
to any site designated by the District for receipt of the waste. If such service is provided, bulky
items may be subject to periodic collection by a licensed collector.
7.9.07 Waste Preparation and Storage.
Subd. 1 Accumulation. No Owner or Occupant of any private property or business
property shall permit any accumulation of solid waste, or any similar material or mixture
of material upon the property or upon any adjoining property, alley, street, sidewalk, or
highway, except in proper containers as described below.
Subd. 2 Containers. Every Owner or Occupant of any private property or business
property shall provide in good condition water-tight and rodent-proof containers
sufficient to hold all the solid waste which accumulates on the premises during the time
between collections. In the case of residential structures containing four or less dwelling
units, the containers shall be of a maximum size of thirty-two (32) gallons, shall be
provided with handles and a tight and securely fitted cover. All solid waste shall be
placed in the containers which shall not be filled in a manner which prevents closure of
the container and, in the case of residential structures containing four or less dwelling
units, the contents shall not exceed forty-five (45) pounds in weight.
Subd. 3 Automobile Waste. Every Owner or Occupant shall separate all automobile
oil, motor vehicle batteries and tires from all solid waste and shall transport the same to
the facility designated by the District for the handling of the waste or deposit them with a
service station or merchant that will properly dispose of such materials in conformance of
the requirements of the District. Automobile oil shall be placed in an unbreakable, leakproof
receptacle by the Owner or Occupant before transporting. Motor vehicle batteries
shall be transported in a manner which shall not allow release or escape of their contents.
Subd. 4 Solid Waste Placement. No person or entity shall place solid waste in any
container unless specifically authorized by the Owner, Occupant or licensed Collector
which provides collection services for the container. The disposal in a roadside litter
receptacle of garbage or rubbish generated within an automobile shall not violate this
provision.
Subd. 5 Household Hazardous Waste. Every Owner or Occupant shall separate all
household hazardous waste from all other solid waste. Containers with household
hazardous waste shall be handled or transported in a manner which shall not allow release
or escape of the contents. All household hazardous waste shall be disposed of in
accordance with the Household Hazardous Waste Program of the District, as the same
shall exist at the time, or in such other manner as shall be specified by the District.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
26
Subd. 6 Special and Unacceptable Wastes. Hospital Waste, Pathological Waste,
Infectious Waste, Medical Sharps, Hazardous Substances and other Unacceptable Wastes
not specifically referred to in this Section shall be disposed of in accordance with State
law and as required by the District. Industrial solid waste shall be disposed of in
accordance with the Industrial Solid Waste Management Plan of the District, as the same
shall exist at the time.
7.9.08 Mandatory Collection of Waste.
A. Owners of Four or Fewer Dwelling Units. It shall be the duty of the Owner and
Occupant of every residential structure containing four or fewer dwelling units to
provide for not less frequent than weekly disposal of all mixed solid waste
generated by the dwelling units through employment of the services of a licensed
collector; provided that collection may be less frequent than weekly where the
volume of mixed municipal solid waste generated is sufficiently low to allow less
frequent collection in compliance with all other provisions of this Section.
B. Owners of Single Residential Dwelling Units. Owners or Occupants of a single
dwelling residential structure may upon application and approval of the City be
exempted from the requirement to have solid waste collection service if the owner
or occupant uses or utilizes an accepted environmentally sound alternative.
C. Owners of Residential Dwelling Units in Excess of Four Units. Owners of
residential structures containing more than four dwelling units or of commercial
or industrial establishments shall either employ a licensed collector for the
removal of all mixed Municipal Solid Waste from their premises or provide the
removal service themselves, provided that the Owner shall obtain a license under
this Section. For those residential or commercial structures not in compliance
with the mandatory collection provisions of this Section, the City may assign
collectors on a rotating basis to collect mixed municipal solid waste from the
structures. Prior to assignment of collection under this Section, written notice of
the assignment shall be served upon the Owner and/or Occupant of the structure
in question, ten (10) days before commencement of service. If an Owner and/or
Occupant assigned a collector under this Section fails to pay the collector for
collection of mixed municipal solid waste, the City may require payment by the
Owner and/or Occupant to the collector in the manner as otherwise provided for
in this Section and is further authorized to certify unpaid amounts for payment
with real estate taxes on the premises.
7.9.09 Collection of Recyclable Materials. The City Council shall designate certain areas of
the City in which collectors shall provide curbside collection of recyclable materials at lease once
each month. For areas of the City in which collectors shall not provide curbside collection of
recyclable materials, the City shall construct and operate at least one structure for the collection
and disposal of recyclable materials or designate at least one privately operated location for the
collection and disposal of recyclable materials.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
27
7.9.10 Charges for Collection. The schedule of rates for the collection of mixed municipal
solid waste established pursuant to Carlton County Ordinance shall be applicable within the City.
State law references: Fees authorized, Minn. Stats. §115A.945.
7.9.11 Establishment of Solid Waste Collection Officer; Powers and Duties. There shall be
hereby continued a Solids Waste Collection Officer who shall have control over the making of all
collections and removal of the materials and substances specified in this Section and shall be
responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this Section. The officer shall receive and
investigate any complaints regarding services rendered and shall, if appropriate and with the
assistance of a peace officer, direct that remedial measures be promptly taken. The officer shall
coordinate the solid waste and recyclable collection requirements of this Section with licensed
collectors, the District and County regulations, and shall, whenever possible, assist in the
education of the citizens of Cloquet to the benefits and the necessity of recycling and
composting. In the performance of official duties, the designated Solid Waste Collection Officer
or any designated agent or peace officer shall have the authority to issue citations for criminal
violations of the law.
7.9.12 Nuisance. No Owner or Occupant shall permit any accumulation or storage of solid
waste which causes a nuisance or unsanitary condition or permits or encourages the accumulation
or breeding of rats, insects or other vermin.
7.9.13 Unauthorized Deposit of Solid Waste. No person shall:
A. Deposit solid waste, recyclable materials, construction debris or yard waste upon
any public or private highway, street, road or right-of-way; deposit solid waste,
recyclable materials, construction debris or yard waste upon or within any river,
creek, stream, lake waterway or other body of water of any kind or character; or
deposit solid waste, recyclable materials, construction debris or yard waste on the
property of another; or,
B. Cause, maintain or permit the accumulation of solid waste which creates an
unsanitary condition or permits or encourages the accumulation or breeding of
rats, insects or other vermin; or,
C. Otherwise deposit solid waste, recyclable materials, demolition debris or yard
waste within the City in any manner that violates the provisions of this Section.
7.9.14 Enforcement and Inspection.
Subd. 1 Inspections. Inspection and evaluation of containers and collectors shall be
made by the City in such frequency as to insure consistent compliance by the owners,
occupants and collectors with the provisions of this Section. Each owner, occupant or
collector shall be provided with written and documented notice of any deficiencies,
recommendations for their correction and the date when the correction shall be
accomplished. Each owner, occupant or collector shall be required to allow free access to
authorized representatives of the City, or to authorized representatives of any other
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
28
governmental agency at any time for the purpose of making the inspections as may be
necessary to determine compliance with the requirements of this Section, or any other
applicable statute, code, ordinance or regulation.
Subd. 2 Private Property. The City shall have the right to inspect private property to
determine if a container or collector is in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
7.9.15 Violations and Remedies.
Subd. 1 Penalties for Violation. Any person who fails to comply with, or violates, any
of the provisions of this section may be charged with a misdemeanor violation. A
separate offense shall occur for each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
Subd. 2 Equitable Relief. In the event of a violation or a threat of violation of this
Section, and in addition to pursuing criminal sanctions as authorized herein, the attorney
for the City may take appropriate action to enforce this Section, including but not limited
to, application for injunctive relief, action to compel performance or other appropriate
action in District Court, if necessary, to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the violations
or threatened violations.
Subd. 3 Costs as Special Assessment. If an owner or occupant fails to comply with the
regulations in this Section, the City may take the necessary steps to correct the violations
and the costs of correction may be recovered in a civil action or may be certified, at the
discretion of the City Council, to the County Auditor as a special assessment against real
property under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429, or other similar law relating to special
assessment.
(Ordinance #217A, #195A)
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
29
Section 7.10: Smoking Prohibited in Certain Locations
7.10.01 Purpose and Application. Tobacco smoke has been determined to be a major
contributor to indoor air pollution and is known to be a leading cause of disease. There is
compelling evidence that second hand smoke causes and contributes to the development of
health conditions including lung cancer, heart disease, respiratory infection, decreased respiratory
function and other health- related problems. At special risk are children, elderly people,
individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function,
including people with asthma and those with obstructive airway disease. In view of these risks, it
is apparent that the simple separation of smokers and nonsmokers within the same air space does
not sufficiently protect the general public and nonsmokers from exposure to harmful
environmental tobacco smoke and its associated health risks.
Accordingly, the purpose of this section is to:
1. Protect the public health, welfare and safety by better ensuring the ability of
citizens to breath safe and uncontaminated air; and,
2. Affirm that the need to breath uncontaminated air has priority over the desire to
smoke or to be exposed to tobacco smoke; and,
3. Protect vulnerable populations, including employees, children, the elderly and
those with chronic health conditions from exposure to tobacco contaminated air
and to guarantee the right of the public and nonsmokers to breath smoke-free air
while dining in public restaurants located within the City.
7.10.02 Definitions.
Subd. 1. “Bar” means an establishment that has an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor
license issued pursuant to Minn. Stat. §340A.403, as amended from time to time, or an
on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued pursuant to Minn. Stat. §340A.404, as amended
from time to time, which does not serve food or which has a limited food menu selection
as defined by Minn. Stat. §157.16, Subd. 3(d)(1), as amended from time to time.
Subd. 2. “Bar/restaurant” means an establishment that has an on-sale 3.2 percent malt
liquor license issued pursuant to Minn. Stat. §340A.403, as amended from time to time,
or an on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued pursuant to Minn. Stat. §340A.404, as
amended from time to time, and that holds a small, medium or large establishment food
license as defined by Minn. Stat. §157.16, Subd. 3(d) (2)-(4), as amended from time to
time.
Subd. 3. “Other person in charge” has the meaning specified in the Minnesota Clean
Indoor Air Act Rules, Minnesota Rules, part 4620.0100, subpart 10, as amended from
time to time.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
30
Subd. 4. “Proprietor” has the meaning specified by the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act
Rules, Minnesota Rules, part 4620.0100, subp. 13, as amended from time to time.
Subd. 5. “Restaurant” has the meaning specified in Minn. Stat. §157.15, Subdivision
12, as amended from time to time.
Subd. 6. “Smoking” means the inhaling, exhaling or combustion of any cigar, cigarette,
pipe, tobacco product, weed, plant or any other similar article. “Smoking” includes
possessing or carrying a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other lighted smoking
equipment including but not limited to electronic cigarettes, electronic cigars, electronic
pipes, or any other electronic smoking device used to deliver nicotine or other substances
to a person obtained from inhaling from the device.
7.10.03. Smoking Prohibited in Restaurants.
Subd. 1. Smoking prohibited indoors. Except as provided in subdivision 3, smoking is
prohibited in all indoor areas of any restaurant located within the City.
Subd. 2. Smoking prohibited in certain outdoor areas. To ensure that smoke does not
enter restaurants and that restaurant customers and employees are not exposed to smoke
involuntarily, and in conformity with Carlton County Smoke-Free Ordinance No. 29,
smoking is prohibited within 25 feet of any entrance, exit, open window or ventilation
intake of a restaurant.
Subd. 3. Repealed in conformity with Carlton County Smoke-Free Ordinance No. 29.
7.10.04. Responsibilities of Proprietors. The proprietor or other person in charge of a
restaurant subject to Section 3 shall:
(a) Post “no smoking” signs that comply with the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act
Rules, Minnesota Rules, part 4620.0500, as amended from time to time;
(b) Ensure that ashtrays, lighters, and matchbooks are not provided in areas where
smoking is prohibited; and,
(c) Ask any person who smokes in areas of the restaurant where smoking is
prohibited to refrain from smoking and, if the person does not refrain from
smoking after being asked to do so, ask the person to leave.
(d) Post signs outside the entrance of the business notifying patrons that smoking is
prohibited within 25 feet of an entrance, exit, open window, or ventilation intake
of a restaurant.
7.10.05. Other Applicable Laws. This section is intended to compliment the Minnesota Clean
Indoor Air Act, Minn. Stat. §144.411 to 144.417, as amended from time to time. Nothing in this
section authorizes smoking in any location where smoking is prohibited or restricted by other
applicable laws. The Carlton County Smoke-Free Ordinance No. 29 is specifically incorporated
by reference into this Section 7.10, of Chapter 7 of the Cloquet City Code.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 7 Public Nuisances
31
7.10.06. Violation and Penalties.
Subd. 1. Smoking Where Prohibited. It is a violation of this section for any person to
smoke in an area where smoking is prohibited by this section.
Subd. 2. Proprietors. It is a violation of this section for the proprietor or other person in
charge of any premises subject to this section to fail to comply with the requirements of
section 4.
Subd. 3. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
(Ordinance #286A)
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Effective Date: March 7, 2006
Amendments: 05-15-07 335A / 05-07-13 422A / 05-21-13 423A / 04-07-15 441A /05-17-16 456A /08-18-18 474A
Section 8.1: Regulating the Keeping of Domesticated Animals 1
SECTION 8.1: REGULATING THE KEEPING OF DOMESTICATED ANIMALS
8.1.01 Definitions: As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings provided unless the
context otherwise indicates:
Subd. 1 Animal. “Animal” shall mean any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird
(including all fowl and poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the
animal kingdom. Animals shall be classified as follows:
A. Domestic. “Domestic animals” shall mean those animals commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include dogs,
cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domestic rabbits, fish, non-poisonous,
non-venomous and non-constricting reptiles or amphibians, or other similar animals.
B. Non-Domestic. “Non-Domestic animals” shall mean those animals commonly
considered to be naturally wild and not naturally trained or domesticated, or which are
commonly considered to be inherently dangerous to the health, safety, and welfare of the
people. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include:
(1) Any member of the large cat family (family felidae) including lions, tigers,
cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly domesticated
house cats.
(2) Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family candidae) including
wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but excluding commonly accepted
domesticated dogs.
(3) Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog, unless the
crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet.
(4) Any member or relative of the rodent family, including any skunk (whether or
not descented), raccoon, squirrel, or ferret, but excluding those members
otherwise defined herein or commonly accepted as domesticated pets.
(5) Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or inherently dangerous member of the
reptile or amphibian families including, but not limited to, rattlesnakes, boa
constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators.
(6) Any other animal which is not explicitly listed in this section but which can
reasonably be defined by the terms of this subpart, including, but not limited to
bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.
C. Farm Animals. “Farm animals” shall mean those animals commonly associated with a
farm or performing work in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, such
animals shall include members of the equestrian family (horses, mules), bovine family
(cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl (ducks, geese), swine (including
farm pigs and Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees, and other animals typically
associated with a farm, ranch, or stable.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.1: Regulating the Keeping of Domesticated Animals 2
Subd. 2 Dog. "Dog" shall be intended to mean both male and female domesticated members of the canine
family commonly accepted as household pets.
Subd. 3 Cat. "Cat" shall mean both the male and female of the domesticated members of the feline family
commonly accepted as household pets.
Subd. 4 Owner. “Owner,” when used in relation to an animal, shall include every person or persons, firm,
association or corporation who owns, harbors or keeps an animal.
Subd. 5 Commercial Kennel. "Commercial Kennel" shall mean any place located within the FR, RC or
OM Zoning Districts as shall be defined in the City Zoning Code or Ordinance and where the business of
keeping, raising, selling, boarding, breeding, or showing, of dogs or cats is conducted, in full conformance
with applicable Zoning District regulations including, but not specifically limited to, pet shops, animal
hospitals and grooming facilities. Commercial kennels are allowed as a conditional use within the City.
(Refer to Chapter 17, Zoning Ordinance, for the conditional use requirements.)
Subd. 6 Private Kennel. “Private Kennel” shall mean any premises, regardless of how zoned or used,
within the City Limits of the City, where four or five dogs or cats in combination, six months or older, are
kept, maintained or harbored as pets or for some other purposes, but not for purposes of selling, boarding,
breeding, showing, treating or grooming, or other commercial purposes.
Subd. 7 Poundmaster. "Poundmaster" shall be construed to mean Chief of Police or his or her designated
agent, such as Animal Control Officer.
Subd. 8 Animal Control Officer. "Animal Control Officer" shall be construed to mean the person
appointed by the Chief of Police, with the consent of the City Council, to act as the animal control officer
in enforcing the provisions of this Section and other animal control Code or Ordinances of the City. The
animal control officer need not be licensed as a peace officer, constable or part-time peace officer.
Subd. 9 Public Nuisance Dog. "Public Nuisance Dog" shall be intended to mean any dog which:
A. Is repeatedly found at large;
B. Damages the property of anyone other than its owner;
C. Is a "vicious dog," meaning a dog that constitutes a physical threat to human beings or
other animals by virtue of one or more attacks of such severity as to cause property
damage or physical injury;
D. Causes fouling of the air by unreasonable odors;
E. Causes unsanitary conditions of enclosures or surroundings;
F. Excessively, habitually or frequently makes disturbing noises by barking, yelping,
howling, crying or otherwise disturbing the peace;
G. Molests passer(s)-by or passing vehicles;
H. Attacks other domestic animals;
I. Has been designated by the poundmaster or police officers to be a public nuisance dog by
virtue of being a menace to the public health, welfare and safety; and
J. Frequents school grounds or parks.
Subd. 10 Running at Large. "At Large" shall be intended to mean off the premises of the owner and not
under the control of the owner or a member of his or her immediate family either by leash, cord, chain or
otherwise. No person owning, keeping or harboring an animal shall permit the animal to run at large. For
the purposes of this section, an animal shall be deemed to be running at large:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.1: Regulating the Keeping of Domesticated Animals 3
A. When the animal commits damage to the property of anyone other than the owner or
injury to the person of anyone other than the owner, except in defense of the animal’s
owner or the owner’s family.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.2: Dogs and Cats 4
SECTION 8.2: DOGS AND CATS
8.2.01 Repealed.
8.2.02 ID Tag/Micro-Chip. It is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or maintain a dog, cat or ferret over the
age of four months unless it has an ID tag, to be worn at all times, that has on it the owner’s name and contact
information, including a valid telephone number, or unless it is micro-chipped with the micro-chip data contact
information kept up to date. However, if the animal is harbored or kept on the premises of a recognized Humane
Society shelter or pet store it need not have an ID tag or be micro-chipped.
8.2.03 Keeping Of Dogs and Cats Limited. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or have custody or
control at any one time, except as otherwise allowed for in this Section, more than three (3) dogs over the age of six
months, more than three (3) cats over the age of six months, or a combination of more than three (3) dogs or cats
over the age of six months in any residential dwelling unit or upon such person's premises, whether owned, leased or
otherwise occupied or possessed by such person unless one of the following exceptions apply.
(Ordinance 245A, 313A)
Subd. 1. Exceptions. It shall not be unlawful for a person to keep, harbor or have custody or control of
more than three (3) dogs and/or three (3) cats (not to exceed a total of five animals at any one time),
provided one of the following conditions exists:
A. Such person is in the process of applying for a one-time nonrenewable Private Kennel
License consistent with the provisions of this Section; or,
B. Such person is granted a Private Kennel License for the purpose of providing a period of
time not less than six months but not to exceed three years, in which to find another
place where the dogs and cats numbering in excess of three (3) dogs and/or (3) cats can
be legally, safely and humanely harbored.
C. Such person keeps, harbors or has custody or control of no more than three (3) dogs and
three (3) cats over six months old and a number of puppies and kittens under six (6)
months old, all of the same litter, which are offspring of animals lawfully kept, harbored
or in the custody or control of such person at such person's premises. However, it shall
be unlawful for such person to keep, harbor or have custody or control of more than one
such litter at any one time, unless such person obtains a Private Kennel License.
8.2.04 Vaccination of Dogs and Cats Required.
Subd. 1. All dogs and cats kept, harbored, maintained, or transported within the City shall be vaccinated at
least once every three years by a licensed veterinarian for rabies (with a live modified vaccine) and
distemper.
Subd. 2. The owners of all dogs and cats kept, harbored, maintained, or transported within the City shall
be required to maintain records of the date of all required vaccinations and a certificate of vaccination shall
be maintained which includes all of the following information: owners name and address, animals name,
sex, description and weight, type of vaccine, and the signature of the veterinarian. This certificate shall
upon demand be produced to the City Administrator’s office or a police officer within seven days or shall
constitute a violation of this section.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.2: Dogs and Cats 5
8.2.05 Dog and Cat Nuisances.
Subd. 1. Dog Nuisance. The owner of any dog shall be responsible to prevent the dog from committing
any act in the City of Cloquet which constitutes a nuisance under this Code. Failure of the owner of a dog
to prevent the dog from committing such a nuisance is a violation of this Code and is punishable as
provided herein. In the case of a dog or dogs disturbing the peace by excessively, habitually or frequently
barking, yelping, howling, crying or making any other noise for a period of ten consecutive minutes or
intermittently for 30 minutes or more at any time either day or night or otherwise disturbing the peace and
tranquility of neighbors or other citizens, such actions will be deemed a nuisance if reported to the City and
the behavior is verified by witnesses, an Animal Control Officer or a City Peace Officer.
Subd. 2. Cat Nuisance. The owner of any cat shall prevent the cat from committing any act in the City
which constitutes a nuisance by destroying, damaging or defiling property; creates an offense by way of
noise, odor, or public sanitation; is a danger to the public health; molests other animals or human beings; is
in heat and unconfined; or is repeatedly found at large after receiving notice from the City of the
commission of such acts. No person shall own or possess any cat which violates the provisions of this
Section after receiving notice from the City of the prior commission of such acts by the cat in question.
Such cats shall be declared to be a public nuisance.
Subd. 3 Notice of Owner. Thereafter, and prior to the issuance of any violation of this Code for a dog or
cat nuisance, the City Police Department, City Attorney or the City Administrator’s Office for the City of
Cloquet, shall give the owner of such a dog or cat a written notice by certified mail or by personal service
noting the date and nature of the alleged violation. If the owner of the dog or cat is not known, then such
written notice shall be sent by certified mail to the occupant of the premises where the animal is being kept
or harbored. If the owner is not known, and an occupant cannot be found upon the premises, said written
notice shall be posted for at least five (5) business days in the City Hall of the City of Cloquet in a
conspicuous place and shall be addressed: “To Whom it May Concern”. Said notice of a dog or cat
violation shall describe the dog or cat constituting the nuisance, it shall include the location of the alleged
violation and shall state the grounds or which the dog or cat and the owner are being cited for a violation of
the Code.
8.2.06 Running at Large Prohibited. No owner or keeper of any dog shall negligently or intentionally permit the
animal to run at large, as that term is defined in Subd. 10 of Section 8.1.01, within the City of Cloquet. Given the
potentially serious public health and safety concerns, it is the City’s intent that with respect to the application of this
section that the standard of negligence to be applied in considering a violation will be that of ordinary negligence as
is required in a civil action.
8.2.07 Impounding of Animals.
Subd. 1. The Animal Control Officer, a City peace officer and any other authorized agents appointed by
the City Council shall have the authority to seize, impound or restrain any animal maintained in violation of
this Code or which bites a person or causes an annoyance to individuals, or which runs at large. All animals
seized or restrained pursuant to this subsection shall be impounded and the owner assessed a per diem
charge based upon the cost of holding and maintaining the animal. Immediately upon the
impounding of an animal wearing a current license tag, the designated Animal Control Officer shall make
every reasonable effort to notify the owner or harborer of the impoundment, and of the conditions whereby
the owner or harborer may regain custody of the animal. Verbal notice shall be immediately confirmed in
writing by the designated Animal Control Officer, any peace officer or agent of the City.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.2: Dogs and Cats 6
Subd. 2. Any animal so impounded shall be held until claimed by the animal's owner or until it is
destroyed. Any animal so impounded shall be kept, with humane treatment and sufficient food and water
for its comfort, at least five regular business days, unless the animal is a dangerous animal as defined under
M.S. Sections 347.50 to 347.54, as it may be amended from time to time, in which case it shall be kept for
seven days, and except if the animal is a cruelly-treated animal under M.S. Sections 343.20 to 343.235, as it
may be amended from time to time, or has not been properly inoculated as required herein in which case it
shall be kept for ten days to make sure that the animal is free from disease. After that time, it may be
destroyed unless properly reclaimed by its owner. The owner will remain liable for all charges incurred by
the City in impounding, holding or destroying the animal.
8.2.08 Notice to Owner and Redemption. Not later than three days after the impounding of any dog or cat, the
owner shall be notified, or if the owner of the animal is unknown written notice shall be posted for three days at the
City Hall and the Animal Control Shelter, or designated Veterinarian Hospital used by the City as a pound,
describing the animal and the time and place of taking the impoundment. The owner of any animal so impounded
may reclaim the animal upon payment of the license fee and additional charge which shall be established by
resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council as a late fee penalty for failure to license as required by
this Section. In addition the animal owner shall be responsible to pay for all costs and charges incurred by the City
for impounding and maintenance of the animal. The owner shall be notified that the Veterinarian will inject the
impounded animal with rabies shots if the animal is overdue for injection or if the Veterinarian cannot obtain
information as to the last date of rabies shots for the animal. The cost of the injection for rabies shots shall be paid
for by the owner. The following items are charges that shall be paid to the keeper of the animal or Veterinarian at a
cost which shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council:
A. Cost of Rabies shot.
B. Cost for impounding the animal during normal business hours and for impounding a dog
after normal business hours (after 6:00 p.m.).
C. Costs of keeping any animal.
D. All costs related to the service or giving of notice.
8.2.09 Disposition of Unclaimed or Infected Dogs or Cats. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer, or
the Animal Shelter as designated by a City officer or agent to keep all dogs and cats so impounded for a period of
five (5) regular business days. If upon the expiration of five (5) regular business days from the date of notice to the
owner or the posting of the notice, the dog or cat shall not have been redeemed, it may be destroyed. Any
unlicensed dog or cat required by law to be licensed, or any dog or cat which appears to a licensed veterinarian to be
suffering from rabies or affected with hydrophobia, mange or other infectious or dangerous disease shall not be
released but may be forthwith destroyed with all costs accessible to the owner.
8.2.10 Muzzling. Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard the public from the dangers of hydrophobia, the
Mayor, if he or she deems it necessary, may issue a proclamation ordering every person owning or keeping a dog to
confine it securely on his or her premises unless the dog shall have a muzzle of sufficient strength to prevent it from
biting any person. Any unmuzzled dog running at large during the time of the proclamation shall be seized and
impounded unless noticeably infected with rabies. All dogs so noticeably infected with rabies and displaying
vicious propensities shall be killed by any peace officer or animal control officer without notice to the owner.
Dogs impounded during the first two days of the proclamation shall, if claimed within four days, be released to the
owner, unless infected with rabies, and upon payment of the impounding charges, maintenance and serving of the
notice provided in this Section. If unclaimed after that period, the dog may be summarily destroyed.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.2: Dogs and Cats 7
8.2.11 Rabies Notice. If a dog or cat is believed to have rabies or has been bitten by a dog or cat suspected of
having rabies, the animal shall be confined by a leash or chain on the owner's premises and shall be placed under the
observation of a veterinarian at the expense of the owner for a period of two weeks. The owner shall notify the
animal control officer or the City police of the fact that his or her animal has been exposed to rabies and at his or her
discretion the animal control officer as designated by the City is empowered to have the animal removed from the
owner's premises to a veterinary hospital or designated animal shelter and there placed under observation for a
period of two weeks at the expense of the owner.
It shall be unlawful for any person who has reason to know that a dog or cat has rabies to take the animal off his or
her premises or beyond the limits of the City without written permission of the City designated animal control
officer or the Chief of Police. Every owner, or other person, upon ascertaining a dog or cat is rabid shall
immediately notify the City designated animal control officer or a police officer who shall either remove the animal
to the pound or summarily destroy it.
8.2.12 Proceedings for Destruction of Certain Dogs and Cats. Upon sworn complaint to the District Court and
upon good cause shown that any one of the following conditions exist, the Court may issue an Order to Show Cause
why a dog or cat should not be destroyed:
A. That any dog or cat at any time has destroyed property, attacked a domesticated pet
properly on its own premises or has habitually trespassed in a damaging manner on the
property of persons other than the owner;
B. That any dog or cat at any time has attacked or bitten a person outside the owner's
premises;
C. That any dog or cat is vicious or shows vicious habits or molests pedestrians or interferes
with vehicles on the public streets; or,
D. That any dog or cat is a public nuisance as defined herein.
If the Court determines that one of these situations has been established by a showing of good cause, the
Judge shall issue a Summons directed to the owner of the dog or cat commanding him or her to appear
before the Court to show cause why the animal should not be seized by the animal control officer and/or
police officer or otherwise disposed of in the manner authorized in this Section.
The Summons shall be returnable not less than two (2) nor more than six (6) days from the date thereof and
shall be served at least two (2) days before the time of the scheduled appearance. Upon the hearing and
finding the facts true as complained of and upon good cause shown, the Court may either order the animal
killed or order the owner or custodian to remove it from the City, or may order the owner or custodian to
keep it confined to a designated place. If the owner violates the order, the animal control officer and/or any
police officer may impound the animal described in the order at the expense of the owner. The provisions
of this Section are in addition to and supplemental to other provisions of this Chapter.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.2: Dogs and Cats 8
8.2.13 Private Kennel License.
Subd. 1 Private Kennel License. A Private Kennel License, may at the discretion of the City Council be
granted to an applicant for the license only upon good cause shown, provided:
A. Such application is made in accordance with this Section; and
B. The applicant for the Private Kennel License properly licenses all the dogs and cats the
applicant is keeping, harboring, or has in his or her control, in accordance with all Code
provisions or ordinances at the time application for the license is made; and,
C. The applicant obtains the written consent from all residential landowners located within
one hundred (100) feet of the property line of the applicant; and
D. The applicant pays all fees set forth by this Section and complies with the conditions set
forth by the City Council at the time the license is granted.
Subd. 2 License Application. Application for a Private Kennel License shall be made to the City
Administrator upon forms supplied by the City Administrator. The application shall state:
A. The name and address of the applicant; and,
B. That the applicant keeps, harbors, has custody of or control of a combined total of four or
five dogs and/or cats in combination, each of greater age than six (6) months in age; and
C. The property address and legal description of the proposed kennel site; and,
D. The age, breed and sex of all of the dogs and cats that the applicant keeps, harbors or has
custody or control of; and,
E. That the applicant has properly licensed all such dogs and cats or has applied for licenses
for all such animals in conformity with all City Code or Ordinances requiring the
licensing within the City; and,
F. The applicant provides proof of rabies vaccination by a licensed veterinarian for all dogs
and cats that the applicant keeps, harbors, or has custody or control of; and
G. The applicant has attached to the application a sketch or drawing of the proposed kennel
describing the construction, operation, purpose and approximate number of animals to be
kept, harbored or to be in the custody or control of the applicant or confined in such
kennel.
H. If the applicant is a renter or tenant, a written letter of support/approval from the property
owner on which such kennel license is sought must be obtained.
Subd. 3 Private Kennel License Fee. The fee for a Private Kennel License shall be established by
resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council and shall be paid at the time the license is
issued.
Subd. 4 Private Kennels for Less than Three Dogs and Three Cats. Nothing in this Section shall be
construed or interpreted to mean the City Council of the City of Cloquet desires that people having custody
or control of three (3) or fewer dogs and cats should not provide lawful, proper, safe and humane kennels
and shelter for such animals in accordance with all requirements of law or should not properly license all
such animals within the City.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.2: Dogs and Cats 9
Subd. 5 Hearing Required. A public hearing before the City Council, shall be required for all
applications for Private Kennel Licenses and shall be placed on the agenda of the City Council for a public
hearing at a regular City Council meeting within 30 days after the application is received by the City. Not
less than seven days before the date of the public hearing, the City Administrator shall mail notice of the
hearing to the applicant and to the owners of the property within 100 feet of the proposed kennel location.
The failure of any owner to receive the notice shall not invalidate the proceeding.
(Ordinance 313A)
Subd. 6 Council Approval. The City Council may, in its discretion, approve any Private Kennel License
application and may attach to the approval any conditions necessary to insure compliance with this Section
and any other conditions necessary to protect the health, safety, welfare and property values of other
property in the immediate area of the proposed kennel. The form of approval for a license shall be the
resolution of approval, a certified copy of which shall be forwarded to the applicant.
Subd. 7 Standards for Kennels. Kennels shall be designed, operated and maintained according to the
following standards:
A. Private Kennels. A private kennel shall consist of an enclosed area in which all animals
are confined when not under restraint and shall be constructed so as to prevent the
animals from running at large. Any such kennel shall be so constructed as to provide
shelter for all animals, shall be kept in good repair, and maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition. It shall be unlawful to maintain a private kennel in a way which constitutes a
violation of this Section or which constitutes a nuisance under this Code, or in violation
of any condition imposed by the City Council at the time the license is granted.
Subd. 8 Penalty. Any person who keeps, harbors, controls or has custody of more than three (3) dogs,
more than three (3) cats without a private kennel license, or a combination of more than 5 dogs and cats in
violation of this section, shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor. Each day a violation of this
Section exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
8.2.14 Citations. The designated Animal Control Officer shall be hereby authorized and empowered to issue a
citation or citations in lieu of arrest or continued detention of any person who is believed to have violated the
provisions of this Section, in conjunction with the powers and limitations set forth in this Code. Nothing contained
in this Section shall limit the authority of any City Police Officer to issue a citation or perform all lawful acts in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this Section or any other applicable City Ordinance.
8.2.15 Penalty . Except as otherwise provided, any owner found violating any provision of this Section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. “Further a person which holds a private kennel license, who is in violation of these
provisions, may have such license revoked by the City Council after a hearing has been held by the Council.”
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.3: Pet and Animal Waste 10
SECTION 8.3 PET AND ANIMAL WASTE
8.3.01 Purpose. It shall be the purpose of this Section to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to guard
against the transmission of disease, and to promote City beautification by requiring the owners of all animals,
including pets, within the City to be immediately responsible for the animal waste and feces produced by those
animals.
8.3.02 Waste Removal Required. The Council finds and hereby requires that the owners of all pets and animals
within the City owe an obligation to their friends, neighbors and members of the public to properly pick up and
dispose of any animal waste produced by their animal in an expeditious, safe and proper manner. Every owner (or
person in possession) of every dog, cat, pet or other animal while that pet or animal is located within the City shall
be required to properly pick up and dispose of any feces produced by the animal immediately or as soon as is
practicable so that such animal waste or feces is not left on City property or the private property of another.
8.3.03 Citations. All law enforcement personnel, including the Animal Control Officer, shall hereby be authorized
and empowered to issue a citation or citations in lieu of arrest or continued detention to any person who is believed
to have violated the provisions of this Section.
8.3.04 Penalty. Any animal owner or person found in violation of a provision of this Section shall be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. Each violation of this offense Section shall be considered a separate offense.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.4: Dangerous, Non-Domestic and Farm Animals 11
SECTION 8.4: DANGEROUS, NON-DOMESTIC AND FARM ANIMALS
8.4.01 Non-Domestic Animals. It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess, harbor, or offer for sale any nondomesticated
animal (as that term is defined herein) with the City limits. Any owner of such an animal at the time of
the adoption of this Code shall have thirty (30) days in which to remove the animal from the City after which time
the City may impound the animal as provided herein and charge the owner all costs. An exception shall be made to
this prohibition for animals specifically trained for and actually providing assistance to the handicapped or disabled,
and for those animals brought into the City as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research
laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition.
8.4.02 Farm Animals. Farm animals shall only be kept in an agricultural district of the City, or on a residential lot
of at least ten (10) acres in size provided that no animal shelter shall be within three hundred (300) feet of adjoining
piece of property. An exception shall be made for animals brought into the City as part of an operating zoo,
veterinarian clinic, scientific research laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition
8.4.03 Reporting Escape of Dangerous Animals Required.
Subd. 1. The owner or keeper of any member of a species of the animal kingdom that escapes from his or
her custody or control and that is not indigenous to this state or presents a risk of serious physical harm to
persons or property, or both, shall within one hour after he or she discovers or reasonably should have
discovered the escape, report it to a law enforcement officer of the City, the County Sheriff either directly
of by dialing 911 and providing a report and the City Administrator.
Subd. 2. If the office of the City Administrator is closed to the public at the time a report is required, then it
is sufficient compliance to notify law enforcement by calling 911 if the owner or keeper makes the report
within one hour after becoming aware of the fact that the City office is not open to the public.
8.4.04 Possession, Sale of Wild, Potentially Dangerous Animals; Prohibitions.
Subd. 1. No person shall keep, own, harbor, have charge of, maintain or have control of within the City of
a wild, non-native or potentially dangerous animal.
Subd. 2. No person shall possess with intent to sell, offer for sale or buy or attempt to buy within the City a
wild, non-native or potentially dangerous animal.
Subd. 3. For the purpose of this section, the phrase “wild, non-native or potentially dangerous animal”
means an animal which is wild by nature and not customarily domesticated in the city and which because
of its size, disposition or other characteristics inherently constitutes a danger to human life or property. A
wild and potentially dangerous animal shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Apes: chimpanzees (Pan); gibbons (Hylobates); gorillas (Gorilla); orangutans (Pongo);
and siamangs (Symphalangus);
B. Baboons (Papoi, Mandrillus);
C. Bears (Ursidae);
D. Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus);
E. Coyotes (Canis latrans) and coyote-dog hybrids;
F. Elephants (Elephas and Loxodonta);
G. Hyenas (Hyaenidae);
H. Jaguars (Panthera onca);
I. Leopards (Panthera pardus);
J. Lions (Panthera leo);
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.4: Dangerous, Non-Domestic and Farm Animals 12
K. Lynxes (Lynx);
L. Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars, mountain lions and panthers;
M. Tigers (Panthera tigris);
N. Wolves (Canis lupus) and wolf-dog hybrids;
O. Wild cats (jungle cat, ocelot, margay, serval, caracal, leopard cat) and wildcat-domestic
cat hybrids; and
P. Large snakes or poisonous spiders or lizards.
Subd. 4. For the purposes of this section, the phrase “wild or potentially dangerous animal” does not
include an animal that is in the possession or control of any of the following agencies, organizations, its
employees or agents:
A. The Minnesota Department of Natural Resources;
B. The Minnesota Agriculture Department;
C. An incorporated humane society;
D. A veterinarian holding a valid license under state law who has custody of the a animal for
the purpose of providing medical treatment of the animal;
E. Any organization that is an accredited member of the American Association of
Zoological Parks and Aquariums;
F. An agency or official of the United States government acting in its official capacity;
G. Any research facility within the meaning of the Animal Welfare Act, being 7USC 2131,
as it may be amended from time to time;
H. A common carrier with possession of the animal while transporting;
I. Any person who is not currently dwelling in the city, who is traveling through the city
with any wild or potentially dangerous animal, and who is in the city for no more than 24
hours and the wild or potentially dangerous animal is maintained in quarters so
constructed which are humane and will prevent escape;
J. The International Society for the Preservation of Wild Animals;
K. Research facilities of the International Society for Endangered Cats; or
L. Any circus or professional entertainer present within the city for the purpose of
entertainment to the general public; provided, that the wild or potentially dangerous
animal is maintained in quarters so constructed which are humane and will prevent
escape.
Subd. 5. In addition to the penalty provided herein for a violation of this section, any person found guilty
of violating this section shall also be liable to the City for all expenses, whether incurred by the City or
advanced by the City, for the shelter, food, veterinary expenses, boarding and transportation of the seized
wild or dangerous animal, and such other expenses as may be required in the relocation or destruction of
any such wild or dangerous animal.
8.4.05 Seizure of Certain Animals Allowed. Any police officer or animal control officer may enter upon private
property and seize any animal provided that the following conditions exist:
A. There is an identified reliable complainant making a contemporaneous complaint about
the animal;
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.4: Dangerous, Non-Domestic and Farm Animals 13
B. The officer reasonably believes that the animal is either a barking dog, is an animal
subjected to cruelty, or is an animal at large;
C. The officer can demonstrate that there has been at least one verified previous complaint
of a barking dog; inhumane treatment of the animal; or that the animal was at large at this
address on a prior date;
D. The officer has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of the property and those
attempts have either failed or have been ignored;
E. The seizure will not involve the forced entry into a private residence. Use of a pass key
obtained from a property manager, landlord, innkeeper, or other authorized person to
have such key shall not be considered unauthorized entry; and,
F. Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place if personal contact with the
owner of the dog is not possible.
8.4.06 Animals Presenting a Danger to Health and Safety of City. If, in the reasonable belief of any person or
police officer, an animal presents an immediate danger to the health and safety of any person, or the animal is
threatening imminent harm to any person, or the animal is in the process of attacking any person, the officer may
destroy the animal in a proper and humane manner. Otherwise the person or officer may apprehend the animal and
deliver it to the pound for confinement. If the animal is destroyed, all charges to dispose of the animal is payable by
the owner of the animal. If the animal is found not to be a danger to the health and safety of the City, it may be
released to the owner or keeper.
8.4.07 Diseased Animals.
Subd. 1 Running at Large. No person shall keep or allow to be kept on his or her premises, or on
premises occupied by them, nor permit to run at large in the City, any animal which is diseased so as to be
a danger to the health and safety of the City, even though the animal be properly licensed under this
Section.
Subd. 2 Confinement. Any animal reasonably suspected of being diseased and presenting a threat to the
health and safety of the public, may be apprehended and confined in the pound by any person or police
officer. The police officer shall have a qualified veterinarian examine the animal. If the animal is found to
be diseased in such a manner so as to be a danger to the health and safety of the City, the officer shall cause
such animal to be painlessly killed and shall properly dispose of the remains. The owner or keeper of the
animal killed under this Section shall be liable for all costs of maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus
the costs of any veterinarian examinations.
Subd. 3 Release. If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be diseased within the meaning of this
Section, the animal shall be released to the owner or keeper free of charge.
8.4.08 Dangerous Animals.
Subd. l. Attack by an animal. It shall be unlawful for any person's animal to inflict or attempt to inflict
bodily injury to any person or other animal whether or not the owner is present. This section shall not apply
to an attack by a dog under the control of an on-duty law enforcement officer or to an attack upon an
uninvited intruder who has entered the owner's home with criminal intent.
Subd. 2. Destruction of dangerous animal. The animal control officer shall have the authority to order the
destruction of dangerous animals in accordance with the terms established by this ordinance.
Subd. 3. Definitions.
(1) A dangerous animal is an animal which has:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.4: Dangerous, Non-Domestic and Farm Animals 14
a. Caused bodily injury or disfigurement to any person on public or private
property; or
b. Engaged in any attack on any person under circumstances which would indicate
danger to personal safety; or
c. Exhibited unusually aggressive behavior, such as an attack on another animal; or
d. Bitten one (1) or more persons on two (2) or more occasions; or
e. Been found to be potentially dangerous and/or the owner has personal
knowledge of the same, the animal aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the
safety of humans or domestic animals.
(2) A potentially dangerous animal is an animal which has:
a. Bitten a human or a domestic animal on public or private property; or
b. When unprovoked, chased or approached a person upon the streets, sidewalks,
or any public property in an apparent attitude of attack; or
c. Has engaged in unprovoked attacks causing injury or otherwise threatening the
safety of humans or domestic animals.
(3) Proper enclosure. Proper enclosure means securely confined indoors or in a securely
locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping and to provide
protection for the animal from the elements. A proper enclosure does not include a porch,
patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other structure that would allow the animal to exit
of its own volition, or any house or structure in which windows are open or in which door
or window screens are the only barriers which prevent the animal from exiting. The
enclosure shall not allow the egress of the animal in any manner without human
assistance. A pen or kennel shall meet the following minimum specifications:
a. Have a minimum overall floor size of thirty-two (32) square feet.
b. Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five (5) feet and be constructed of 11-
gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall not exceed two (2) inches,
support posts shall be one-and-one-quarter-inch or larger steel pipe buried in the
ground eighteen (18) inches or more. When a concrete floor is not provided, the
sidewalls shall be buried a minimum of eighteen (18) inches in the ground.
c. A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be provided. The cover shall be
constructed of the same gauge wire or heavier as the sidewalls and shall also
have no openings in the wire greater than two (2) inches.
d. An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be constructed of the same material
as the sidewalls and shall also have no openings in the wire greater than two (2)
inches. The gate shall be equipped with a device capable of being locked and
shall be locked at all times when the animal is in the pen or kennel.
(4) Unprovoked. Unprovoked shall mean the condition in which the animal is not purposely
excited, stimulated, agitated or disturbed.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.4: Dangerous, Non-Domestic and Farm Animals 15
Subd. 4. Designation as potentially dangerous animal. The animal control officer, a City peace officer or
the City Attorney shall designate any animal as a potentially dangerous animal upon receiving such
evidence that such potentially dangerous animal has, when unprovoked, then bitten, attacked, or threatened
the safety of a person or a domestic animal as stated in subparagraph (c)(2). When an animal is declared
potentially dangerous, the animal control officer shall cause one (1) owner of the potentially dangerous
animal to be notified in writing that such animal is potentially dangerous.
Subd. 5. Evidence justifying designation. The animal control officer, a peace officer or the City Attorney
shall have the authority to designate any animal as a dangerous animal upon receiving evidence of the
following:
(1) That the animal has, when unprovoked, bitten, attacked, or threatened the safety of a
person or domestic animal as stated in subparagraph (c)(l).
(2) That the animal has been declared potentially dangerous and such animal has then bitten,
attacked, or threatened the safety of a person or domestic animal as stated in
subparagraph (c)(1).
Subd. 6. Authority to order destruction. The animal control officer, upon finding that an animal is
dangerous hereunder, is authorized to order, as part of the disposition of the case, that the animal be
destroyed based on a written order containing one (1) or more of the following findings of fact:
(1) The animal is dangerous as demonstrated by a vicious attack, an unprovoked attack, an
attack without warning or multiple attacks; or
(2) The owner of the animal has demonstrated an inability or unwillingness to control the
animal in order to prevent injury to persons or other animals.
Subd. 7. Procedure. The animal control officer, after having determined that an animal is dangerous, may
proceed in the following manner:
(1) The animal control officer shall cause one (1) owner of the animal to be notified in
writing or in person that the animal is dangerous and may order the animal seized or
make such orders as deemed proper. This owner shall be notified as to dates, times,
places and parties bitten, and shall be given fourteen (14) days to appeal this order by
requesting a hearing before the city council for a review of this determination.
a. If no appeal is filed, the orders issued will stand or the animal control officer
may order the animal destroyed.
b. If an owner requests a hearing for determination as to the dangerous nature of
the animal, the hearing shall be held before the city council, which shall set a
date for hearing not more than three (3) weeks after demand for the hearing. The
records of the animal control or city clerk's office shall be admissible for
consideration by the animal control officer without further foundation. After
considering all evidence pertaining to the temperament of the animal, the city
council shall make an order as it deems proper. The city council may order that
the animal control officer take the animal into custody for destruction, if such
animal is not currently in custody. If the animal is ordered into custody for
destruction, the owner shall immediately make the animal available to the
animal control officer.
c. No person shall harbor an animal after it has been found by to be dangerous and
ordered into custody for destruction.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.4: Dangerous, Non-Domestic and Farm Animals 16
Subd. 8. Stopping an attack. If any police officer or animal control officer is witness to an attack by an
animal upon a person or another animal, the officer may take whatever means the officer deems appropriate
to bring the attack to an end and prevent further injury to the victim.
Subd. 9. Notification of new address. The owner of an animal which has been identified as dangerous or
potentially dangerous must notify the animal control officer in writing if the animal is to be relocated from
its current address or given or sold to another person. The notification must be given in writing at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the relocation or transfer of ownership. The notification must include the current
owner's name and address, the relocation address, and the name of the new owner, if any.
8.4.09 Dangerous animal requirements.
Subd. 1. Requirements. If the city council does not order the destruction of an animal that has been
declared dangerous, the city council may, as an alternative, order any or all of the following:
(1) That the owner provide and maintain a proper enclosure for the dangerous animal as
specified in section 8.04.08, Subd. 3(3);
(2) Post the front and the rear of the premises with clearly visible warning signs, including a
warning symbol to inform children, that there is a dangerous animal on the property as
specified in Minnesota Statute 347.51;
(3) Provide and show proof annually of public liability insurance in the minimum amount of
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00);
(4) If the animal is a dog and is outside the proper enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and
restrained by a substantial chain or leash (not to exceed six (6) feet in length) and under
the physical restraint of a person sixteen (16) years of age or older. The muzzle must be
of such design as to prevent the dog from biting any person or animal, but will not cause
injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration;
(5) If the animal is a dog, it must have an easily identifiable, standardized tag identifying the
dog as dangerous affixed to its collar at all times as specified in Minnesota Statute
347.51;
(6) All animals deemed dangerous by the animal control officer shall be registered with the
County in which this city is located within fourteen (14) days after the date the animal
was so deemed and provide satisfactory proof thereof to the animal control officer.
(7) If the animal is a dog, the dog must be licensed and up to date on rabies vaccination. If
the animal is a cat or ferret, it must be up to date with rabies vaccination.
Subd. 2. Seizure. Animal control shall immediately seize any dangerous animal if the owner does not meet
each of the above requirements within fourteen (14) days after the date notice is sent to the owner that the
animal is dangerous. Seizure may be appealed to district court by serving a summons and petition upon the
city and filing it with the district court.
Subd. 3. Reclaiming animals. A dangerous animal seized under subsection 8.04.09, Subd. 2, may be
reclaimed by the owner of the animal upon payment of impounding and boarding fees, and presenting proof
to animal control that each of the requirements under subsection 8.04.09, Subd. 2, is fulfilled. An animal
not reclaimed under this section within fourteen (14) days may be disposed of as provided under section
8.04.08, Subd. 6, and the owner is liable to animal control for costs incurred in confining the animal.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.4: Dangerous, Non-Domestic and Farm Animals 17
Subd. 4. Subsequent offenses. If an owner of an animal has subsequently violated the provisions under
section 8.04.08 with the same animal, the animal must be seized by animal control. The owner may request
a hearing as defined in section 8.04.08, Subd. 6. If the owner is found to have violated the provisions for
which the animal was seized, the animal control officer shall order the animal destroyed in a proper and
humane manner and the owner shall pay the costs of confining the animal. If the person is found not to
have violated the provisions for which the animal was seized, the owner may reclaim the animal under the
provisions of subsection 8.04.09, Subd. 3. If the animal is not yet reclaimed by the owner within fourteen
(14) days after the date the owner is notified that the animal may be reclaimed, the animal may be disposed
of as provided under section 8.04.08, Subd. 6 and the owner is liable to the animal control for the costs
incurred in confining, impounding and disposing of the animal.
8.4.10 Interference with Officers. No person shall in any manner molest, hinder, or interfere with any person
authorized by the Council to capture dogs, cats or other animals and convey them to the pound while engaged in
such operation. Nor shall any unauthorized person break open the pound, or attempt to do so, or take or attempt to
take from any agent any animal taken up by him or her in compliance with this Chapter, or in any other manner to
interfere with or hinder such officer in the discharge of his or her duties under this Chapter.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.5: Feeding of Deer Prohibited 18
SECTION 8.5: FEEDING OF DEER PROHIBITED
8.5.01 Prohibition to the Feeding of Deer Within the Urban City Limits. It shall be unlawful for any person to
place, or permit to be placed on the ground or within four (4) feet of the ground surface, either on property owned or
controlled by such person or on property controlled by others, and located within the urban city limits of the City of
Cloquet (unless that property is screened in a manner which prevents deer from feeding thereon) any grain, fodder,
salt licks or any other food including feed for birds, which may reasonably be expected to result in encouragement
of deer feeding thereon.
A. The prohibition shall not apply to:
1. Feeding programs or efforts undertaken by or under the auspices of the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources or for designated public purpose as
approved by the City Council; and,
2. Veterinarians, City Animal Control Officers, or County, State, or Federal game
official who, in the course of their duties, have deer in their custody; and,
3. Any food places upon the property for the purpose of entrapping or otherwise
taking deer where such trapping or taking is pursuant to a permit issued by the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources; and,
4. Any property located within the defined city limits of the City of Cloquet which
is zoned as a Farm Residential District. For purposes of this Ordinance, all other
properties located within the City of Cloquet will be considered a part of the
urban City of Cloquet.
B. Penalties for violation. Any person violating, or otherwise refusing to comply with any
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. Each day a violation of
this section is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such under this section.
(Ordinance 321A)
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS
Section 8.6: General Penalties for Violation of Chapter 8 19
SECTION 8.6: GENERAL PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER 8
8.6.01 Violations and Penalties Generally.
Subd. 1 Separate Offenses. Each day a violation of this Chapter of the Code is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such under this Section.
Subd. 2 Misdemeanor. Unless otherwise provided, violations of this Chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Effective Date: March 7, 2006
Amendments: 05-15-07 336A / 05-11-17 465A / 03-06-18 472A
Section 9.1 Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways 1
Section 9.1: Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways
9.1.01. Election to Manage the Public Rights-of-Way. Pursuant to the authority granted to the City of Cloquet
under state and federal statutory, administrative and common law, the City hereby elects, pursuant to Minn. Stat.
237.163 Subd. 2(b), to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
9.1.02. Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meaning given. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include
the future, words in the plural number shall include the singular number, and words in the singular number shall
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
Subd. 1. “Abandoned Facility” means a facility no longer in service or physically disconnected
from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other facility, that is in use or still carries
service. A facility is not abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
Subd. 2. “Applicant” means any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-ofway.
Subd. 3. “City” means the City of Cloquet, Minnesota.
Subd. 4. “Commission” means the State Public Utilities Commission.
Subd. 5. “Congested Right-of-Way” means a crowded condition in the subsurface of the public
right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing underground facilities
does not allow for construction of new underground facilities without using hand digging to expose
the existing lateral facilities in conformance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 216D.04. Subdivision
3, over a continuous length in excess of 500 feet.
Subd. 6. “Department” means the Department of Public Works of the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 7. “Department Inspector” means any person authorized by the city to carry out inspections
related to the provisions of this chapter.
Subd. 8. “Director” means the Director of the Department of Public Works of the City of Cloquet,
or his or her designee.
Subd. 9. “Delay Penalty” is the penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in right-of-way
excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established by permit.
Subd. 10. “Emergency” means a condition that (1) poses a danger to life or health, or of a
significant loss of property; or (2) requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to
restore service to a customer.
Subd. 11. “Equipment” means any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain facilities in any
right-of-way.
Subd. 12. “Excavate” or “Excavation” means any work in the surface or subsurface of the public
right-of-way, including, but not limited to, opening the public right-of-way; installing, servicing,
repairing or modifying any Facility (ies) in or under the surface or subsurface of the public right-ofway;
restoring the surface and subsurface of the public right-of-way.
Subd. 13. “Excavation permit” means the permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained
before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An Excavation permit allows the holder to
excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.1 Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways 2
Subd. 14. “Facility” or “Facilities” shall include, but not limited to, any and all cables, cabinets,
ducts, conduits, converters, equipment, fences, drains, handholes, manholes, parking areas, pipes,
pedestals, spice boxes, surface location markers, tracks, tunnels, utilities, vaults and other
appurtenances or tangible things owned, leased, operated, or licensed by a Person or company, that
are located within the public right-of-way.
Subd. 15. “Hole” means an excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length less
than the width of the pavement.
Subd. 16. “Local Representative” means a local person or persons, or designee of such person or
persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for that registrant
regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
Subd. 17. “Obstruct” means to place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and
open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
Subd. 18. “Occupation Permit” means the permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained
before a person may obstruct or occupy a public right-of-way, allowing the holder to hinder free
and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way, for the duration of the permit.
This would include the construction of any type of above ground facility located within a public
right-of-way or easement.
Subd. 19. “Patch” or “Patching” means a method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature. A patch consists of (1) the compaction of the subbase and aggregate base, and (2) the
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the
excavation in all directions. A patch is considered full restoration only when the pavement is
included in the city’s two-year project plan.
Subd. 20. “Pavement” means any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-way
and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete, aggregate, or gravel.
Subd. 21. “Permittee” means any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way
has been granted by the city under this chapter.
Subd. 22. “Person” means an individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state,
however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign, whether for profit or
nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or political.
Subd. 23. “Probation” means the status of a person that has not complied with the conditions of
this chapter.
Subd. 24. “Probationary Period” means one year from the date that a person has been notified in
writing that they have been put on probation.
Subd. 25. “Registrant” means any person who (1) has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities
located in any right-of-way, or (2) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the rightof-
way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way.
Subd. 26. “Restore” or “Restoration” means the process by which an excavated right-of-way and
surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition and life
expectancy that existed before excavation.
Subd. 27. “Public Right-of-Way” means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicycle lane, public sidewalk, or utility easements in which the city has an interest,
including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility installations of the City’s. A
right-of-way does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other
nonwire telecommunications or broadcast service.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.1 Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways 3
Subd. 28. “Right-of-Way Permit” means either an excavation permit, an obstruction permit, or a
utility franchise right-of-way permit, depending on the context, required by this section.
Subd. 29. “Right-of-Way User” means (1) a telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by
Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162, subd. 4; or (2) a person owning or controlling a facility in the
right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a right
under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
Subd. 30. “Service” or “Utility Service” includes (1) those services provided by a public utility as
defined in Minn. Stat. 216B.02, subds. 4 and 6; (2) services of a telecommunications right-of-way
user, including transporting of voice or data information; (3) services of a cable communications
systems as defined in Minn. Stat. Chapter. 238; (4) natural gas or electric energy or
telecommunications services provided by the city; (5) services provided by a cooperative electric
association organized under Minn. Stat., Chapter 308A; and (6) water, and sewer, including service
laterals, steam, cooling or heating services.
Subd. 31. “Service Lateral” means an underground facility that is used to transmit, distribute, or
furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a common source to an end-use customer.
A service lateral is also an underground facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a
customer’s premises.
Subd. 32. “Temporary Surface” means the compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the excavation. It is temporary
in nature except when the replacement is of pavement included in the city’s two-year plan, in which
case it is considered full restoration.
Subd. 33. “Trench” means an excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
Subd. 34. “Telecommunication right-of-way user” means a person owning or controlling a facility
in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a Facility in the right-of-way, that is used or is
intended to be used for transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. For
purposes of this chapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated under Minn. Stat.
Chap. 238, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy
services whether provided by a public utility as defined in Minn. Stat. Sec. 216B.02, a municipality,
a municipal gas or power agency organized under Minn. Stat. Chaps. 453 and 453A, or a
cooperative electric association organized under Minn. Stat. Chap. 308A, are not
telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this chapter.
Subd. 35. “Utility franchise right-of-way permit” means the permit which, pursuant to this section,
must be obtained by all privately owned utility companies, which have been granted a franchise by
the City of Cloquet to operate and occupy public right-of-ways within the City, or
Telecommunications right-of-way users as defined by Minn. Stat. Chap. 237.162.
9.1.03. Administration. The Director is the principal city official responsible for the administration of the
rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The Director may delegate any or all
of the duties hereunder.
9.1.04 . Permit Requirements.
Subd. 1. Right-of-Way Permit Required. No person, except an authorized city employee or a contractor
performing work under a contract with the city, shall make any excavation in a street, alley, sidewalk,
public ground or right-of-way, or obstruct or otherwise occupy any right-of-way with the construction or
installation of any type of above ground facility, without first having obtained the appropriate permit from
the City, as provided in this Section.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.1 Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways 4
a) Excavation Permit. An excavation permit is required before a person can excavate that
part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free and open passage
over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to
the extent and for the duration specified therein.
b) Occupation Permit. An occupation permit is required before a person can hinder free
and open passage over the specified portion of public right-of-way, or to otherwise
occupy a right-of-way by constructing or placing any type of above ground facility on or
within the public right-of-way, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.
c) Utility Franchise Right-of-Way Permit. A utility franchise right-of-way permit is
required of all privately owned utility companies, which have been granted a franchise by
the City of Cloquet to operate within and occupy public right-of-ways in the City, or
Telecommunications right-of-way users as defined by Minn. Stat. Chap. 237.162. An
excavation permit or occupation permit is not required if a person or company already
possesses a valid utility franchise right-of-way permit as provided for by this section.
Subd. 2. Trees, Plantings, Gardens and Other Exceptions. Persons planting or maintaining trees,
plantings or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and shall not be required to
obtain any permits under this Chapter. All such planting plans, however, must be reviewed and approved
by the Director prior to installation. All trees or plantings are subject to removal by the City, without
compensation to the owner, if they are deemed to interfere with the public’s use of the right-of-way or the
City’s maintenance of any public utilities located within such right-of-ways or easements. Excavations in
the boulevards for the purpose of installing utility poles, utility signs or utility markers shall not require a
permit. The replacement of residential sidewalks or driveway aprons less than 250 square feet in total work
area, shall not require a permit.
Subd. 3. Storage Buildings Within Public Right-of-Ways. No permanent storage buildings, nor any
other type of permanent buildings or structures, may be constructed or located within a public right-of-way
or easement. Temporary storage buildings may be allowed within a public right-of-way, but only after an
Occupation Permit, as described in Section 9.1.04, Subd. 1(b) of this Chapter, has been obtained.
Subd. 4. Fences Within Public Right-of-Ways or Easements. Fences may be allowed across public
right-of-ways, but only after an Occupation Permit, as described in Section 9.1.04, Subd. 1(b) of this
Chapter, has been obtained. If a fence blocks access to a dedicated utility easement, the fence must be
provided with a gate, to the width of the easement, at the point or points where it blocks the easement.
Subd. 5. Permit Extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date or
dates specified in the permit unless such person (i) makes a supplementary application for another right-ofway
permit before the expiration of the initial permit, and (ii) a new permit or permit extension is granted.
Subd. 6. Denial of permit. The city may deny a permit for a past permittee’s failure to meet the
requirements and conditions of this Chapter or if the City determines that the denial is necessary to protect
the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use. Except in
an emergency, the City further reserves the right to deny or delay the issuance of an Excavation Permit
when such work would be seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable.
Subd. 7. Permit Display. Permits issued under this Chapter shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise
available at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.
9.1.05 Right-of-Way Permit Applications. Applications for right-of-way excavation or occupation permits shall
be made to the City for individual projects on forms prescribed by the Director and furnished by the City.
Applications shall be in writing; shall state the name and address of the applicant; the nature, location and purpose
of the excavation or work, the name and contact telephone number of a local representative, the date of
commencement and the estimated date of completion and other data as may reasonably be required by the City to
whom all applications shall be submitted. By his or her signature, the applicant shall agree to conform to the rules,
regulations and requirements of this section and any others as established by the director.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.1 Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways 5
Subd. 1. Required Insurance and Performance Bond. Excavation Permit applications and Utility
Franchise Right-of-Way Permit applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon the
furnishing of and compliance with, the requirements of the following provisions:
a) A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
1) Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the permittee by an
insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota, or a
form of self insurance acceptable to the City;
2) Verifying that the permittee is insured against claims for personal injury,
including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the (i)
use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the permittee, its officers, agents,
employees and permittees, and (ii) placement and use of facilities and
equipment in the right-of-way by the permittee, its officers, agents,
employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against
liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities
and collapse of property;
3) Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required
herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as
to all such coverages;
4) Requiring that the Director be notified thirty (30) days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term;
5) Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage,
workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by the director in
amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry out the
purposes and policies of this Chapter, but in no case shall insured coverage
be less than the following:
General Liability: $1,000,000 Each Occurrence.
Automobile Liability: $1,000,000 Combined Single Limit.
Workers Compensation: Statutory.
6) A copy of the actual insurance policies shall be provided to the City at time
of application.
7) If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required to be filed
under Minn. Stat. 300.06 as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of
State.
8) A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from the
Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or federal
agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate from
said commission or other state or federal agency.
b) Surety Bond (Restoration Performance Bond). Before an excavation permit as provided in
this Section shall be issued, the applicant, other than public service corporations and utilities to
whom a franchise has been issued by the City or a certificate or authorization to do business has
been granted by some other governmental agency, shall deposit with the City, a surety bond in the
amount of $5,000.00 payable to the City. In special cases, the City may require the posting of an
additional or larger surety bond when the City deems the existing bond to be inadequate under
applicable standards. The required bond shall be:
1) With a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of Minnesota.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.1 Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways 6
2) Satisfactory to the City Attorney in form and substance.
3) Conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this Section and to the permittee’s
satisfactory performance to backfill, restore and place in good and safe condition as
near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction of the Director, all
openings and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any street where
excavation shall be made in as good condition for the period of 12 months after the
work shall have been done, usual wear and tear excepted, as it was in before the
work shall have been done. Any settlement of the surface within the one-year period
shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective back-filling by the permittee.
c) Payment of money due the City for:
1) Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management costs;
2) Prior past due right-of-way permit fees;
3) Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City because of applicant's
prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any emergency actions
taken by the city;
4) Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
9.1.06. Issuance of Permit; Conditions.
Subd. 1. Conditions. The Director may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and
the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of
local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to Minnesota Statutes, Section 216D.01-.09 (Gopher
One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560.
Subd. 2. Trenchless Excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits, permittees employing
trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited to Horizontal Directional Drilling, shall follow all
requirements set forth in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 216D and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560, and shall
require potholing or open cutting over existing underground utilities before excavating, as determined by
the City.
Subd. 3. No Advertising or Business Signs. No private advertising or business signs shall be located
within a public right-of-way, unless specifically authorized by city council resolution.
9.1.07. Excavation Permit and Occupation Permit Fees. A permit fee shall be paid to the City for each
individual project, upon issuance of an excavation permit or occupation permit, in a sum which shall be established
by resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council. Said permit fees shall be in addition to all other fees
for permits or charges relative to any proposed construction work. Utility franchise right-of-way permits will
require the payment of one annual fee.
Subd. 1. Excavation Permit Fee. The city shall establish the excavation permit fee and shall be in an
amount sufficient to recover the city’s management costs.
Subd. 2. Occupation Permit Fee. The city shall establish the occupation permit fee and shall be in an
amount sufficient to recover the city’s management costs.
Subd. 3. Utility Franchise Right-of-Way Permit Fee. The city shall establish the utility franchise rightof-
way permit fee and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city’s management costs.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.1 Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways 7
Subd. 4. Delay Penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000 subp. 3 and notwithstanding
Section 9.1.04, Subd. 3 of this Chapter, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable
delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be
established from time to time by city council resolution.
Subd. 5. Payment of Permit Fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit shall be issued without
payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The city may allow applicant to pay such fees within
thirty (30) days of billing.
Subd. 6. Non refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the Director has revoked for a
breach as stated in Section 9.1.13 are not refundable.
Subd. 7. All permit fees shall be established consistent with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.100.
9.1.08. Right-of-Way Patching and Restoration.
Subd. 1. Timing. The work to be done under an excavation permit, and the patching and restoration of the
right-of-way as required herein, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as
many days as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the permittee.
Subd. 2. Patch and Restoration by Permittee. The permittee shall patch all its own excavations and
restore the right-of-way at it’s own expense. To guarantee satisfactory performance with this requirement
the permittee shall, at the time of application for an excavation permit, post a construction surety
(performance) bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rules 7819.3000 and Section 9.1.05,
Subd. 1(b) of this Chapter.
Subd. 3. Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in patching, or restoration
performed by permittee or its agents. Permittee upon notification from the Director, shall correct all
restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the Director. Said work shall be
completed within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the Director, not including days
during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work
is prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable.
Subd. 4. Failure to Restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the
condition required by the Director, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by
the Director, the Director at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the city,
within thirty (30) days of billing, 100% the cost of restoring the right-of-way plus a 25% administrative fee
plus any delay penalties as may be assessed under Section 9.1.07, Subd. 4 of this Chapter. If permittee fails
to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under the construction surety (performance) bond. In
addition, the City may also deny future permit applications by the permittee for failure to correct all defects
in a timely manner.
9.1.09. Excavation, Installation, Patching and Restoration Standards and Practices. The permittee shall
perform all excavations, installations, patching and restoration in compliance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1100 and in
accordance with the following requirements and standards:
Subd. 1. Backfilling and Compaction of Excavations. Backfilling of any excavations in any street,
pursuant to an excavation permit issued under this Chapter, shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to
that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug. Backfill shall be placed in uniform layers and
shall be tamped by acceptable vibratory, mechanical compactors, as required by the soil materials and
sound engineering practices generally recognized in the construction industry. Compaction by backhoe
bucket and/or vehicle tires is not considered an acceptable compaction method and under no circumstances
will this method be approved as the sole method of compaction.
When and where acceptable backfill material is not available from the job site, which is conducive to
proper and uniform compaction, the permittee shall furnish, from other sources, acceptable granular
backfill material as approved by the Director.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.1 Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways 8
Subd. 2. Restoration of Pavement Surfaces. The permittee shall restore the surface of all streets, cut into
or damaged as a result of any excavation work, in accordance with the specifications of the Director. The
permittee may be required to place a temporary surface over openings made in paved traffic lanes. Except
when the pavement shall be permanently replaced before the opening of the cut to traffic, the fill above the
bottom of the pavement slab shall be made with suitable material well tamped into place and this fill shall
be topped with a minimum of at least two inches of bituminous mixture, which shall be suitable to maintain
the opening in good condition until permanent pavement restoration can be made. The crown of the
temporary restoration shall not exceed one inch above the adjoining pavement. The permittee shall
exercise special care in making the temporary restorations and shall maintain the excavation in safe
traveling condition, until such time as permanent restorations shall be made. All temporary or permanent
pavement materials shall be in accordance with the specifications of the City.
Permanent restoration of the street shall be made by the permittee in strict accordance with the
specifications prescribed by the City to restore the street to its original condition as to both material type
and pavement thickness. Prior to the replacement of the permanent pavement restoration, the edges of the
pavement opening shall be squared up by saw-cutting or an acceptable means of neat-lining for a minimum
of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions.
Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the City shall not prevent the City from asserting a
claim against the permittee and his, her or its surety under the surety bond required by Section 9.1.05,
Subd. 1(b), for incomplete or defective work if discovered within 12 months from the completion of the
excavation work. The City’s presence during the performance of any excavation work shall not relieve the
permittee of its responsibilities under this Section.
Subd. 3. Routing of Traffic. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that, during the
performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions are maintained as nearly normal as practicable so as
to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the general
public. The Director may permit the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him
or her if in his or her opinion it shall be necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic, except in
the case of an emergency, during which time the permittee shall take every reasonable precaution to
provide for the safety and convenience of the people using the street, including its own vehicles, by taking
the following steps before any roadway shall be closed or restricted to traffic:
(a) The permittee shall receive the approval of all street closures and detours from the
Director.
(b) The permittee shall notify the Cloquet Fire Department of any streets so closed to traffic.
(c) Upon completion of the construction work the permittee shall notify the Director before
traffic shall be moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be
made.
(d) Where flag persons shall be deemed necessary by the City they shall be furnished by the
permittee at his or her own expense. Where possible, through traffic shall be maintained
without the aid of detours. In instances where this would not be feasible the Director
shall designate detour routes. The permittee shall be responsible for any unnecessary
damage caused to any roadway by the operation of his or her equipment.
Subd. 4. Traffic Control Devices. All barricades, warning devices, detour signs and flagman shall be
provided and maintained by the permittee, at their expense, during all phases of the excavation and
restoration operations for as long as they may be necessary. All traffic control and warning devices shall be
in accordance with the Minnesota Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, current edition.
Subd. 5. Clearance for Fire Equipment. The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as
not to interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Passageways leading to fire escapes or
firefighting equipment shall be kept free of piles of material or other obstructions.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.1 Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways 9
Subd. 6. Protection of Traffic. The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable barriers to confine earth
from trenches or other excavations in order to encroach upon highways as little as possible. The permittee
shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossings over excavations and across roadways under
improvement to accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections where possible.
Subd. 7. Gopher State One Call. In accordance with MN Rules Chapter 7560, prior to any excavation
work, the permittee shall contact Gopher State One Call at (800) 252-1166 to have all utilities properly
located.
Subd. 8. Removal and Protection of Utilities. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility
without the written consent of the Director and the utility company or person owning the utility. If it shall
become necessary to remove an existing utility this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the
City shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of the work is borne by the permittee.
The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other
arrangements with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or
otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the
excavation work and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or
across the work. In case the pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be
repaired by the agency or person owning them and the expense of the repairs shall be charged to the
permittee, and his or her bond shall be liable for the cost. The permittee shall be responsible for any
damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas
pipe, electric conduit or other utility and its bond shall be liable therefor.
Subd. 9. Protection of Adjoining Property. The permittee shall at all times and at his or her own
expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and
taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of the property it shall be necessary
to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall
obtain written permission from the owner of the private property for such purpose and if he or she cannot
obtain written permission from the owner the director may authorize him or her to enter the private
premises solely for the purpose of making the property safe. The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore
up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the
excavations work and shall be responsible for all damages to public or private property or roadways
resulting from its failure to properly protect and carry out the work. Whenever it may be necessary for the
permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after
ditches have been back-filled as required in this Section. All construction and maintenance work shall be
done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as nearly as
possible to that which existed before the work began. The permittee shall not remove even temporarily any
trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without first having
notified and obtained the consent of the property owner, or in the case of public property the appropriate
City Department or the City officials having control of the property.
Subd. 10. Protective Measures. The permittee shall erect adequate fences, railing or barriers about the
site of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using the City street or sidewalks, and the
protective barriers shall be maintained until the work shall be completed or the danger removed. At
twilight there shall be placed upon the place of excavation and upon any excavated materials or structures
or other obstructions to streets suitable and sufficient lights which shall be kept burning throughout the
night during the maintenance of the obstructions. It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove or tear down
the fence or railing or other protective barriers or any lights provided there for the protection of the public.
Subd. 11. Attractive Nuisance. It shall be unlawful for the permittee to suffer or permit to remain
unguarded at the place of excavation or opening any machinery, equipment or other device having the
characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to attract children and be hazardous to their safety or health.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.1 Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways 10
Subd. 12. Care of Excavated Material. All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the
trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger those working in the
trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible shall be caused to
those using streets and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow
to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such as might be the case in a narrow alley, the
Director shall have the authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site
and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of back-filling. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to
secure the necessary permission and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal
sites.
Subd. 13. Damage to Existing Improvements. All damages done to existing improvements during the
progress of the excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials for such repair shall conform
with the requirements of any applicable code or ordinance. If upon being ordered the permittee fails to
furnish the necessary labor and materials for the repairs, the director shall have the authority to cause the
necessary labor and materials to be furnished by the City and the cost shall be charged against the
permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable on his or her surety bond for the cost.
Subd. 14. Property Lines and Easements. Property lines and limits of easements shall be indicated on
the plan of excavation submitted with the application for the excavation permit and it shall be the
permittee's responsibility to confine excavation work within these limits.
Subd. 15. Cleanup. As the excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties shall be
thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup
operations at the location of the excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and
shall be completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. From time to time as may be ordered by the
director, and in any event immediately after completion of the work, the permittee shall at this or its own
expense clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from the work and upon
failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the director, the work may be done
by the City and the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost
thereof under the surety bond provided under this section.
Subd. 16. Protection of Water Courses. The permittee shall provide for the flow of all water courses,
sewers or drains intercepted during the excavation work and shall replace the same in as good condition as
they were found or shall make provisions for them as the Director may require. The permittee shall not
obstruct the gutter of any street but shall use all proper measures to provide for the free passage of surface
water. The permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt, slickings or other
run-off pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other operations and shall be responsible for
any damage resulting from its failure to so provide.
Subd. 17. Erosion and Sediment Control. Erosion and sediment control within and around work sites
shall be in accordance with the City’s Storm Water or Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance. In the
absence of a local Storm Water or Erosions and Sediment Control Ordinance, recommended Best
Management Practices shall be utilized as identified in the “MINNESOTA STORMWATER MANUAL”
as prepared by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. Inlet protection should be provided at curb inlets
and yard drains where necessary. Under no circumstances shall material be allowed to enter the storm
drain or storm sewer systems of the City. Excess material/sediment shall be removed by sweeper or
shoveling and then be hauled away. Effluent from dewatering operations shall be filtered or passed through
an approved sediment trapping device, or both, and discharged in a manner that does not adversely affect
adjacent property.
Subd. 18. Tunnels. Tunnels under pavement shall not be permitted, except by permission of the director
and if permitted shall be adequately supported.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.1 Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways 11
Subd. 19. Trenches in Pipe Laying. Except by special permission from the Director, no trench shall be
excavated more than 50 feet in advance of pipe laying nor left unfilled more than 100 feet where pipe has
been laid. The length of the trench that may be opened at any one time shall not be greater than the length
of pipe and the necessary accessories which shall be available at the site ready to be put in place. Trench
excavations shall be carried out, braced and/or sheathed according to generally accepted safety standards
for construction work as prescribed by OSHA Excavation standards. No timber bracing, lagging, sheathing
or other lumber shall be left in any trench.
Subd. 20. Prompt Completion of Work. The permittee shall proceed with diligence and expedite all
excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete the work and restore the
street to its original condition, or as near as may be, as soon as practicable and in any event not later than
the date specified in the excavation permit therefor.
Subd. 21. Urgent Work. If in his or her judgment traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the
traveling public or the public interest require that the excavation work be performed as emergency work,
the director shall have full power to order, at the time the permit shall be granted, that a crew of workers
and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day to the end that the excavation work
may be completed as soon as possible.
Subd. 22. Emergency Action. In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in
or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise shall be in such condition as to immediately endanger the
property, life, health or safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling the sewer, main, conduit
or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit under this Chapter, shall
immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection
of property, life, health and safety of individuals. However, any person owning or controlling the facility
shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the
director’s office shall be open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first
obtaining an excavation permit under this Chapter.
Subd. 23. Noise, Dust and Debris. Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in
such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of
neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent
practicable in the performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris and during the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The permittee shall not use, except with the express written permission
of the Director or in case of an emergency as otherwise provided in this Section, any tool, appliance or
equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the
neighboring property.
Subd. 24. Preservation of Monuments. The permittee shall not disturb any property survey monuments
or hubs found on the line of excavation work until ordered to do so by the Director. Any survey
monuments disturbed or removed by the permittee as a result of any excavations shall be replaced at the
permittee’s expense.
Subd. 25. Safe Excavation Practices. The permittee shall be solely responsible to see that all excavations
take place in conformance with OSHA Standard 1926.652, that employees are properly trained with
regards to safe excavation practices as they relate to the construction industry and that suitable protective
methods are utilized to protect its employees and the general public.
9.1.10. Inspections. The Director may make any inspections as shall be reasonably necessary in the enforcement
of this Section. The Director shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced any rules and
regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this Section
Subd. 1. Notice of Completion. Upon completion of all work and the restoration of the street surface, the
permittee shall notify the Director’s office to arrange for a final inspection and return to the City a
certification of completion signed by the permittee in accordance Minnesota Rules 7819.1300.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.1 Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways 12
Subd. 2. Site Inspection. Permittees shall make the work-site available to city personnel and to all others
as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of
the work.
Subd 3. Authority of Director.
(a) At the time of inspection the director may order the immediate cessation of any work, which
poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety, or well being of the public.
(b) The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any work that does not conform to the
terms of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall state
that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten (10)
days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the director that the
violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time,
the Director may revoke the permit pursuant to Sec. 9.1.13 or this Chapter.
9.1.11. Work Done Without a Permit.
Subd. 1. Emergency Situations. Each person with facilities in the right-of-way shall immediately notify
the city of any event regarding its facilities that it considers being an emergency. The owner of the
facilities may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two
business days after the occurrence of the emergency the owner shall apply for the necessary permits, pay
the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into
compliance with this section for the actions it took in response to the emergency.
If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local
representative of each facility owner affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the
city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be
borne by the person whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
Subd. 2. Non-Emergency Situations. Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having
obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and
as a penalty pay double the normal fee for said permit and comply with all of the requirements of this
section.
9.1.12. Supplementary Notification. If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the Director of the accurate information as soon as
this information is known.
9.1.13. Revocation of Permits.
Subd. 1. Substantial Breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any right-of-way
permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute,
ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by permittee
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(a) The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
(b An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit, or the
perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;
(c) Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way permit;
(d) The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a permit extension is
obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the permittees
control; or
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.1 Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways 13
(e) The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a condition
indicated on an order issued pursuant to Section 9.1.10, Subd. 3(b).
Subd. 2. Written Notice of Breach. If the city determines that the permittee has committed a substantial
breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the
city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall state that
continued violations might be cause for revocation of the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above,
will allow the city, at its discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and
remedy the breach.
Subd. 3. Response to Notice of Breach. Within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving notification of the
breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan, acceptable to the city, which will cure the breach.
Permittee's failure to so contact the city, or the permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or
permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation of
the permit.
Subd. 4. Reimbursement of City Costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the City for the
City's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred
in connection with such revocation.
9.1.14. Mapping Data.
Subd. 1. Information Required. Each permittee shall provide mapping information required by the City
in accordance with Minnesota Rules 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within ninety (90) days following
completion of any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the Director accurate maps and
drawings certifying the “as-built” location of all equipment installed, owed and maintained by the
permittee. Such maps and drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all facilities and
equipment and shall be provided consistent with the City’s mapping standards. Failure to provide maps
and drawings pursuant to this subsection shall be grounds for denying the permittee’s future permit
applications.
Subd. 2. Service Laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of service laterals, other than
minor repairs as defined in Minnesota Rules 7560.0150 subpart 2, shall require the permittee’s use of
appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals, and the service
lateral vertical locations in those cases where the city reasonably requires it. Permittees or their
subcontractors shall install a locating wire or have an equally effective means of marking the location of
each nonconductive underground facility within the public right-of-way. This requirement does not apply
when making minor repairs to an existing nonconductive facility.
Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the city evidence of the installed service lateral locations.
Compliance with this subdivision 2 and with applicable Gopher State One Call law and Minnesota Rules
governing service laterals installed after December 31, 2005, shall be a condition of any city approval
necessary for 1) payments to contractors working on a public improvement project including those under
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429, and 2) City approval of performance under development agreements, or
other subdivision or site plan approval under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 462. The city shall reasonably
determine the appropriate method of providing such information. Failure to provide prompt and accurate
location information on service laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit issued for the
work or may result in the denial of future permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors.
Subd. 3. Maintain Drawings. Users of sub-surface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans,
and profiles showing the location and character of all underground structures including abandoned
installations. Corrected maps shall be filed with the Director within 60 days after new installations,
changes or replacements are made.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.1 Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways 14
9.1.15. Location of Facilities.
Subd. 1. Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with this Chapter, with other
applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do
not limit authority otherwise available to the city.
Subd. 2. Buried Telecommunication Facilities. Buried telecommunication cables and buried fiber
facilities must be placed at a minimum of 36 inches below the surface and at a maximum depth of 48
inches, unless otherwise altered or approved by the director on a case-by-case basis.
Subd. 3. Corridors. The City may assign specific corridors within the right-of-way, or any particular
segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology,
the city expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or other
permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper
corridor for the facilities at issue.
Subd. 4. Limitation of Space. To protect health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use, the director shall have the power to prohibit or the director shall strive to
the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided
primarily by considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for the particular utility service, the
condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing
facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development projects
which have been determined to be in the public interest.
9.1.16. Damage to Other Facilities. When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move facilities to protect it, the director shall notify the local representative as early as is
reasonably possible and placed as required. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that facility owner and
must be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of billing. Each facility owner shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages. Each facility owner shall be responsible
for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another caused during the city's response to an emergency
occasioned by that owner’s facilities.
9.1.17. Right-of-Way Vacation.
Subd. 1. Reservation of Right. If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains facilities, the facility
owner’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minnesota Rules 7819.3200.
9.1.18. Indemnification and Liability. By applying for and accepting a permit under this chapter, a permittee
agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.1250.
9.1.19. Removal of Abandoned Facilities. Any person who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall
remove them from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation, or
construction, unless the director waives this requirement.
9.1.20. Appeal. A right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) has been denied a permit; (3) has had
a permit revoked; (4) believes that the fees imposed are invalid; or (5) disputes a determination of the city regarding
this Chapter, may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision reviewed, upon written request, by the
City Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A
decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be writing and supported by
written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
9.1.21. Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers. A permittee’s rights are subject to the regulatory and
police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the public.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.1 Street Excavations and Use of Public Right-of-Ways 15
9.1.22. City Work. The provisions of this Section shall not be applicable to any excavation work under the
direction of competent City authorities by employees of the City or by any contractor of the City performing work
for and in behalf of the City necessitating openings or excavations in streets.
9.1.23. Liability of City. This Section shall not be construed as imposing upon the City or any official or employee
any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by the performance of any excavation work for
which an excavation permit shall be issued under this Section; nor shall the City or any official or employee thereof
be deemed to have assumed any liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized under this Section, the
issuance of any permit or the approval of any excavation work.
9.1.24. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provision of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day such violation shall be committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such under this section.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.2 Project Labor Agreements 16
Section 9.2: Project Labor Agreements
9.2.01 Policy. The City desires to advance or preserve its own proprietary interest in a Project where it acts as an
owner, investor or developer. That interest is best served when construction of Covered Projects proceed in a timely,
cost-effective manner with the highest degree of quality and with minimal delays and disruptions. City contracts
should be performed with the highest degree of safety for workers and the public, and in a manner, that provides
meaningful training and employment opportunities for residents. Throughout the state and country, public and
private construction owners regularly utilize and require project labor agreements for billions of dollars’ worth of
construction each year. Project labor agreements that establish uniform terms and conditions of employment for the
contractors and other parties working on a project have been shown to provide an effective mechanism for
construction management because they allow project owners to:
(1) Predict their labor costs and requirements, and, therefore, more accurately estimate actual total project costs;
(2) Promote cost-efficient, timely and safe construction project delivery, by providing access to a reliable supply of
properly trained and skilled construction craft personnel for all aspects of the project;
(3) Assure greater productivity and workmanship quality from construction craft personnel, thereby yielding high
quality, cost-efficient projects, while also reducing maintenance and repair costs over the life of the project;
(4) Integrate work schedules and standardize work rules for the project to provide a well-coordinated, efficiently
functioning construction worksite that will minimize delays, promote quality, and maintain
project safety; and
(5) Assure that construction will proceed without interruption from staffing shortages, high employee turnover,
safety incidents, and labor disputes by providing reliable project staffing, contractual guarantees against work
stoppages and mutually binding procedures for resolving disputes.
9.2.02 Project Labor Agreement Required. A project labor agreement, will be substantially in the form adopted
by resolution of the Council from time to time and will be kept by the city administrator as a public document. It
shall be required to be used on any Covered Project, as Covered Project is defined below, which involves a project
with a total City investment of $175,000 or more. Any project labor agreement entered into by the City shall be
made binding on all contractors and subcontractors working on the Covered Project. The City shall implement the
project labor agreement by requiring adherence to the agreement in the bid specifications in all relevant bid
documents. No contractor shall be required to be or become a party to a collective bargaining agreement on any
other construction project in order to qualify to work under a project labor agreement implemented for a particular
city project.
Project Defined. “Project” shall mean the erection, destruction, demolition, painting, remodeling or repairing of
any building, highway, sidewalk, bridge, water or gas line, sewer and sewage treatment facility or other similar
work.
Covered Project Defined. “Covered Project” means that the City has a contract for construction services on a
Project owned by the City with a total Project cost of $175,000 or more, or the City has a proprietary interest
because one or more of the following conditions are met:
(1) The City makes a payment or grant of $175,000 or more to assist the development of a Project.
(2) The City guarantees loan payments, lease payments or contract for deed payments of $175,000 or more to
assist the development of a Project.
(3) The City receives ongoing revenue from a Project to repay loans provided by the City to assist the
development of said Project, including incremental tax revenues generated by the Project and used directly or
indirectly, to repay the loan by the City where the proceeds of the loan are used for development of that Project and
the amount of the loan is $175,000 or more.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 9 - PUBLIC WORKS (STREETS)
Section 9.2 Project Labor Agreements 17
(4) The City receives ongoing revenue from a Project to pay debt service on bonds provided by the City to assist in
the development of said Project, including incremental tax revenues generated by the Project and used, directly or
indirectly, to pay debt service on bonds by the City where the proceeds of the bonds issued are used for development
of the Project and the amount of the bonds are $175,000 or more.
(5) That the City otherwise has assets at risk equal to or in excess of $175,000 because it has agreed to underwrite
or guarantee the development of a project.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Effective Date: March 7, 2006
Amendments: 10-16-07 344A / 04-05-11 393A / 11-18-14 437A / 01-20-15 (Res 15-04) /
Section 10.1 1
10.1.01. Codes adopted by reference. The Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the Commissioner of
Labor and Industry pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Chapter 16B.59 to 16B.75, including all of the amendments, rules
and regulations established, adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Labor and
Industry, through the Building Codes and Standards Unit, is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the
optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this Ordinance, as the Building Code for the City of Cloquet. The
Minnesota State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this Ordinance as if fully set out herein.
10.1.02. Application, Administration and Enforcement.
A. The application, administration and enforcement of the Code shall be in accordance with the
Minnesota State Building Code. The Code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits
permitted by Minnesota Statutes, 16B.62, Subdivision 1, when so established by this Ordinance.
B. The Code enforcement agency of the City of Cloquet shall be the Cloquet Planning Department.
The Cloquet Planning Director, or his designated agent, shall be the Administrative Authority
wherever the terms “Building Department” and “Administrative Authority” are used in the Code.
The Administrative Authority shall be a Minnesota Certified “Building Official” as the term is
defined by Minnesota statute 16B.65.
10.1.03. Permits and Fees.
A. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in Minnesota statute
16B.62 subdivision 1.
B. Building permit, plumbing permit, mechanical permit and grading permit fees shall be assessed for
work governed by this Code in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution as adopted
from time to time by the City Council. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits
issued for work governed by this Code in accordance with Minnesota Statute 16B.70.
C. Fee refunds. Permit fees are generally non-refundable. However, in the event that a project for
which a permit has been granted is abandoned, the holder of a permit may apply for a refund of
said fees, minus a 25% administrative handling fee. A request for a refund shall be in writing,
shall state the reasons for such request and project abandonment, and must be filed within 180 days
of the date of permit issuance. No refund of plan check fees will be granted for any project where
said plan check has already been completed. Requests for refunds must be approved by the City
Council in accordance with its normal payment process.
10.1.04. Building Code Optional Chapters.
A. The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 16B.59 to 16B.75
allows the City to adopt by reference and enforce certain optional chapters of the most current
edition of the Minnesota State Building Code.
The following optional provisions identified in the most current edition of the State Building Code
are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Building Code for the City of Cloquet:
1. Chapter 1335, Floodproofing Regulations, parts 1335.0600 to 1335.1200.
2. Appendix Chapter J (Grading) of the 2006 International Building Code.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.1 2
10.1.05. Disclaimer Clause. It is not the intention of the City of Cloquet to rely upon the City or its agents in any
inspections, investigations or other activities related to the enforcement of this Ordinance. Individuals are expected
to continue to exercise independent responsibility for their own protection and the protection of others. It is further
not the intention of the City of Cloquet, through enactment of this Ordinance, to create any additional rights of action
against the City.
10.1.06. Violations and Penalties. A violation of the Code is a misdemeanor (Minnesota statute 16B.69).
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.2 Driveways 3
Section 10.2: Driveways
10.2.01 Width. The width of any useable driveway surface from curb to curb of all designated streets in the City
which are at least Fifty (50) feet or more in width shall be Thirty-two (32) feet, excepting the streets or parts of
streets which are used for business purposes. Those streets are presently Cloquet Avenue from 14th Street west to
First Street; Broadway Street; Avenues A, B, and C from Broadway to Market Street; Arch Street from Avenue C
north to Dunlap's Island; and Main Street and St. Louis Avenue on Dunlap's Island.
10.2.02 Certain. No person, corporation, partnership or firm shall erect a private driveway from his or her premises
onto Cloquet Avenue between State Trunk Highway No. 33 and 18th Street, nor widen any existing driveway except
as provided in this Section.
Subd. 1 Existing Driveways. Any existing public driveway (i.e. alley, street, public way, etc.) intersecting
with Cloquet Avenue between T.H. #33 and 18th Street may be transferred into private ownership, and used
as a driveway for private purpose, provided the following conditions shall be met:
A. A petition which contains the signatures of 100% of the property owners whose property
abuts the public driveway, and which requests the vacation of the public driveway and
subsequent use for private driveway purposes, shall be submitted to the City Council and
shall be considered in the same manner as a petition to vacate a public street, alley, or
way; and,
B. A finding shall be made that the transfer in ownership shall result in an overall
improvement in vehicles/pedestrian traffic safety and circulation shall not result in
additional maintenance or other costs to the City for the right-of-way segment in
questions, shall have a beneficial relationship to applicable downtown development or
improvement plans, if any, shall not increase the driveway width at the curb line, shall not
reposition or realign the driveway unless it can be shown that an improvement in traffic
safety and/or circulation shall be a direct benefit, and shall comply with any other factor
which shall be found to be material to the case.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 4
Section 10.3: Housing Code
10.3.01 Purpose. The purpose of these code provisions regarding the regulation of housing in the City of Cloquet is
to protect the public health, safety and welfare in buildings used for dwelling purposes as hereinafter provided by
establishing minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for light ventilation, space heating and sanitation,
for safety from fire, for space use and location, and for safe and sanitary maintenance, for cooking equipment in all
dwellings and multi-family dwellings now in existence.
Subd. 1. Matters Covered. The provisions of the Housing Code shall apply to all structures used for
human habitation, which are now, or may become in the future, sub-standard with respect to structure,
protection against fire hazard, equipment or maintenance, inadequate provisions for light and air, lack of
proper heating, unsanitary conditions, and overcrowding, or otherwise may be deemed to constitute a
menace to the safety, health or welfare of their occupants; except as provided in section 10.3.03 subdivision
4. The existence of such conditions, factors or characteristics adversely affect public safety, health and
welfare and lead to the continuation, extension and aggravation of urban blight. Adequate protection of the
public therefore, requires the establishment and enforcement of these minimum housing standards.
Subd. 2. Travel Trailers and Mobile Homes. All moveable units used for human habitation, and the
areas, grounds or parcels on which they are located as provided in such other codes, laws or ordinances of
the municipality applicable thereto, shall comply with the requirements of the Housing Code.
10.3.02 Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
Subd. 1. Approved as applied to a material, device, or method of construction shall mean approved by the
building official under the provisions of this code, or approved by other authority designated by law to give
approval in the matter in question.
Subd. 2. Basement. A portion of the building partly underground but having less than half its clear height
below average grade of the adjoining ground. (See cellars)
Subd. 3. Building Code. City ordinances as may be officially designated by the legislative body of the
municipality for the regulation of construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use,
location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings and structures.
Subd. 4. Building Official. The official designated by the municipality to enforce building, zoning or
similar laws and this code, or his/her duly authorized representative.
Subd. 5. Cellar. The portion of the building partly underground, having half or more than half of its clear
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
Subd. 6. Dwellings.
1. One-family dwelling. A building containing one dwelling unit with not more than five (5)
lodgers or boarders.
2. Two-family dwelling. A building containing two (2) dwelling units with not more than
five (5) lodgers or boarders per family, but not more than twenty (20) individuals.
3. Multi-family apartment house. A building containing more than two (2) dwelling units.
4. Boarding house, lodging house, tourist house. A building arranged or used for lodging
with or without meals, for compensation, more than five (5) and not more than twenty
(20) individuals.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 5
5. Dormitory. A building arranged or used for lodging six (6) but not more than twenty
(20) individuals and having common toilet and bathroom facilities.
6. Hotel. A building arranged or used for sheltering, sleeping, or feeding for compensation
of more than twenty (20) individuals.
Subd. 7. Dwelling unit. One or more rooms arranged for the use of one (1) or more individuals living
together as a single house-keeping unit, with cooking, living sanitary and sleeping facilities.
Subd. 8. Enforcement Officer. The official designated herein or otherwise charged with the
responsibilities of administering this code or his/her authorized representatives.
Subd. 9. Exterior Property Areas. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the
control of owners or operators of such premises.
Subd. 10. Extermination. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating
their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food by poison
spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other approved pest elimination methods.
Subd. 11. Family. A group of persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption within and including the
degree of first cousins.
Subd. 12. Garbage. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food.
Subd. 13. Gross Floor Area. The total area of all habitable space in a building or structure.
Subd. 14. Habitable Room. A room, or enclosed floor space arranged for living, eating, and sleeping
purposes (not including bathrooms, water closet compartment, laundries, pantries, foyers, hallways and
other accessory floor spaces.)
Subd. 15. Infestation. The presence, within or contiguous to a multi-family dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house, rooming unit, or premises, of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
Subd. 16. Motel. For purposes of this code a motel shall be defined the same as a hotel.
Subd. 17. Occupant. Any person over one year of age (including owner or operator) living and sleeping
in a dwelling unit or having actual possession of said dwelling or rooming unit.
Subd. 18. Openable Area. That part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation
and which opens directly to the outdoors.
Subd. 19. Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a multi-family dwelling or rooming
house, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let or offered for occupancy.
Subd. 20. Owner. The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a
mortgagee or vendee in possessions, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person,
firm or corporation in control of a building; or their duly authorized agents.
Subd. 21. Person. An individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
Subd. 22. Plumbing or Plumbing Fixtures. Water heating facilities, water pipes, gas pipes, garbage and
disposal units, waste lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, or other similar
equipment, catch basins, drains, vents, or other similarly supplied fixtures, together with all connections to
water, gas, sewer , or vent lines.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 6
Subd. 23. Residence Building. A building in which sleeping accommodations or sleeping
accommodations and cooking facilities as a unit are provided; except when classified as an institution under
the building code.
Subd. 24. Rooming House. Any residence building, or any part thereof containing one or more rooming
units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to more than five (5) persons who are not members of
the family. (See dwellings -boarding houses)
Subd. 25. Rooming Unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to
be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking or eating purposes.
Subd. 26. Rubbish. Combustible and non-combustible waste materials, except garbage; and the term shall
include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags,
cartoons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar material.
Subd. 27. Supplied. Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator.
Subd. 28. Ventilation. The process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or
from any space.
1. Mechanical: Ventilation by power driven devices.
2. Natural: Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows, skylights, doors,
louvers, or stacks without wind driven devices.
Subd. 29. Workmanlike. Whenever the words “workmanlike, state of maintenance and repair” are used in
this code, they shall mean that such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonable skillful manner.
Subd. 30. Yard. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building extending along the entire
length of a street, or rear, or interior lot line.
Subd. 31. Whenever the words “multi-family dwelling”, “residence building”, “dwelling unit”, “rooming
house”, “rooming unit”, or “premises” are used in this code they shall be construed as though they were
followed by the words “or any part thereof”.
10.3.03 Applicability. Every portion of a building or premise used or intended to be used for residential purposes,
except hotels and motels serving transient guests only, rest homes, convalescent homes, and nursing homes, shall
comply with the provisions of this code irrespective of when such building shall have been constructed, altered, or
repaired, except as hereinafter provided.
Subd. 1. Application of Building Codes and Ordinances. Any alterations to buildings, or changes of use
therein, which may be caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be done in
accordance with applicable sections of the building codes and ordinances of the municipality.
Subd. 2. Application of Zoning Law. Nothing in this code shall permit the establishment or conversion
of a multi-family dwelling in any zone except where permitted by the zoning law; nor the continuation of
such non-conforming use in any zone except as provided therein.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 7
Subd. 3. Conflict with Other Ordinances. Except as provided in subdivision 4, in any case where a
provision of this code is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or
health ordinance or code of this municipality existing on the effective date of this code, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and health of the people shall
prevail. In any case where a provision of this code is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other
ordinance or code of this municipality existing on the effective date of this code, which establishes a lower
standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and health of the people, the provisions of this code
shall prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they
may be found in conflict with this code.
Subd. 4. Existing Buildings. This code establishes minimum requirements for the initial and continued
occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation and does not replace or modify requirements
otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration, or use of buildings, equipment or facilities,
except as provided in this section.
Subd. 5. Existing Remedies. Nothing in this code shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies
of the municipality or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings which
are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
10.3.04 Environmental Requirements. The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum conditions of
property and buildings to be used for human occupancy. Every building or structure occupied by humans, except as
exempted by section 10.3.03 subdivision 4, and the premises on which it stands shall comply with the conditions
herein prescribed as they may apply thereto.
Subd. 1. Exterior property Areas. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for
occupancy any dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein or premises which does not comply with the
following requirements. The building official of the municipality shall cause periodic inspections to be
made of dwelling premises to secure compliance with these requirements.
A. Sanitation. All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
B. Grading and Drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent
the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any building or structure located
thereon.
C. Noxious Weeds. All exterior property areas shall be kept free from species of weeds or
plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to the public health.
D. Insect and Rodent Harborage. Every owner of a dwelling or multi-family dwelling
shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests in all
exterior areas of the premises; except that the occupant shall be responsible for such
extermination in the exterior areas of the premises of a single-family dwelling. Whenever
infestation exists in the shared or public parts of the premises of other than a single-family
dwelling, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
E. Accessory Structures. All accessory structures including detached garages shall be
maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
Subd. 2. Exterior Structure. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy,
any dwelling or multi-family dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or portion thereof for
the purpose of living therein; which does not comply with the following requirements:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 8
A. Foundation, Walls and Roof. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof, and all other
exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair
and shall be kept in such condition as to exclude rodents. All exterior surfaces shall be
maintained free of loose, deteriorated or decayed materials, and all exterior wood
surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay
by paint which shall not be lead-based paint or by other protective covering or treatment,
which shall be maintained in a neat and attractive manner according to the prevailing
standards of the neighborhood or area in which the building shall be located.
1. Foundations. The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at
all points.
2. Exterior Walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or
rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain, or
dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the
building.
3. Roofs. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight, and have no defects which
might admit rain; and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rain water from
causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building.
B. Stairs, Porches and Railings. Stairs and other exit facilities shall be adequate for safety
and shall comply with the following subsections:
1. Structural Safety. Every outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance
attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the loads to which it is subjected as required by the building code and
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
2. Handrails. Where the building official deems it necessary for safety, every
flight of stairs which is more than two (2) risers high shall have handrails which
shall be located as required by the building code; and every porch which is more
than two (2) risers high shall have handrails so located and of such design as
required by the building code. Every handrail and balustrade shall be firmly
fastened and shall be maintained in good condition.
C. Windows, Doors and Hatchways. Every window, exterior door, and basement
hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in sound condition and repair.
1. Windows to be Glazed. Every window sash shall be fully supplied with glass
window panes or an approved substitute which are without open cracks or holes.
2. Windows to be Tight. Every window sash shall be in good condition and fit
reasonably tight within its frame.
3. Windows to be Openable. Every window, other than a fixed window shall be
capable of being easily opened and shall be held in position by window
hardware.
4. Door Hardware. Every exterior door, door hinge, and door latch shall be
maintained in good condition.
5. Doors to Fit in Frame. Every exterior door, when closed shall fit reasonably
well within its frame.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 9
6. Window and Door Frames to Fit in Wall. Every window, door and frame
shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall
construction so as to exclude rain as completely as possible and to substantially
exclude wind from entering the dwelling or multi-family dwelling.
7. Basement Hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be so constructed and
maintained as to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water
into the dwelling or multi-family dwelling.
8. Exit Doors. Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being opened
from the inside, easily and without the use of a key.
D. Screening. Guards and screens shall be supplied for protection against rodent’s and
insects in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Guards for Basement Windows. Every basement or cellar window which is
operable shall be supplied with corrosion resistive rodent proof shields of not
less than No. 22 U.S. gage perforated steel sheets, or No. 20 B&S gage
aluminum or No. 16 U.S. gage expanded metal or wire mesh screens, with not
more than one-half (1/2) inch mesh openings; or with other material affording
equivalent protection against the entry of rodents, including storm windows.
2. Insect Screens. From June 1st to October 15th of each year every door opening
directly from any dwelling or multi-family dwelling to the outdoors and every
window or other outside opening used for ventilation purposes shall be supplied
with a screen of not less than sixteen (16) mesh per inch and every swinging
screen door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition, except
that no such screens shall be required for a dwelling unit on a floor above the
fifth floor.
Subd. 3. Interior Structure. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy,
any dwelling, multi-family dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or portion thereof, for the
purpose of living therein which does not comply with the following requirements.
A. Free from Dampness. In every dwelling, multi-family dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
house, and rooming unit, cellars, basements and crawl spaces shall be maintained
reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or deterioration
of the structure as required by the building code.
B. Structural Members. The supporting structural members of every dwelling and multifamily
dwelling used for human habitation shall be maintained structurally sound;
showing no evidence of deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the
imposed loads in accordance with the provisions of the building code.
C. Interior Stairs and Railings. Stairs shall be provided in every dwelling, multi-family
dwelling, rooming, and boarding house as required by the building code.
1. Maintained in Good Repair. All interior stairs of every structure used for
human habitation shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair by
replacing treads and risers that evidence excessive wear or are broken, warped or
loose. Every inside stair shall be so constructed and maintained as to be safe to
use and capable of supporting a load as required by the provisions of the
building code.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 10
2. Handrails. Every stairwell and every flight of stairs which is more than two (2)
risers high, shall have hand rails or railings located in accordance with the
provisions of the building code. Every handrail or railing shall be firmly
fastened and must be maintained in good condition. Properly balustrade railings,
capable of bearing normally imposed loads as required by the building code,
shall be placed on the open portions of stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells.
D. Bathroom Floors. Every toilet and bathroom floor surface shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to
be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
E. Sanitation. The interior of every dwelling and multi-family dwelling used for human
habitation shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage. Rubbish, Garbage, and other refuse shall be properly
kept inside temporary storage facilities as required under sections 10.3.05 Subd. 1 (D) &
(E) of this Code.
F. Insect and Rodent Harborage. Buildings used for human habitation shall be kept free
from insect and rodent infestation, and where insects or rodents are found they shall be
promptly exterminated by acceptable processes which will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.
1. Extermination from Buildings. Every owner of a dwelling or multi-family
dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin, or
other pests whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more of the dwelling units
or in the shared or public parts of the structure.
2. Extermination from Single Dwelling Units. The occupant of a dwelling unit in
a dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be responsible for such extermination
within the unit occupied by him/her whenever his/her dwelling unit is the only
unit in the building that is infested.
3. Responsibility of Owner. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, whenever
infestation of rodents is caused by failure of the owner to maintain any dwelling
or multi-family dwelling in a rodent-proof condition, extermination of such
rodents shall be the responsibility of the owner.
10.3.05 Space and Occupancy Requirements.
Subd. 1. Basic Facilities. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any
dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating, therein which does not comply with the
following requirements.
A. Sanitary Facilities. The following minimum sanitary facilities shall be supplied and
maintained in sanitary, safe working conditions.
1. Water Closet. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls, a room,
separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy and which is equipped
with a water closet.
2. Lavatory. Every dwelling unit shall contain a lavatory, which, when a closet is
required, shall be in the same room with said water closet.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 11
3. Bathtub or Shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords
privacy to a person in said room and which is equipped with a bathtub or
shower.
4. Kitchen Sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart from the
lavatory required under section 10.3.05 Subd. 1(A)4.
B. Water and Sewer System. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, or shower and
water closet required under the provisions of Section 10.3.05 Subd. 1 (A) shall be
properly connected to either a public water and sewer system or to an approved private
water and sewer system. All sinks, lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied
with hot and cold running water.
1. Water Heating Facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with water
heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner, properly
maintained, and properly connected with hot water lines to the fixtures required
to be supplied with hot water under this section. Water heating facilities shall be
capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount
of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory, basin, bathtub,
shower, and laundry facility or other similar units, at a temperature of not less
than 130 degrees Fahrenheit at any time needed.
C. Heating Facilities. Every dwelling and multi-family dwelling shall have heating facilities
and the owner of the heating facilities shall be required to see that they are properly
installed, safely maintained, and in good working condition, and that they are capable of
safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms located
therein, to a temperature of at least an average of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit with an
outside temperature of ten (10) degrees below zero (0). The owner shall maintain a
minimum average room temperature of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit in all habitable
rooms including bathrooms and toilet rooms when rented, at all times on the basis of ten
(10) degrees below zero (0) outside.
1. Operation of Heating Facilities and Incinerators. Every heating or water
heating facility and incinerator shall be installed and shall operate in accordance
with the requirements of the building code or the air pollution control ordinances
of the municipality.
D. Rubbish Storage. Every dwelling, multi-family dwelling and dwelling unit shall be
supplied with approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish, and the owner,
operator or agent in control of such dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be responsible
for the removal of such rubbish.
E. Garbage Storage or Disposal Facilities. Every dwelling, or multi-family dwelling and
every dwelling unit shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility; which
may be an adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each
dwelling unit, or an incinerator unit, to be approved by the building official in the
structure for the use of the occupants of each dwelling unit or an approved outside
garbage can.
Subd. 2. Installation and Maintenance. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for
the occupancy, any dwelling, multi-family dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit for the
purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein which does not comply with the following
requirements.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 12
A. Facilities and Equipment. All required equipment and all building space and parts in
every dwelling and multi-family dwelling shall be constructed and maintained so as to
properly and safely perform their intended function in accordance with the provisions of
the building code.
1. Maintained Clean and Sanitary. All housing facilities shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition by the occupant so as not to breed insects and
rodents or produce dangerous or offensive gases or odors.
B. Plumbing Fixtures. In buildings and structures used for human habitation, water lines,
plumbing fixtures, vents and drains shall be properly installed, connected and maintained
in working order and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and capable
of performing the function for which they are designed. All repairs and installations shall
be made in accordance with the provisions of the building code or plumbing code of the
municipality.
C. Plumbing Systems. In buildings and structures used for human habitation, every
plumbing stack, waste and sewer line shall be so installed and maintained as to function
properly and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects to prevent structural
deterioration or health hazards. All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance
with the provisions of the building code or plumbing code of the municipality.
D. Heating Equipment. Every space heating, cooking, and water heating device located in a
dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be properly installed, connected and maintained
and shall be capable of performing the function for which it was designed in accordance
with the provisions of the building code.
E. Electrical Outlets and Fixtures. Every electrical outlet and fixture as required in
section 10.3.05 Subd. 4 shall be installed, maintained an connected to the source of
electrical power in accordance with the provisions of the building code or electrical code
of the municipality.
1. Correction in Defective System. Where it is found, in the opinion of the
building official, that the electrical system in a building constitutes a hazard to
the occupants or the building by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing,
insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage or
for similar reasons, he/she shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate
the hazard.
Subd. 3. Occupancy Requirements. No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling
unit for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with the following requirements.
A. Minimum Ceiling Heights. Habitable rooms in existing building except as provided in
section 10.3.03 Subdivision 4, shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven and
one-third (7 1/3) feet, except that in attics or top half-stories the ceiling height shall be not
less than seven (7) feet over not less than one-third (1/3) of the area when used for
sleeping, study or similar activity. In calculating the floor area of such rooms only those
portions of the floor area of the room having a clear ceiling height of five (5) feet or more
may be included.
B. Required Space in Dwelling Units. Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum gross
floor area of not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet for the first occupant, and
one hundred (100) square feet for each additional occupant. The floor area shall be
calculated on the basis of the total area of all habitable rooms.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 13
C. Required Space in Sleeping Rooms. In every dwelling unit, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall have a minimum gross floor area of at least
seventy (70) square feet. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
(1) occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant
thereof.
D. Access Limitation of Dwelling Unit to Commercial Uses. No habitable room,
bathroom or water closet compartment which is accessory to a dwelling unit shall open
directly into or shall be used in conjunction with a food store, barber or beauty shop,
doctor’s or dentist’s examination or treatment room, or similar room used for public
purposes.
E. Location of Bath and Second Sleeping Room. No residence building or dwelling unit
containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangement that access
to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended for use by occupants of more than
one (1) sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall
the room arrangement be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going
through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet compartment. No bathroom
shall be so located that access thereto is solely through a kitchen.
F. Occupancy of Dwelling Units Below Grade. No dwelling unit partially below grade
shall be used for living purposes unless:
1. Floors and walls are watertight;
2. Total window area, total openable area and ceiling height are in accordance with
this code; and
3. Required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area.
Subd. 4. Light and Ventilation. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for
occupancy, any dwelling, multi-family dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit for the
purpose of living therein which does not comply with the following requirements.
A. Natural Light in Habitable Rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one (1)
window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total
widow area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten (10) percent
of the floor area of such room, except in kitchens when artificial light may be provided in
accordance with the provisions of the electrical code ordinance. Whenever walls or other
portions of the structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less
than three (3) feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the
room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court
and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for
the room.
B. Light in Non-Habitable Work Space. Every laundry, furnace room, and all similar nonhabitable
work spaces located in a dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall have one
(1)supplied electric light fixture available at all times.
C. Light in Public Halls and Stairways. Every public hall and inside stairway in every
dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be adequately lighted at all times with an
illumination of at least five (5) lumens per square foot in the darkest portion of the
normally traveled stairs and passageways.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 14
D. Electrical Outlets Required. Where there is electric service available to the building or
structure, every habitable room of a dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall contain at
least two (2) separate and remote outlets, one (1) of which may be a ceiling or wall-type
electric light fixture. In kitchens three (3) separate and remote wall-type electric
convenience outlets or two (2) such convenience outlets and one (1) ceiling or wall-type
electric light fixture shall be provided. Every public hall, water closet compartment,
bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one (1) electric light
fixture. In addition to the electric light fixture, in every bathroom and laundry room, there
shall be provided at least one (1) electric outlet.
E. Adequate Ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window which
can be easily opened or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total
openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least forty-five (45)
percent of the minimum window area size required in section 10.3.05 subdivision 4(A),
except where mechanical ventilation is provided.
F. Ventilation and Light in Bathroom and Water Closet. Every bathroom and water
closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable
rooms as required by sections 10.3.05 subdivision 4(A) and (D), except that no window
shall be required in bathrooms or water closet compartments equipped with an approved
ventilation system.
Subd. 5. Minimum Requirements for Fire Safety. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or shall
let to another for occupancy, any dwelling, multi-family dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming
unit, lodging house or lodging unit which does not comply with the applicable provisions of the fire
prevention sections of building ordinances of the municipality and the following additional requirements for
safety from fire.
A. Storage of Flammable Liquids Prohibited. No dwelling, multi-family dwelling,
dwelling unit, or rooming unit shall be located within a building containing any
establishment handling, dispensing, or storing flammable liquids with a flash point of one
hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit or lower.
B. Cooking and Heating Equipment. All cooking and heating equipment, components,
and accessories in every heating, cooking and water heating device shall be maintained
free from leaks and obstructions, and kept functioning properly so as to be free from fire,
health, and accident hazards.
All installations and repairs shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the
building code, or other laws or ordinances of the municipality applicable thereto.
Portable cooking equipment employing flame is prohibited.
Subd. 6. Responsibilities of Persons. Occupants of dwellings, multi-family dwellings, and dwelling units,
and owners or operators of rooming houses shall be responsible for maintenance thereof as provided in this
code.
A. Cleanliness. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep that part of the dwelling unit
and premises thereof which he/she occupies, controls, or uses, in a clean and sanitary
condition.
B. Disposal of Rubbish. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall disposes of all his/her
rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers required by
section 10.3.05 Subdivision 1(D).
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 15
C. Disposal of Garbage. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of his/her garbage
in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities, or if such
facilities are not available, by removing all non-burnable matter and securely wrapping
such garbage and placing it in tight metal garbage storage containers as required by
section 10.3.05 subdivision 1(E) of this code; or by such other disposal method as may be
required by applicable laws or ordinances of the municipality.
D. Use and Operation of Supplied Plumbing Fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling unit
shall keep the supplied plumbing fixtures therein clean and sanitary and shall be
responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in their proper use and operation.
E. Installation and Care of Plumbing Fixtures Furnished by Occupant. Every plumbing
fixture furnished by the occupant of a dwelling unit shall be properly installed and shall
be maintained in good working condition, kept clean and sanitary, and free of defects,
leaks or obstructions.
Subd. 7. Rooming Houses. Every person who operates a rooming house, or who occupies or lets to
another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, shall comply with the provisions of every
section of this code, except as provided in the following sections.
A. Water Closet, Hand Lavatory, and Bath Facilities. At least one (1) water closet,
lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower properly connected to an approved water and sewer
system and in good working condition shall be supplied for each four (4) rooms within a
rooming house wherever said facilities are shared.
All such facilities shall be located within the residence building served and shall be
directly accessible from a common hall or passageway and shall be not more than one (1)
story removed from any of the persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and
bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. Such required
facilities shall not be located in a cellar.
B. Minimum Floor Area for Sleeping Purposes. Every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area,
and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than three (3) persons shall
contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof.
C. Bed Linen and Towels. The operator of every rooming house shall supply bed linen
and towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of any room to another
occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding
in a clean and sanitary manner.
D. Shades, Drapes, etc. Every window of every rooming unit shall be supplied with
shades, drawn drapes, or other devices or material which when properly used will afford
privacy to the occupant of the rooming unit.
E. Sanitary Conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the
sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of
every other part of the rooming house; and he/she shall be further responsible for the
sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building within
which the rooming house is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.
F. Sanitary Facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower required by section 10.3.05 subd. 7(A) shall be located within the rooming house
and within a room or rooms which:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 16
1. Afford privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms;
2. Are accessible from a common hall and without going outside the rooming
house or through any other room therein.
10.3.06 Enforcement Authority.
Subd. 1. Enforcement Officer. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the building official of the
municipality to enforce the provisions of the Housing Code as herein provided.
A. Coordination of Enforcement. Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in
connection therewith under the provisions of this code shall be the exclusive
responsibility of the building department of the municipality. Whenever, in the opinion of
the building official it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any condition by
any other department he/she shall arrange for this to be done in such a manner that the
owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors
nor to multiple or conflicting or any violation under this code shall be issued without the
approval of the building official and it shall be the responsibility of that official before
issuing any such order to determine that it has the concurrence of any other department or
official of the government concerned with any matter involved on the case in question.
B. Administrative Liability. Except as may otherwise be provided by statute or local law
or ordinance, no officer, agent or employee of the municipality charged with the
enforcement of the Housing Code shall render him/herself personally liable for any
damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted
in the discharge of his/her duties under this code. No person who institutes or assists in
the prosecution of a criminal proceeding under this code shall be liable to damages
hereunder unless he/she acted with actual malice and without reasonable grounds for
believing that the person accused or prosecuted was guilty of an unlawful act or omission.
Any suit brought against any officer, agent, or employee of the municipality, as a result of
any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties under this code, shall be
defended by the legal representative of the municipality until the final determination of
the proceeding therein.
Subd. 2. Inspections. The building official shall make or cause to be made inspections to determine the
conditions of the dwellings, multi-family dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units, and
premises in order to safeguard the safety, morals, and welfare of the public under the provisions of this
code. The building official is authorized to enter any dwelling, dwelling unit, multi-family dwelling,
rooming house, or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing his/her duties under this
code. The owner, operator, or occupant of every dwelling, multi-family dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the building official free access thereto and to all parts
thereof and to the premises on which it is located at all reasonable times for the purposes of such inspection,
examination and survey.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entrance or impede an inspector or officer authorized under this
code in the performance of his/her duties and every such inspector or officer shall have the right to enter,
examine, and survey all premises, grounds, structures, dwellings, and multi-family dwellings and every part
thereof at all reasonable times upon display of proper identification.
A. Access by Owner or Operator. Every occupant of a dwelling unit or rooming unit shall
give the owner or operator thereof, or his/her agent or employee, access to any part of
such dwelling unit, rooming unit, or its premises, at reasonable times for the purpose of
making such inspections, maintenance, repairs, or alterations as are necessary to comply
with the provisions of this code.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 17
10.3.07 Condemnation. Dwellings or multi-family dwellings shall be condemned as dangerous structures or
unsafe for human habitation as herein provided.
Subd. 1. Dangerous Structures. If all or part of any building or structure (including among others a
fence, billboard or sign) or the equipment for the operation thereof (including among others the heating
plant, plumbing, electric wiring moving stairways, elevators and fire extinguishing apparatus) shall be
found, in the opinion of the building official to be in an unsafe condition - dangerous to life, limb, or
property, he/she shall proceed to have the same condemned pursuant to the applicable provisions of the
ordinances of the municipality pertaining to unsafe structures, or of State Law.
Subd. 2. Structures Unfit for Human Occupancy. Whenever the building official finds that any
dwelling or multi-family dwelling constitutes a hazard to the safety, health, or welfare of the occupants or to
the public because it lacks maintenance; or is in disrepair, unsanitary, vermin - infested or rodent - infested;
or because it lacks the sanitary facilities or equipment or otherwise fails to comply with the minimum
provisions of this code, but has not yet reached such state of complete disrepair as to be condemned as a
dangerous structure as herein provided, he/she may declare such dwelling or multi-family dwelling as
UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION and order it to be vacated. If any dwelling or multi-family dwelling
or any part thereof is occupied by more occupants than permitted under this code, or was erected altered or
occupied contrary to law, such dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be deemed an unlawful structure and
the building official may cause such dwelling to be vacated. It shall be unlawful to again occupy such
dwelling until it or its occupation, as the case may be, has been made to conform to the law.
Subd. 3. Notice. Notice of the declaration of any building under the Housing Code as unfit for human
habitation and order to vacate it shall be served as provided in the following sections. When the condition
requires the removal or demolition of the building such notice shall be given as provided in State Statutes,
or such other codes or ordinances of the municipality pertaining to unsafe buildings.
A. Posting of Notice. Any dwelling or multi-family dwelling declared as UNFIT FOR
HUMAN HABITATION shall be posted with a placard by the building official. The
placard shall include the following:
1. Name of City;
2. The name of the authorized department having jurisdiction;
3. The chapter and section of the code under which it is issued;
4. An order that the dwelling or multi-family dwelling when vacated must remain
vacant until the provisions of the order are complied with and the order to vacate
is withdrawn;
5. The date that the placard is posted;
6. A statement of the penalty for defacing or removal of the placard.
B. Form of Notice. Whenever the building official has declared a dwelling or multi-family
dwelling as unfit for human habitation, he/she shall give notice to the owner of such
declaration and placarding of the dwelling or multi-family dwelling as unfit for human
habitation. Such notice shall:
1. Be in writing;
2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
3. Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued;
4. State the time to correct the conditions;
5. State the time occupants must vacate the dwelling units.
C. Service of Notice. Service of notice to vacate shall be as follows:
1. By delivery to the owner personally, or by leaving the notice at the usual place of
abode of the owner with a person of suitable age and discretion; or
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 18
2. By depositing the notice in the United State Post Office addressed to the owner
at his/her last known address with postage pre-paid thereon; or
3. By posting and keeping posted for twenty-four (24) hours a copy of the notice in
placard form in a conspicuous place on the premises to be vacated.
D. Removal of Placard or Notice. No person shall deface or remove the placard from any
dwelling or multi-family dwelling which has been declared or placarded as unfit for
human habitation except by authority in writing from the building official.
Subd. 4. Vacating of Declared Building. Any dwelling or multi-family dwelling which has been declared
and placarded as unfit for human habitation by the building official shall be vacated within a reasonable
time as required by the building official, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to let to any
person for human habitation said dwelling, multi-family dwelling or dwelling unit; and no person shall
occupy any dwelling or multi-family unit which has been declared or placarded by the building official as
unfit for human habitation after the date set forth in the placard.
A. Occupancy of Building. No dwelling or multi-family dwelling which has been declared
or placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until
written approval is secured from the building official. The building official shall remove
such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the declaration and placarding
action were based have been eliminated.
B. Report of Notice to Vacate. The building official shall furnish a copy of each notice to
vacate a building to the health officer and the chief of the fire prevention bureau and any
other designated official of the municipality concerned herewith.
10.3.08 House, Building, and Lot Numbering.
Subd. 1 Assignment. All streets and avenues in the City shall be assigned numbers in accordance with the
plan set forth in this Section
Subd. 2 Numbering Plan.
A. For the purpose of numbering houses or lots on streets or avenues running in an easterly
and westerly direction in the City, Broadway from Avenue A to Prospect Avenue shall be
used as a base line and starting point and all numbers of houses and lots on streets or
avenues running east and west from Broadway shall be designated by the street and
number as designated on the official numbering map referred to in this Section as east or
west of Broadway on the avenues or streets.
B. For all streets and avenues running north and south, Cloquet Avenue from 18th Street to
Broadway and Avenue "A" from Broadway to Chestnut Street and a prolongation of
Avenue "A" from its intersection with Chestnut Street, following parallel with railroad
tracks to the City limits, shall be used as base lines and starting points for numbering
houses and lots on streets and avenues running north and south from Cloquet Avenue and
Avenue "A." All houses and lots south of Cloquet Avenue from 18th Street to Broadway
shall be numbered as South and all houses north of the Cloquet Avenue from 18th Street
to Broadway shall be numbered as North.
C. It shall be further provided that numbers shall be assigned to every 25 feet of lots fronting
on all north and south streets and avenues and the even numbers shall be used on the
southerly and easterly sides of streets and avenues. The odd numbers shall be used on the
northerly and westerly sides in accordance with the map prepared by the City Engineer,
which map shall be hereby designated and adopted as the official numbering map for the
City.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.3 Housing Code 19
Subd. 3 Notice. It shall be further provided that the City Administrator of the City shall give public notice
of the adopting of the numbering maps, which the notice shall be published once each week for two (2)
successive weeks in the official newspaper of the City. After the publication it shall be the duty of all
owners and occupants of buildings upon the streets and avenues to obtain from the City Clerk the correct
numbers of their respective buildings, and to cause correct numbers to be placed on their buildings in
accordance with the numbering placed on the official map within sixty (60) days from the date of the
publication of the last notice as provided in this Section. Numbers shall be on the house, building or lot in a
way visible to the street posted. Numbers shall be at least 3-1/2" high and of a contrasting color to the
background on which they are mounted.
10.3.09 Violations. Notice of violation shall be served upon the owner of record; provided that such notice shall be
deemed to be properly served upon such owner if a copy thereof is delivered to him/her personally, or if not found,
by leaving a copy thereof at his/her usual place of abode with a person of suitable age and discretion who shall be
informed of the contents thereof, or by sending a copy thereof by mail to his/her last known address, or if the letter
with the copy is returned showing it has not been delivered to him/her by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous
place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice.
Subd. 1. Service of Notice. Whenever the building official determines that there has been or is a violation,
or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been or is a violation of any provision of this
code, he/she shall give notice of such violation or alleged violation to the person or persons responsible
therefor. Such notice shall:
A. Be in writing;
B. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
C. Specify the violation which exists and the remedial action required;
D. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
Subd. 2. Prosecution of Violation. In case any violation order is not promptly complied with the building
official may request the legal representative to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity against the person responsible for the violation, ordering him/her:
A. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any further execution of work;
B. To restrain or correct the erection, installation, or alteration of such building;
C. To require the removal of work in violation;
D. To prevent the occupation or use of the building, structure, or part thereof erected,
constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in compliance with the provisions
of this code, or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or
certificate was issued; or
E. To enforce the penalty provisions of this code.
Subd. 3. Penalty for Violations. Every person or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served in
accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
Subd. 4. Right to Appeal. Any owner or person who is aggrieved with the ruling or decision of the
enforcing officer in any matter relative to the interpretation or enforcement of any of the provisions of the
Housing Code may appeal the decision in accordance with the provisions as set forth in Chapter 15 of the
Code, Administrative Hearing Process.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.4 Pipeline Safety Setback 20
Section 10.4: Pipeline Safety Setback
10.4.01 Purpose. The purpose of this Section shall be to increase public safety by requiring that any new
development be safely set back from pipeline locations.
10.4.02 Applicability. This Section applies to new residential and other development. It shall not apply to
development that has occurred or for which development permits have been issued before the effective date of this
Code.
10.4.03 Setback. Buildings and places of public assembly subject to this Section shall not be constructed closer to
the pipeline than the boundary of the pipeline easement.
10.4.04 Variances. Variance procedures adopted by the City under Minnesota Statutes shall apply.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.5 Hazardous and Unsafe Structures 21
Section 10.5: Hazardous And Unsafe Structures
10.5.01 Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
Subd. 1. Building shall include any structure or part of a structure, including without limitation, residential
structures, commercial structures, agricultural outbuildings (such as barns) and structures supporting signs.
Subd. 2. Building Official shall mean a state certified building official appointed by the City Council as
the Building Official of the City.
Subd. 3. Hazardous Building shall mean any building which because of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, physical damage, unsanitary condition or abandonment constitutes a fire hazard or a hazard to
public safety or health. In addition, Ahazardous building@ includes any building or structure which would
be deemed Aunsafe@ under the provisions of this chapter.
Subd. 4. Owner shall mean those shown to be such on the records of the County Auditor.
10.5.02 General Provisions.
Subd. 1. When the existence of a hazardous building comes to the attention of the Building Official, the
Building Official shall make an inspection of the building.
Subd. 2. Following the inspection the Building Official shall make an appropriate order for the elimination
of the hazard created by the building. The order shall be in writing; recite the grounds upon which the
Building Official concluded it was a hazardous building; specify the actions required to be taken to
eliminate the hazard and provide a reasonable time for compliance with the order, which shall be no more
than 30 days from the date of the order.
The order shall be mailed to the owner of the property on which the hazardous building is located by
certified or registered mail.
Subd. 3. Following the expiration of the time specified in the order for compliance the Building Official
shall re-inspect the building to determine whether the hazard has been eliminated.
Subd. 4. Should the order of the Building Official not be complied with within the time allowed, unless an
appeal provided for in 10.05.04, hereof, is taken, the Building Official shall communicate such information
to the City Council in writing.
10.5.03 Failure to Comply with Order. Should the order of the Building Official not be complied with within the
time allowed, unless appeal provided for in 10.5.04, hereof, is taken, the City Council shall determine whether to
proceed in accordance with the provisions of M.S. Sections 463.15 et seq, to prosecute the owner of the property on
which the hazardous building is located for violating the provisions of this section hereof, to proceed in any other
manner authorized by law or to proceed in any combination of the foregoing.
10.5.04 Appeals.
Subd. 1. Any person affected by any decision of the Building Official which is related to or made pursuant
to this section may appeal therefrom to the Fire Code Appeal Board. An appeal may be taken by the
affected party by serving the Building Official with written notice of intention to appeal the Building
Official's decision within ten days after the affected party received knowledge or notice of the decision.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.5 Hazardous and Unsafe Structures 22
Subd. 2. The notice of appeal shall contain a complete statement of the matter in controversy, and, if from a
refusal of to make ordered repairs, shall contain a guarantee of payment of all expenses of any tests made or
ordered by the Fire Code Appeal Board. The notice shall be accompanied by a fee of which shall be
established by resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council and will be retained by the City.
Subd. 3. Any such appeal shall be subject to and shall be conducted in accordance with the appeal
provisions as set forth.
10.5.05 Limitation on Liability. The City, the Building Official and/or any employee charged with the enforcement
of this section shall not be liable for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required
of the Building Official or any employee of the City or by reason of any act or omission of the Building Official or
any such employee.
10.5.06 Violations and Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with an order of the Building Official within the
time allowed made pursuant to this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day or portion thereof during
which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.6 City Fire Code 23
Section 10.6: City Fire Code
10.6.01 Adoption of the International Fire Code. That the City of Cloquet hereby adopts as the Fire Code for the
City of Cloquet that certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Fire Chief of the City
of Cloquet, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D, E,
F, and G as published by the International Code Council. That those provisions are specifically adopted for
regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the
storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the City of Cloquet. That those provisions are incorporated
in full by reference and contain provisions providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of such International Fire Code, 2000 edition,
published by the International Code Council. That a complete copy is on file in the office of the City of Cloquet and
is hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this section.
(Ordinance 299A, replacing 272A)
10.6.02 Language Revisions. The following sections of the International Fire Code are hereby revised to make it
applicable to the City of Cloquet:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Cloquet.
Section 109.3. Insert: Misdemeanor or administrative penalty as determined by the City Council from time
to time; that is allowed by applicable law.
Section 111.4. Insert: A dollar amount which shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to
time by the City Council.
10.6.03 Geographic Limits. That the geographic limits necessarily located within the City limits of the City of
Cloquet referred to in certain sections of the 2000 International Fire Code are hereby established as follows:
Section 3204.3.1.1 The limits referred to in Section 3204.3.1.1 of the International Fire Code in which the
storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited, are hereby established as
described in the UBC & IFC.
Section 3204.2.9.5.1 The limits referred to in Section 3404.2.9.5.1 of the International Fire Code in which
the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited, are
hereby established as described in the UBC & IFC.
Section 3406.2.4.4 The limits referred to in Section 3406.2.4.4 of the International Fire Code in which the
storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited, are hereby established as
described in the UBC & IFC.
Section 3804.2 The limits referred to in Section 3804.2 of the International Fire Code in which the storage
of liquified petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, are hereby
established as described in the UBC & IFC.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.7 Rental Housing Regulations 24
Section 10.7: Rental Housing Regulations
10.7.1 Purpose. The city recognizes the need for an organized, systematic inspection program of residential rental
housing within the City of Cloquet in order to ensure that rental dwelling units meet city and state housing safety,
health, fire, building and zoning codes, and to provide a more effective system for compelling the correction of code
violations and the proper maintenance of rental housing within the city. This registration program is intended to
protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the entire community. Under these regulations
inspections will be done on a complaint basis with inspection guidelines being spelled out in Section 10.7.7, and with
enforcement to be made only against the owner of rental housing found to be in violation.
10.7.2 Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
Subd. 1. Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within residential housing and forming
a separate single habitable unit intended for residential occupancy by a single family.
Subd. 2. Family means an individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or a group of not more than four persons who need
not be related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling
unit.
A. For purposes of this article "related" shall be interpreted herein to include any owner of
record and an owner's natural children, adopted children, foster children, spouse, other
blood relations, any significant other and any other dependent minors, residing with that
owner as a family unit; "significant other" means romantic partner;
B. For purposes of this article "related" shall also be interpreted herein to include a tenant's
natural children, adopted children, foster children, spouse, other blood relations, any
significant other and any other dependent minors, residing with the tenant as a family unit;
"significant other" means romantic partner.
Subd. 3. Person means any natural person, the person's heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, and also
includes a business entity such as a firm, partnership, company or corporation, or its successors or assigns,
or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
Subd. 4. Rental dwelling unit means a dwelling unit occupied by a person or persons in the status of
tenant(s),under the terms of a contract or lease, whether oral or written, whereby nonpayment of a periodic
payment or nonperformance of a periodic service means the occupants may be evicted without the necessity
of either a statutory mortgage foreclosure procedure, a statutory termination of contract for deed procedure
or a statutory repossession procedure.
Subd. 5. Rent means any compensation given for use of the premises, either monetary or "in lieu of"
payments, such as but not limited to utilities, upkeep, repair, or the provision of services, but does not
include payment of shared housing by a family member.
Subd. 6. Residential Housing means any structure or building, or portion thereof, including a
"manufactured home (mobile home)", containing at least one dwelling unit which is intended to be used for
residential occupancy, and which includes bathroom and kitchen facilities permanently installed.
Subd. 7. Tenant, except as otherwise provided herein, means any person who occupies and uses as their
primary residence a dwelling unit furnished to that person for payment of rent to another.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.7 Rental Housing Regulations 25
10.7.3. Applicability and exceptions.
Subd. 1. The provisions of this article shall apply to all residential housing occupied for rent and the rental
dwelling units contained therein, including rented single-family dwellings and duplexes, manufactured
homes, and rental dwelling units in owner-occupied dwellings.
Subd. 2. The provisions of this article shall not apply to jails, hospitals, parish houses, parsonages, manses
and rectories, dwelling units in a cooperative or condominium building, hotels, motels, or facilities licensed
by the State of Minnesota, nor to any dormitory owned and operated by an educational institution.
10.7.4. Registration permit required. No person shall occupy, allow to be occupied, or let to another for
occupancy, any rental dwelling unit in the City of Cloquet, without first having obtained a registration permit from
the city under the terms of this section. Dwelling units constructed or converted to rental usage after the effective
date of this article shall not be occupied for human habitation prior to issuance of a registration permit by the city.
An application for registration shall be made upon forms furnished by the city for such purpose and shall require the
minimum information required under Section 10.7.5.
10.7.5. Application for registration permit; register of occupancy.
Subd. 1. The owner of each rental dwelling unit shall make written application to the city for registration of
the rental dwelling unit(s). A new owner shall be required to register units within ten days after acquiring
them. Application for registration shall be made upon forms furnished by the city and shall specifically set
forth the following information:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the rental dwelling unit(s); if an
entity, the name of the entity, and the name, address, telephone number and email address
of the president, chief manager, or managing partner; and the name, address, telephone
number and email address of any property management company acting as landlord on
their behalf.
B. The street address of each rental dwelling unit.
C. Number and types of rental dwelling units within a dwelling.
D. The maximum number of occupants permitted for each rental dwelling unit.
E. At least one name, emergency telephone number, and address of the person authorized to
make or order made repairs and/or services to the building as required and necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the occupants, or who is able to contact the
person so authorized.
F. A site drawing showing designated off-street parking areas for each existing rental
dwelling unit, which areas comply with the city’s off-street parking requirements.
Subd. 2. Every permit holder, or their resident agent, shall maintain a current register of all tenants and
other persons with a lawful right of occupancy to each rental dwelling unit. The register shall be kept
current at all times and shall be provided for inspection by the city within a reasonable time.
Subd. 3. The city shall be promptly notified of any change of the resident agent, and any change in the
names, addresses, and other information concerning the persons listed in the last registration application
filed with the city. A window sticker will be provided.
10.7.6. Posting of registration. Each registration permit issued by the city shall be displayed in a conspicuous spot
near the front entrance of a single unit rental dwelling, or in a public corridor, hallway or lobby of residential housing
containing multiple rental dwelling units, and shall be visible to all residents. Only one registration need be posted
for each separate apartment building.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.7 Rental Housing Regulations 26
10.7.7. Performance Requirements and Acceptability Standards. Below are the performance requirements and
acceptability criteria that will be evaluated during an inspection. A discussion of how inspectors should interpret the
requirements and tenant preference options follows.
Subd. 1. Sanitary Facilities.
A. Performance Requirement
1. The dwelling unit must include sanitary facilities within the unit.
2. The sanitary facilities must be in proper operating condition and be adequate for
personal cleanliness and disposal of human waste.
3. The sanitary facilities must be usable in privacy.
4. A shared bathroom is permitted in a boarding house situation.
B. Acceptability Criteria
1. The bathroom must be located in a separate room and have a flush toilet in
proper operating condition.
2. The unit must have a fixed basin (lavatory) with a sink trap and hot and cold
running water in proper operating condition.
3. The unit must have a shower or tub with hot and cold running water in proper
operating condition.
4. The facilities must utilize an approved public or private disposal system,
including a locally approved septic system.
C. Related Inspections for Sanitary Facilities.
1. The bathroom must be contained within the dwelling unit, afford privacy (usually
meaning a door, although no lock is required), and be for the exclusive use of
the occupants.
2. All public or private waste disposal systems servicing the unit or facilities must
be either state or local agency approved.
3. The tub/shower, toilet, and basin/lavatory must have a proper sewer trap, drain,
and vents to prevent the escape of sewer gases or severe leakage of water.
Drains must not be clogged and the toilet must flush. Hot and cold water must
be available at the tub, shower, and lavatory taps. The definition of hot water
(temperature) required at the lavatory, tub, or shower should be determined from
local health standards or applicable local code.
4. The inspector must determine if the bathroom facilities are free of hazards, such
as damaged or broken fixtures and plumbing leaks, which may endanger the
occupants.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.7 Rental Housing Regulations 27
5. Only one bathroom is required to meet these requirements. Additional
bathrooms do not have to contain all plumbing fixtures (tub/shower, toilet or
lavatory), but if present, they must not create any unsanitary conditions, be
properly plumbed, and be free of sewer gases.
6. Other room standards that apply to bathroom facilities, such as illumination and
electricity, are discussed under those performance requirements.
Subd. 2. Food Preparation and Refuse Disposal.
A. Performance Requirement.
1. The dwelling unit must have suitable space and equipment to store, prepare, and
serve food in a sanitary manner.
B. Acceptability Criteria.
1. The dwelling unit must have an oven and a stove or range. A microwave oven
may be substituted for a tenant-supplied oven and stove or range. A microwave
may be substituted for an owner-supplied oven and stove or range if the tenant
agrees and microwave ovens are furnished to both subsidized and unsubsidized
tenants in the same building or premises. On gas stoves no pilot light is allowed;
they must be electronic ignition.
2. The dwelling unit must have a refrigerator supplied by either the owner or
tenant.
3. All required equipment must be in proper operating condition. According to the
lease, equipment may be supplied by either the owner or the tenant.
4. The dwelling unit must have a kitchen sink in proper operating condition, with a
sink trap and hot and cold running water. The sink must drain into an approved
public or private system.
5. The dwelling unit must have space for storage, preparation, and serving of food.
6. Facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food waste and refuse,
including temporary storage facilities where necessary, are required.
EXAMPLE:
What are bathroom hazards that may endanger occupants?
? Broken ceramic, metal, or glass fixtures that may pose a
hazard. This includes towel racks, soap dishes, medicine
cabinets, and mirrors as well
? A leaking hot water faucet may pose a scalding threat.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.7 Rental Housing Regulations 28
C. Related Inspections for Food Preparation and Refuse Disposal.
1. Hot plates are not acceptable substitutes for stoves or ranges. The oven must
heat and all burners on the stove or range must work. All stove or range knobs
must be present. The stove or range must be free of hazardous gas hook-ups, gas
leaks, or electrical hazards.
2. The sink must have hot and cold running water from the faucets and a proper
working sink drain with gas trap. It must also be hooked to an approved water
and sewer system.
3. Space for storage, preparation, and serving of food must be present. Built-in
space, equipment, table(s), or portable storage facilities are acceptable.
4. Waste and refuse storage facilities are determined by local practice and may
include trash cans or dumpster facilities.
5. Other room standards apply to the food preparation area and are discussed under
those specific requirements below.
Subd. 3. Space and Security.
A. Performance Requirement.
1. The dwelling unit must provide adequate space and security for the tenant.
B. Acceptability Criteria.
1. At a minimum, the dwelling unit must have a living room, a kitchen and a
bathroom, except in a boarding house.
2. The dwelling unit must have at least one bedroom or living/sleeping room for
every two persons. Other than very young children (up to age 5), children of
opposite sex may not be required to occupy the same bedroom or living/sleeping
room.
3. Dwelling unit windows that are accessible from the outside must be lockable.
4. Exterior doors to the unit must be lockable with a deadbolt.
EXAMPLE:
What temperature must a refrigerator maintain to keep food from
spoiling?
Above 32° F, but generally below 40° F.
Consider how often the refrigerator will be opened. Proper
temperatures are difficult to maintain if the refrigerator is frequently
opened during warm weather, door seals are removed or broken, or
the door sits open.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.7 Rental Housing Regulations 29
C. Related Inspections for Space and Security.
1. A living room may be used as sleeping (bedroom) space, but no more than two
persons may occupy the space.
2. Unit windows located on the first floor, at the basement level, on a fire escape,
porch, or other outside space that can be reached from the ground and that are
designed to be opened must have a locking device. (Windows with sills less
than six feet off the ground are considered accessible.) Traditional window
locks, those provided by storm/screen combination windows, window pins, and
nails are acceptable. Windows leading to a fire escape or required to meet
ventilation requirements may not be permanently nailed shut.
3. Doors leading to the outside and common hallways must be equipped with a
deadbolt; fire escapes, porches and other openings accessible from the ground
must have locks. No specific type of lock is required.
4. Window and door surfaces (including the door frame) must be in sufficient
condition to support the installation and proper operation of window and door
locks.
Subd. 4. Thermal Environment.
A. Performance Requirement.
1. The dwelling unit must be able to provide a thermal environment that is healthy
for the human body.
B. Acceptability Criteria.
1. There must be a safe system for heating the dwelling unit, such as electric
baseboard, radiator, or forced air systems. In order to ensure a healthy living
environment appropriate for the climate the system must be able to provide
adequate heat either directly or indirectly to each room.
2. The heating system must be in proper operating condition.
3. The dwelling unit must not contain unvented room heaters that burn gas, oil, or
kerosene. Electric heaters are acceptable.
C. Related Inspections for Thermal Environment.
1. The inspector must define “a healthy living environment” for the local climate.
Local or state codes will help the inspector determine when and how much heat
is adequate. For example, an inspector may define a heating system capable of
maintaining an interior temperature of 65º between October 1 and May 1 as
adequate.
2. Adequate heat is required in all rooms used for living; the heat source does not
have to be located in each room as long as the heat can pass to the appropriate
space and meet the definition of adequate. Portable electric room heaters or
kitchen stoves with built-in heating units are not acceptable as a primary source
of heat for units.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.7 Rental Housing Regulations 30
3. Improper operating conditions, including all conditions that may be unsafe, such
as broken or damaged source vents, flues, exhausts, gas or oil lines that create a
potential fire hazard or threats to health and safety are not permitted. Heating
unit safety devices must be present, and the heating equipment must have proper
clearance from combustible materials and location of oil storage tanks. There
must be proper gas and oil connections. Local plumbing, fire, or mechanical
codes are instructive in providing details about acceptable materials for furnace
and water heater hookups and required clearances. Seek assistance from local
code enforcement offices to determine health and safety standards for
equipment hook-up and clearance requirements.
4. Heating system inspections are often required by local or state authorities,
especially for large multi-family buildings. If the heating system has passed
inspection from the inspecting authority within the past two years, the inspector
may accept this as proof of heating equipment safety.
5. Working cooling equipment refers to a central ventilation system, evaporative
cooling system, room or central air conditioning. These systems are not
required, but if present, must be operating safely so as not to create a potential
fire hazard or other threat to health and safety.
Subd. 5. Illumination and Electricity.
A. Performance Requirement.
1. Each room must have adequate natural or artificial illumination to permit normal
indoor activities and to support the health and safety of occupants.
2. The dwelling unit must have sufficient electrical sources so occupants can use
essential electrical appliances.
3. Electrical fixtures and wiring must not pose a fire hazard.
4. GFI’s must be installed in all kitchens, bathrooms and by any water outlet.
B. Acceptability Criteria.
1. There must be at least one egress window in the living room and in each
sleeping room.
2. The kitchen area and the bathroom must have a permanent ceiling or wallmounted
fixture in proper operating condition.
3. The kitchen must have at least one electrical outlet in proper operating condition.
4. The living room and each sleeping space must have at least two electrical outlets
in proper operating condition. Permanent overhead or wall-mounted light
fixtures may count as one of the required electrical outlets.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.7 Rental Housing Regulations 31
C. Related Inspections for Illumination and Electricity.
1. The inspector must be satisfied that the electrical system is free of hazardous
conditions, including: exposed, uninsulated, or frayed wires, improper
connections, improper insulation or grounding of any component of the system,
overloading of capacity, or wires lying in or located near standing water or other
unsafe places.
2. Outlets must be properly installed in the baseboard, wall, or floor. Hanging light
fixtures or outlets from electric wiring, missing cover plates on switches and
outlets, badly cracked outlets or cover plates, exposed fuse box connections and
overloaded circuits are unacceptable.
Subd. 6. Structure and Materials
A. Performance Requirement.
1. The dwelling unit must be structurally sound.
2. The structure must not present any threat to the health and safety of the
occupants and must protect the occupants from the environment.
B. Acceptability Criteria.
1. Ceilings, walls, and floors must not have any serious defects such as severe
bulging or leaning, large holes, loose surface materials, severe buckling,
missing parts, or other serious damage.
2. The roof must be structurally sound and weather-proof.
3. The foundation and exterior wall structure and surface must not have any serious
defects such as serious leaning, buckling, sagging, large holes, or defects that
may result in air infiltration or vermin infestation.
4. The condition and equipment of interior and exterior stairs, halls, porches, and
walkways must not present the danger of tripping and falling.
5. Elevators must be working safely.
C. Related Inspections for Structure and Materials.
1. The inspector must examine each of the elements listed in the acceptability
criteria to determine that each is structurally sound, will not collapse, and does
not present a danger to residents through falling or missing parts, or tripping
hazards. The inspector must determine that the unit is free from water,
excessive air, and vermin infiltration.
2. Handrails are required when four or more steps (risers) are present, and
protective railings are required when porches, balconies, and stoops are thirty
inches off the ground.
3. The elevator servicing the unit must be working. A current city or state
inspection certificate suffices to determine working condition of the elevator.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.7 Rental Housing Regulations 32
4. Manufactured homes must have proper tie-down devices capable of surviving
wind loads common to the area.
Subd. 7. Interior Air Quality.
A. Performance Requirement.
1. The dwelling unit must be free of air pollutant levels that threaten the occupants’
health.
B. Acceptability Criteria.
1. The dwelling unit must be free from dangerous air pollution levels from carbon
monoxide, sewer gas, fuel gas, dust, and other harmful pollutants.
2. There must be adequate air circulation in the dwelling unit.
3. Bathroom areas must have one openable window or other adequate ventilation.
4. Any sleeping room must have at least one window. If the window was designed
to be opened, it must be in proper working order.
C. Related Inspections for Interior Air Quality.
1. The inspector must be satisfied that air pollutants such as gas leaks, industrial
outputs, and heavy traffic would not present a health hazard.
2. Air circulation should be checked to determine adequate ventilation. Air
conditioning (A/C) provides adequate circulation as do ceiling and vent fans.
3. The windows must adequately protect the unit’s interior from the weather.
Windows designed to open must not be painted or nailed shut. The ventilating
bathroom fan in the bathroom must operate as intended.
Subd. 8. Water Supply
A. Performance Requirement.
1. The water supply must be free of contamination.
2. Testing of well water is required yearly.
B. Acceptability Criteria.
1. The dwelling unit must be served by an approved public or private water supply
that is sanitary and free from contamination.
C. Related Inspections for Water Supply.
1. The inspector should be satisfied that the water supply is approved by the State
or local jurisdiction.
2. Clean water must be distributed to all unit fixtures and waste water must leave
the unit to an approved area without presence of sewer gas and backups.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.7 Rental Housing Regulations 33
3. Plumbing fixtures and pipes must be free of leaks and threats to health and
safety.
4. Water-heating equipment must be installed safely and must not present any
safety hazards to families. All water heaters must be free of leaks, have
temperature/pressure relief valves, and a discharge line. Unless safety dividers
or shields are installed, water heaters must not be located in bedrooms or living
areas where safety hazards may exist. Fuel-burning equipment must have proper
clearance from combustible materials and be properly vented.
Subd. 9. Lead-Based Paint. The Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act as amended (42 U.S.C. 4821
- 4846) and the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992 and implementing regulations
24 CFR Part 35 Subparts A, B, M, and R apply to the housing choice voucher program.
A. Acceptability Criteria.
1. The requirements apply to dwelling units built prior to 1978 that are occupied or
can be occupied by families with children under six years of age, excluding zero
bedroom dwellings.
2. During initial and annual inspections of pre-1978 units that are occupied or will
be occupied by families with children under six years of age, the inspector must
conduct a visual assessment for deteriorated paint surfaces and the owner must
stabilize deteriorated surfaces. Applicable areas include painted surfaces within
the dwelling unit, exterior painted surfaces associated with the dwelling unit, and
common areas of the building through which residents must pass to gain access
to the unit and areas frequented by resident children under six years of age,
including play areas and child care facilities.
3. For units occupied by environmental intervention blood lead level (lead
poisoned) children under six years of age, a risk assessment must be conducted
(paid for by the building owner), and the owner must complete hazard reduction
activities if lead hazards are identified during the risk assessment.
Subd. 10. Access
A. Performance Requirement.
1. Use and maintenance of the unit must be possible without unauthorized use of
other private properties.
2. The building must provide an alternate means of exit in case of fire.
B. Acceptability Criteria.
1. The unit must have private access.
2. In case of fire, the building must contain an alternate means of exit such as fire
stairs, or windows, including use of a ladder for windows above the second
floor.
C. Related Inspections for Access.
1. The inspector must determine that the unit has private access without
unauthorized passage through another dwelling unit or private property.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.7 Rental Housing Regulations 34
2. The emergency (alternate) exit from the building (not the unit) may consist of fire
stairs, a second door, fire ladders, or exit through windows. The emergency exit
must not be blocked. It must b e appropriate for the family and considered
adequate by local officials. Guidance from the local fire agency is advisable.
Subd. 11. Sanitary Condition.
A. Performance Requirement.
1. The dwelling unit and its equipment must be in sanitary condition.
B. Acceptability Criteria.
1. The dwelling unit and its equipment must be free of vermin and rodent
infestation.
C. Related Inspections for Sanitary Condition.
1. The inspector must ensure that the unit is free of rodents and heavy
accumulations of trash, garbage, or other debris that may harbor vermin.
Infestation by mice, roaches, or other vermin particular to the climate must also
be considered. The unit must have adequate barriers to prevent infestation.
Subd. 12. Smoke and Carbon Monoxide Detectors.
A. Performance Requirements.
1. At least one battery-operated or hard-wired smoke detector in proper operating
condition must be present on each level of the dwelling unit, including
basements but excluding crawl spaces and unfinished attics.
2. Smoke detectors must be installed in accordance with and meet the requirements
of the National Fire Protection Association Standards (NFPA) 74 or its
successor standards.
3. If a hearing-impaired person is occupying the dwelling unit, the smoke detectors
must have an alarm system designed for hearing-impaired persons as specified in
NFPA 74.
4. All units shall have an approved carbon monoxide alarm within 10 feet of each
sleeping room. Carbon monoxide alarms must either be hardwired into the
electrical wiring, directly plugged into a non-switched outlet or battery powered.
B. Acceptability Criteria.
1. The inspector must ensure that the location of smoke and carbon monoxide
detectors conforms with local and/or State Fire Marshall’s requirements.
2. The inspector must determine that smoke and carbon monoxide detectors are
located and installed in accordance with NFPA Standards. All smoke and
carbon monoxide detectors must be in operating condition.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10 - BUILDING AND HOUSING
Section 10.7 Rental Housing Regulations 35
C. Related Inspections for Smoke and Carbon Monoxide Detectors.
1. Local codes, such as housing or fire codes, often address responsibilities between
owners and tenants for installation and maintenance of smoke detector batteries.
At initial inspection smoke detectors must have good batteries and be operable.
The inspector may follow local codes to determine if missing or dead smoke
detector batteries constitute a tenant or owner-caused failure in occupied units.
2. Consultation with the local fire officials is recommended regarding acceptable
types and location of smoke detectors.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Effective Date: March 7, 2006
Amendments: 05-15-07 337A / 02-02-10 389A / 03-15-11 390A / 11-05-13 428A / 11-05-13 430A / 01-07-14 432A /
09-24-15 451A / 11-15-16 461A / 01-16-18 471A / 09-03-19 485A
Section 11.1 General 1
Section 11.1: General
11.1.01. Water and Sewer Department. The City Engineer shall supervise the maintenance, care, management
and operation of the streets, lights, water and sewer. The City Engineer shall be responsible for the management,
maintenance, care and operation of the water works and sanitary sewer system of the City.
11.1.02. Use of Water and Sewer System Restricted. No person shall make or use any water or sewer service
installation connected to the City water or sewer system except pursuant to application and permit as shall be
provided in this Chapter. No person shall make or use any installation contrary to the regulatory provisions of this
Chapter.
11.1.03. Applications for Service.
Subd. 1. Procedure. Application for a water or sewer service installation and for water and or sewer
service shall be made to the City Engineer on forms prescribed and furnished by the City. By his or her
signature, the applicant shall agree to conform to this Chapter and to the rules and regulations that may be
established by the City as conditions for the use of these services.
Subd. 2. Fees or Deposit. Application for a service installation shall be made by the owner of the
property to be served or by his or her agent. The applicant shall, at the time of making application, for
water or sewer services, pursuant to this Section elect either to pay the established connection fees in full
immediately; or to pay the connection fees over a period of five (5) years, if so approved by resolution of
the City Council. Payment of the fees and rate of interest shall be according to the authorizing resolution.
In those cases, where a person elects to pay connection fees over a period of five years, he or she shall be
required to execute an agreement, acceptable in form to the City Attorney, which shall be recorded against
the property to which the water or sewer connection shall be made, and which shall be binding upon the
applicant and future owners of the property to pay the unpaid balance.
Subd. 3. Non-Resident Connections. No individual connections or hookups to the City water and/or
sewer system shall be allowed to non-residents adjacent to or outside the city limits of Cloquet without a
resolution by the City Council authorizing such connections. As part of this approval process, the City
Engineer must provide information stating that the proposed connections shall not adversely affect the
systems of the City and that there shall be sufficient capacity to provide the services to the non-residents
without diminishing the services to the residents of the City. Upon receipt of this statement from the City
Engineer, the City Council may, by resolution, permit non-residents to hook-up or connect to the City water
and sewer systems. If so approved, the connection fees for non-resident connections shall be two times the
cost for a resident of the City, unless there is a written agreement between the City of Cloquet and the
adjoining governmental authority which specifically addresses non-resident connections in a different
manner.
11.1.04. Permits and Charges for Service Connections.
Subd. 1. Permit. No connection shall be made to the City water or sanitary sewer system without a permit
from the City Engineer. The City Engineer may deny a permit for sewer or water connection if:
A. The Engineer finds the property can reasonably be served by an extension of the existing
public system to the property of the applicant and intervening lands. It is the stated intention
of the City to eliminate, where possible, construction of private lines serving private parcels
of land in lieu of public lines.
B. The Engineer finds that granting of a permit would encourage development of property which
cannot economically be served by other utilities or improved accesses. A decision on the part
of the City Engineer may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council upon written
notice.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.1 General 2
Subd. 2. Related Installation Costs. When a connection requires installation of a service line from the
main to the property line, in addition to any connection fees, the applicant shall bear the costs of making the
necessary connections, taps, and installation of pipe appurtenances, and necessary street repairs to provide
service to the property.
Subd. 3. Certification. No permit as described above shall be issued to connect with any water or
sanitary sewer main unless the City Engineer certifies to the truth of one of the following or the payments
required under Section 11.1.04, Subd. 4, 5 and 6 shall be made:
A. That the lot or tract to be served has been assessed for the cost of construction of the main
with which the connection shall be made or that proceedings for levying the assessment have
been or shall be commenced in due course; or
B. That the cost of construction of the main has been paid by the developer or builder developing
the lot or tract.
Subd. 4. Sanitary Sewer and Water Connection Fees for Lots Adjacent to the City Mains Not
Previously Assessed. Each January, the City Engineer shall recommend to the City Council connection
fees which shall be charges for water and sewer connections for properties adjacent to City mains not
previously assessed for the extension of the mains. In developing a recommendation the City Engineer
shall consider the current average or typical front foot costs for the construction of an eight (8) inch water
main and an eight (8) inch sewer main. The Council shall adopt by resolution connection fees for sewer
and water services which shall remain in effect until or unless modified by subsequent Council resolution.
The connection fees shall not include charges for materials and labor as set forth in Subdivision 2 of this
Section. In no instance shall the fees be based upon less than a seventy-five (75) foot frontage.
A. Single Family Dwelling. The connection fee shall be charged in accordance with the
Resolution of the City Council of the City of Cloquet as set forth in this section and the total
water and sewer connection fee shall be based on a 75 foot frontage.
B. Multiple Family Dwelling, Including Duplexes, Motels and Trailer Courts. The connection
charge shall be established by the City Council upon request for connection but shall in no
case be less than one and one-half times (1-1/2 x) the charge for a single family connection.
C. Commercial and Industrial Structures. The connection charges shall be established by the
City Council upon request for connection but shall in no case be less than one and one-half (1-
1/2 x) the charge for a single family connection. In addition, a charge shall be added for all
over and above average costs, if any, that the City may face to make the necessary connection.
Subd. 5. Western Lake Superior Sanitary District (WLSSD) Capacity Availability Fee (CAF). In
addition to any sewer connection fees as established by the City of Cloquet, all applicants for new sanitary
sewer connections shall also be required to pay a Capacity Availability Fee (CAF) in accordance with the
rules and procedures as adopted by the WLSSD Board. Whenever there is a change in use or a physical
change in a building that requires a building permit and/or plumbing permit, an additional Capacity
Allocation Fee may be charged in accordance with the WLSSD’s CAF rules.
Subd. 6. Water Connections and Connection Fees for the Cloquet - Lake Superior Waterline.
Connections to the Cloquet – Lake Superior Waterline are expressly prohibited unless authorized by City
Council resolution. In the event that such a connection is approved, the applicant shall be required to enter
into a written agreement with the City, which details the conditions of the approval and use. Because water
from the Lake Superior Waterline is non-potable, no connections or uses for domestic consumption shall be
authorized or approved. In the event a connection is approved, a connection fee shall be established by the
City Council.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.1 General 3
Subd. 7. Utility Rate, Fee and Usage Schedule. Specifically incorporated herein by reference is a utility
rate, fee and usage schedule which will be regularly reviewed and approved by the City Council by
resolution from time to time for purposes of establishing the presently existing rates, fees and usage charges
applicable to Chapter 11 of the City Code.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.2 User Charge System 4
Section 11.2: User Charge System
11.2.01. Accounting, Billing and Collecting. Each user of water and sewer services to property served by the City
water and/or sewer system shall pay monthly a water and sewer user charge as set forth in this Section.
Subd. 1. Accounts in Name of Owner and/or Occupant. All accounts shall be carried in the name of the
owner of the premises connected to the water and sewer services, and/or the occupant of the premises, if
the owner is not directly paying for the services. Where the term “user” appears in this Code in reference to
the payment for water or sewer charges, the term shall include the owner and the occupant of the premises.
Subd. 2. Required Information. The owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises shall furnish
the City with such information as may reasonably be required relating to use of water or sewer services
provided by the City systems. Willful failure to provide the information, willful falsification of the
information, or willful failure to comply with any requirement or order issued pursuant to this Section shall
constitute a violation of this Section.
Subd. 3. Bills for Service. Water and sewer service charges shall be billed together. Bills shall be mailed
to the owner, and/or occupant monthly and shall specify the water consumed in even thousand gallons and
the sewer and water charges in accordance with the rates as established by City Council resolution. The
procedure shall include a late payment penalty provision and shall provide for an interest charge on the
unpaid balance of the charges as provided in this Section.
Subd. 4. Meters Required. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, for the purpose of determining
the charges to be rendered against premises using the City's water and/or sewer systems, the volume of
water used from the water system, and the volume of wastewater discharged into the sewer system by the
owner, lessee, or occupant of any premises shall be based and computed upon the amount of water used on
the premises as measured by an approved meter.
Subd. 5. Metering of Private Water Sources. In all cases in which the water shall be derived in whole or
in part from sources independent from the city water system, the water supplied from private sources but
placed into City sewers shall be measured by a water meter of a type approved by the City Engineer to be
installed by the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises at his or her own cost and will be subject to the
supervision and inspection by the City. User charges against the premises shall be based upon the volume
of water used as measured from both public and private sources. Whenever the owner, lessee or occupant
fails to install the meter, or where it shall not be practicable to measure the water consumed on any
premises by a meter, the City Engineer shall determine the manner and the method used to estimate the
volume of water from private sources which discharges into the system. The estimate shall be used in lieu
of the meter volume of water from private sources to determine the wastewater charge thereon.
Subd. 6. Wastewater Meters. Where an accurate wastewater flow cannot be measured or determined
with the use of a water meter, the City may require the installation of an acceptable wastewater flow meter
as recommended by the City Engineer. The owner, occupant or user of the sewer service shall be required
to install approved wastewater meters or other measuring devices that serve to demonstrate the volume of
wastewater being discharged to the city sewer system. The volume of wastewater as so measured shall be
the basis upon which the wastewater charges shall be made under this Section. Said meters shall be
installed and maintained by the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises at his or her own expense and
shall be subject to the supervision and inspection by the City.
Subd. 7. Minimum Usage Billings. The minimum usage that shall be billed by the City for any billing
and collection period shall be one thousand gallons for both water and sewer.
Subd. 8. Miscellaneous Service Billings. All water and sewer charges for labor, materials, shut-off fees
and etc. for a customer shall be invoiced or billed directly to the customer of record or may be billed as a
miscellaneous charge on their respective utility accounts.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.2 User Charge System 5
Subd. 9. Penalty for Late Payment. All charges for water, sewer and miscellaneous service shall be due
on the monthly due date specified by the City for the respective account. Penalty for past due bills shall be
5% of the total bill, except, no penalty shall be charged on past due sales tax.
Subd. 10. Delinquent Accounts. All charges for water and sewer service shall be due on the monthly due
date specified by the City for the respective amount and shall be delinquent twenty (20) days thereafter.
The City shall endeavor to collect delinquent accounts promptly. When the delinquent customer shall be
the tenant in possession or the property owner, and satisfactory arrangements for payment have not been
made, after the procedural requirements of Section 11.2.01, Subd. 12 have been complied with, the City
may discontinue service to the delinquent customer by shutting off the water at the curb box. When water
service to any premises has been discontinued, service shall not be restored except upon the payment of all
delinquent bills and an off/on fee as established and adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to
time.
Delinquent accounts shall be certified to the City Administrator who shall prepare an assessment roll each
year providing for assessment of the delinquent amounts against the respective properties served. The
assessment roll shall be delivered to the Council for adoption on or before November 30th of each year for
certification to the County Auditor for collection along with taxes. Such action shall be optional and may
be subsequent to taking legal action to collect delinquent accounts.
If the delinquent customer shall be a tenant who has vacated the property or an owner who no longer has an
ownership interest because of mortgage foreclosure, cancellation of contract for deed or for any other
reason, collection of the delinquent account shall, at the option of the City Administrator, be either through
a collection agency or legal proceedings in accordance with the City's Collection Policy.
Subd. 11. Liability For Payment of Services. The owner of premises which are connected to the City's
water and sewer facilities, and the occupant thereof, shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the
service to the premises and the service shall be furnished to the premises by the City only upon the
condition that the owner and occupant of the premises shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for
the charges. The owner of rental property agrees, as a condition of receiving service, to be personally liable
for water and sewer service furnished the tenants, lessees, or other occupants. A claim for unpaid charges
which have been billed to the occupant of the premises or the user of the service may be recovered against
the owner or occupant in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction or in the discretion of the City
Administrator may be certified to the County Auditor to be collected with taxes against the premises so
served or reported to a collection agency. Money paid to the County Auditor on the account shall belong to
the City and shall be remitted to the City Administrator by the County Auditor in the manner provided by
law for the payment of other money belonging to the City. In addition to, and not in lieu of, the foregoing
method of enforcing payment of the charges, the City Engineer may, according to the rules and regulations
as he or she may have established and the Council shall have by resolution approved, cause the City water
supply for and to any premises to be shut off until all arrears, with interest and penalties on the delinquent
charges, shall be paid, together with the cost of shutting off and turning on the water.
Subd. 12. Procedure for Shutoff of Services. If the amount claimed to be owed shall be actually due and
unpaid and that there shall be no legal reason why the water supply of the delinquent customer may not be
shut off in accordance with this Chapter, the City may shut off the supply. Water shall not be shut off
under this Chapter or for a violation of rules and regulations affecting utility service until notice has first
been given to the occupant of the premises involved and the customer is given a right to protest the shut-off
notice in writing before the shut-off date. The shutoff notice shall state that if arrangements for payment
are not made before a day stated in the notice not less than ten (10) days after the date on which the notice
shall be given and the customer does not file a written protest, the water supply to the premises shall be
shut off. Every possible attempt shall be made to notify the occupant personally before his or her water
shall be actually shut off.
Subd. 13. Minnesota Cold Weather Rule. Water service will not be shut off between October 15
through April 15 if the shut-off would affect the primary heat source of the unit of residence affected and
the customer otherwise complies with the requirements of Minnesota Statute § 216B.097 (Cold Weather
Rule).
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.2 User Charge System 6
Subd. 14. Disposition of Revenues. All revenues derived from charges imposed under this Section shall
be respectively credited to the City Water or Sewer Enterprise Funds, unless otherwise designated by City
Council resolution.
11.2.02. Water User Charges. Each water user, as defined in Section 11.2.01, Subd. 1, shall pay charges and/or
fees, which shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council. Each user shall pay
a fixed monthly charge and a commodity charge for each one-thousand gallons of water used. Furthermore, the City
may also charge additional fees such as a Minnesota Department of Health Service Connection Fee, applicable sales
taxes or any other utility fees as established by State or Federal rules or regulations. Delinquent or late payment
accounts shall furthermore be subject to a penalty for late payment and an off/on fee as established by Section
11.2.01, Subdivisions 9 and 10.
Subd. 1. Inside Rates/Outside Rates. The City shall establish both an “Inside Rate” and an “Outside
Rate” for service usage. Unless otherwise specified by City Council resolution, “Inside Rates” shall apply
to those premises which lie within the city limits of Cloquet and “Outside Rates” shall apply to those
premises outside the city limits, unless otherwise determined or established by a special written agreement
between the City and the user.
Subd. 2. Monthly Fixed Water Charge. Each water user shall pay a monthly fixed charge which shall be
based upon the size of the water meter servicing the premises.
Subd. 3. Water Commodity Charge. In addition to the month fixed charge for water, the user shall also
pay a water commodity charge for each 1,000 US gallons provided to the customer.
Subd. 4. Minnesota Department of Health Drinking Water Service Connection Fee. Each water user
shall pay a monthly Drinking Water Service Connection Fee, as established from time to time by the State
of Minnesota.
Subd. 5. Special Water Agreements. From time to time, the City may, by council resolution, enter into
special utility service agreements with political jurisdictions, businesses or other entities, which establishes
the conditions of water service and the user charges that apply.
Subd. 6. Automatic Meter Reading Devices Required. Water meters required in accordance with
Section 11.2.01, Subd. 4 shall be provided with an Automatic Meter Reading (AMR) feature of the type
and design as approved by the City. For those customer accounts where the water meter does not include
an AMR feature, an additional fixed monthly Manual Read Charge shall be billed to the customer’s
account.
11.2.03. Wastewater Classes and User Charges. For the purpose of recovering from users the cost of operation
and maintenance of the City’s sanitary sewer wastewater facilities, sewer users, as defined in Section 11.2.01, Subd.
1, shall pay sewer charges and/or fees, which shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to time by the
City Council. Each user shall pay a monthly fixed sewer charge and a commodity charge for each one-thousand
gallons of wastewater discharged. Furthermore, the City may also charge applicable sales taxes or any other sewer
utility fees as established by the Western Lake Superior Sanitary District (WLSSD), the State of Minnesota or any
other Federal rules or regulations. Delinquent or late payment accounts shall furthermore be subject to a penalty for
late payment and an off/on fee as established by Section 11.2.01, Subdivisions 9 and 10 of this Chapter.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.2 User Charge System 7
Subd. 1. Wastewater Classes. All wastewater or sanitary sewer customers shall be assigned a
wastewater classification of Class 1, Class 2, or Class 3 by the City Engineer. The Engineer in making the
classification assignment shall take into account all available information with regard to the user's
discharge and have the right to periodic sampling and inspection of the user's wastewater. Upon
determining a particular user's wastewater classification, the Engineer shall file notice of the assignment
with the City Administrator, and send a copy of the notice by regular mail to the user. The Engineer's
determination shall be final unless within ten days of mailing of notice by the city, the user appeals the
determination to the City Council. A user who believes that his or her discharge shall be significantly
different than that contemplated by the classification system or a user who believes that the character of
his or her discharge has changed since the classification assignment by the Engineer, may make
application for reassignment.
A. Class 1. "Class 1" shall mean wastewater having an average daily suspended solids
concentration of not more than 200 mg/L and an average daily BOD of not more than 200
mg/L. (Example: Residential without commercial kitchens, Office, Business and
Commercial Uses with only limited sanitary sewer needs.)
B. Class 2. "Class 2" shall mean wastewater having concentrations greater than Class 1 but not
exceeding 400 mg/L of suspended solids and 400 mg/L of BOD. (Example: Residential with
commercial kitchens, full service restaurants, fast food establishments, delicatessens, and car
washes.)
C. Class 3. "Class 3" shall mean wastewater having concentrations greater than Class 2.
Subd. 2. Monthly Fixed Sewer Charge. All persons, customers or sewer users discharging wastewater to
the City’s sanitary sewer system shall pay a monthly fixed sewer charge as set by the City Council from
time to time.
Subd. 3. Sewer Commodity Charge. In addition to the monthly fixed charge as called for in Section
11.2.03, Subd. 2, all sewer users shall pay a sewer commodity charge for each 1,000 US gallons used.
Subd. 4. Special Sewer Agreements. From time to time the City may, by council resolution, enter into
special utility service agreements with political jurisdictions, businesses or other entities, which establishes
the conditions of sewer service and the user charges that would apply.
11.2.04. Cost Distribution Policy. Charges made to the City by the WLSSD for the cost of the City's proportionate
share of the operation, maintenance, including replacement, and debt service of the WLSSD wastewater facilities
shall be distributed among the users within the City in accordance with the WLSSD domestic equivalent
classification system.
Charges made to the City by the WLSSD in accordance with the Industrial Cost Recovery Requirements of Title II
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Public Laws 92-500, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq) shall
be apportioned among industrial users within the City in accordance with the WLSSD Industrial Cost Recovery
Classification System.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.3 Water System 8
Section 11.3: Water System
11.3.01. General Water Regulations.
Subd. 1. Discontinuance of Service. The City may discontinue service to any water customer without
notice for necessary repairs or, upon notice as provided in Section 11.2.01, Subd. 10, for non-payment of
charges or for violation of rules and regulations affecting utility service.
Subd. 2. Supply from One Service. Whenever two or more parties are supplied from one pipe
connecting with a service main, each building or part of building separately supplied shall have a separate
curb box or service shutoff valve and a separate water meter.
Subd. 3. Turning on Water, Tapping Mains. No unauthorized person shall turn on any water supply at
the curb box or tap any distribution main or pipe of the water supply system or insert a stop cock or other
appurtenance therein.
Subd. 4. Repair of Leaks. The customer or owner shall be responsible for maintaining the water service
pipe from the curb box into the building served. If he or she fails to repair any leak in the service pipe
within 10 days after notice by the City, or a longer period as prescribed by the City Engineer, the City may
turn the water off. The water shall not then be turned on again until the leak has been repaired. When the
waste of water shall be great or damage shall be likely to result from the leak, the City shall turn the water
off immediately.
Subd. 5. Use of Fire Hydrants. No person other than an authorized City employee shall operate a fire
hydrant without first obtaining a Hydrant Use Permit to do so from the City Engineer. Charges for water
used under such permits shall be calculated based on actual or estimated usage and further shall include
such special administrative costs as are deemed appropriate. All persons obtaining a Hydrant Use Permit
agree to comply with the current hydrant use program requirements, standard charges and rules as
established by the City and kept on file with the City Engineer.
Subd. 6. Private Water Supply. No water pipe connected to the City water supply system shall be
connected with any pump, well or tank that shall be connected with any source of water supply not directly
owned and operated by the City. When any connection shall be found, the City Engineer shall notify the
owner to sever the connection and if this shall not be done immediately, the City shall turn off the water
supply forthwith. Before any new connection to the City system shall be permitted, the Department shall
ascertain that no cross connection shall exist when the new connection shall be made.
Subd. 7. Restricted Hours Due to Shortage of Water Supply. Whenever the Council determines that a
shortage of water supply threatens the City, it may, by resolution, limit the times and hours during which
City water may be used for sprinkling, irrigation, car washing, air conditioning, or other specified uses.
After publication of the resolution or two days after the mailing of the resolution to each customer, no
person shall use or permit water to be used in violation of the resolution and any customer who does so
shall be charged a fee, which shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to time by the City
Council, for each day of violation and the charge shall be added to his or her next water bill. If the
emergency requires immediate compliance with the terms of the resolution, any customer who has received
notice and thereafter uses or permits water to be used in violation of the resolution shall be subject to the
charge provided above. Continued violation shall be cause for discontinuance of water service and a petty
misdemeanor charge for each day of violation.
Subd. 8. Permitting Use by Others. No person shall permit City water to be used for any purpose except
upon his or her own premises except in an emergency and then only if written permission shall be first
obtained from the City Engineer. Any unauthorized person wishing to obtain water from a fire hydrant for
any purpose shall make application to the City Engineer for the service, as required by Section 11.3.01,
Subd. 5 of this Chapter.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.3 Water System 9
11.3.02. Meters.
Subd. 1. Meters Required. Except for the extinguishment of fires, no person other than an authorized
City employee shall use water from the City water supply system or permit water to be drawn there from
unless the water passes through a water meter sold by the City to the user. No person not authorized by the
City Engineer shall connect, disconnect, take apart, tamper, or in any manner change or interfere with any
water meter or its use.
Subd. 2. Installation. Water service lines, including all piping, valves, standpipes and meters shall be
installed by the owner at his or her expense and all installations shall be in accordance with the Minnesota
State Plumbing Code and any and all requirements as established by the City Engineer.
Subd. 3. Maintenance. Following the initial purchase of a water meter by the customer, the City shall
maintain and repair, at its expense, all water meters. Any meter that has become unserviceable through
ordinary wear and tear shall be reconditioned or replaced by the City with a meter approved by the City
Engineer. Meters which become broken or unserviceable because of freezing due to inadequate frost
protection, negligence or vandalism shall be repaired or replaced by the City at the customer’s expense. If
the replacement of an existing meter requires additional or revised plumbing within the building itself to
accommodate the new meter installation, the building owner shall be responsible to make arrangements for
this plumbing work at his or her own expense. If a water meter becomes inoperable for any reason and the
City is not afforded an opportunity to repair or replace the meter within a reasonable amount of time, water
service may be discontinued immediately until the cause shall be corrected and the meter is repaired or
replaced.
Subd. 4. Complaints; Meter Testing. When a consumer complains that the bill for any past service
period is excessive, the City shall have the meter re-read on request. All meters two inches or less shall be
tested once by the City without charge. All meters larger than two inches shall be tested at the owner's
expense. If the test shows an error in the City's favor exceeding five percent (5%) of the water consumed,
the City shall have the meter repaired or replaced with an accurate meter and the bill shall be adjusted
accordingly. The adjustment shall not extend back more than one service period from the date of the
written request.
Subd. 5. Meters Property of City. Water meters, after installation, shall be the property of the City and
shall be removed or replaced as to size and type when deemed necessary by the City, as provided in Section
11.3.02, Subd. 3 of this Chapter.
Subd. 6. Meter Reading and Inspection. Authorized meter readers shall have access at reasonable hours
of the day to all parts of every building and premises connected with the City water supply system in order
to read meters and make inspections.
Subd. 7. Tampering or Bypassing of Water Meters. No person shall willfully damage, remove,
relocate, tamper with or otherwise interfere with the proper operation or registration of any water meter.
Furthermore, no person shall intentionally bypass any water meter to lessen or alter the amount water being
measured for billing purposes.
11.3.03. Plumbing Regulations.
Subd. 1. Building Water Service Pipes. Water service piping shall be installed in accordance with the
Minnesota State Plumbing Code and any and all requirements as established by the City Engineer. Every
water service pipe shall be laid with sufficient bend to allow not less than one foot of extra length and in
such manner as to prevent rupture by settlement. The service pipe shall be placed not less than eight feet
below the surface and be so arranged as to prevent freezing.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.3 Water System 10
Every building served by City water shall have a separate curb stop box (shutoff valve) installed on the
building’s water service line. Curb stop boxes shall be installed generally where desired by the owners of
occupied properties, but they shall be placed as near as possible to the curb if on a street or within one foot
of the alley line if the main shall be located in the alley. In no case shall they be installed more than 60 feet
from the service line’s connection with the City main. They shall be installed at an approximate depth of
eight feet below the established grade and shall be left in an accurate vertical position when backfilling
shall be completed. Copper tubing shall be used for all building water services of two inches or less,
between the corporation tap on the City main and the curb stop shutoff valve. Joints on copper tubing shall
be as few as possible and not more than one joint shall be used for a service up to 70 feet in length. Each
joint shall be left uncovered until inspected by the City. Connections with the mains for domestic supply
shall be at least 3/4 of an inch in diameter.
A shutoff valve of the size and type required shall be placed close to the inside wall of the building and
before the water meter and be well protected from freezing.
All non-metallic water and sewer pipes shall be installed with a locating (tracer) wire and shall be a #6
hand drawn copper (ASTM B-1) or annealed 49-strand 203 alloy stainless steel wire, as directed by the
City Engineer, to facilitate the locating of these underground utilities.
Subd. 2. Maintenance of Building Water Service Pipes. After initial installation by the building owner
and acceptance by the City, all building water service pipes shall be maintained by the City from the
corporation tap on the City main up to and including the curb stop shutoff valve. The maintenance of the
remainder of the building water service pipe from the curb stop to the building shall be the responsibility of
the building owner. In no case shall the City’s maintenance responsibility extend beyond a public street or
utility easement right-of-way.
Subd. 3. Abandonment of Building Water and Sewer Service Lines. Whenever a building water or
sewer service line is abandoned, or otherwise no longer used, as a result of a building demolition, building
relocation or the installation of new water and sewer building service lines, the old building service lines
shall be properly disconnected from the City mains, at the building owner or property owner’s expense, in
accordance with the procedures and standards as established by the City Engineer.
Subd. 4. Water Meter Settings. Every water meter shall be installed in accordance with the following
provisions:
A. The service pipe from the water main to the meter shall be brought through the floor in a
vertical position where the pipe enters the building. A suitable shutoff valve shall be installed
within 12 inches of the pipes entry into the building and before the water meter.
B. The bottom of the meter shall be between 6 and 12 inches above the finished floor line. The
meter shall be set not more than 12 inches horizontally from the inside line of the building
wall unless a different position shall be approved by the City Engineer. A suitable bracket
shall be provided to support the meter in a proper horizontal position.
C. Each water meter setting shall have a shutoff valve of adequate type and size installed on the
street side and directly adjacent to the meter. In no case shall more than 12 inches of pipe be
exposed between the point of entrance through the building floor and the shutoff valve. A
second shutoff valve shall also be installed on the building side of the meter.
D. All meters shall be installed and shall remain in such a location that is easily accessible to
accommodate required reading, maintenance and replacement.
E. If the water piping on either side of the meter is metallic piping, a permanent electrical ground
strap must be properly installed across the meter.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.3 Water System 11
F. Meters larger than 2 inch in size shall be installed or otherwise provided with suitable bypass
piping to allow for removal and testing of the meter without disturbing water service to the
building.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.4 Sanitary Sewer System 12
Section 11.4. Sanitary Sewer System
11.4.01. Wastewater Facilities System.
Subd. 1. Established. There shall be hereby continued a City wastewater facilities system. The system
shall include all lateral, main, and intercepting sewers, wastewater pumping stations, equipment and other
works and facilities, whether presently existing or hereafter acquired, as shall be found necessary for
completion of the system in first-class operating condition adequate to collect and transmit all wastewater
of the City which shall be discharged into the City's wastewater facilities system to the wastewater facilities
of the Western Lake Superior Sanitary District (WLSSD).
Subd. 2. Intent. It shall be hereby declared and ordained that the establishment and operation of the City
wastewater facilities system is necessary and conducive to the public health, safety, welfare and
convenience of the City and its inhabitants; that the system shall constitute and be a public utility plant and
convenience from which revenues may and shall be derived and that service to be rendered to the
inhabitants, industries and properties, by the collection of wastewater confers direct and indirect benefits to
the inhabitants, industries, and properties of the City for which reasonable rates and charges may be
imposed.
11.4.02. Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this Section and when otherwise used in this
Chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates.
Subd. 1. Authorized Inspector. An inspector authorized by the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 2. Biochemical Oxygen Demand or BOD: The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at 20 degrees Centigrade
and as expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l) and as described in Standard Methods.
Subd. 3. Board: The Cloquet City Council.
Subd. 4. Building Drain: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives
the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys
Wastewater to the Building Sewer, beginning 3 feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
Subd. 5. Building Sewer: The extension from the Building Drain to the Public Sewer, Private Sewer, Onsite
Wastewater Disposal System or other place of disposal; also referred to as a Service Connection.
Subd. 6. Clean Water Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act also referred to as the Clean Water
Act, as amended.
Subd. 7. Combined Sewer: A Sewer receiving both surface runoff and Sewage.
Subd. 8. Commercial Wastewater: Wastewater emanating from a place of business of a Commercial
User.
Subd. 9. City: The City of Cloquet, a political subdivision of the State of Minnesota.
Subd. 10. County Health Department: The health department of the County.
Subd. 11. Debt Service Charge: A charge to Users of Wastewater Treatment Facilities for the purpose of
repaying the cost of capital improvements to the Wastewater Treatment Facilities.
Subd. 12. Engineer: The Person designated as the LUG's Engineer(s) or the authorized deputy, agent, or
representative of the designated Engineer(s).
Subd. 13. Extra Strength Waste: Wastewater having a BOD and/or T.S.S. greater than NDS and not
otherwise classified as an Incompatible Waste.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.4 Sanitary Sewer System 13
Subd. 14. Flow: The quantity of Wastewater.
Subd. 15. Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing
of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce and animal products, including the packaging
of such products.
Subd. 16. Industrial User: A user which discharges Industrial Wastewater.
Subd. 17. Incompatible Waste: Waste that either singly or by interaction with other wastes interferes
with any Sewage treatment process, constitutes a hazard to humans or animals in spite of the treatment
method used by the WLSSD, creates a public nuisance or creates any hazards in the receiving waters of the
Wastewater Treatment Facilities.
Subd. 18. Infiltration/Inflow or I/I: Water other than Wastewater that enters a Public Sewer or Service
Connection from the ground or from surface runoff through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints,
connections or manholes or from sources such as but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar drains, area drains,
foundation drains, cross connections between Storm Sewers and Sanitary Sewers, catch basins, cooling
towers, storm waters or drainage.
Subd. 19. Industrial Wastewater: The liquid, gaseous, and solid processing wastes from an industrial
manufacturing process, trade, or business.
Subd. 20. Load: Quantities of Wastewater characteristics such as BOD, T.S.S., phosphorus or other
constituents.
Subd. 21. Local Unit of Government or LUG: The City of Cloquet, Minnesota.
Subd. 22. MPCA: The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
Subd. 23. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards: Federal regulations establishing Pretreatment
standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly owned Wastewater Treatment Facilities, found at
Section 307(b) of the Clean Water Act.
Subd. 24. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit or NPDES Permit: A Permit
issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency/MPCA setting limits on pollutant strength
that a permittee may legally discharge into the waters of the United States pursuant to Sections 402 and 405
of the Clean Water Act.
Subd. 25. Natural Outlet: Any outlet, including Storm Sewers and Combined Sewers, which flows into a
water course, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or ground water.
Subd. 26. Normal Domestic Strength Waste or NDSW: Wastewater that has those characteristics
ordinarily introduced by domestic Users.
Subd. 27. On-Site Wastewater Disposal System; Individual Sewage Treatment System or ISTS: An
arrangement of devices or structures for treating domestic or non-domestic Wastewater approved for use by
applicable regulations of the State or County and located on or adjacent to the property of the generator of
the Wastewater.
Subd. 28. Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Costs or O.M.&R: Expenditures necessary to
provide for the dependable, economical and efficient functioning of the Wastewater Treatment Facilities
throughout their design life, including operator training and Permit fees and the establishment of reasonable
funds to offset depreciation of the Wastewater Treatment Facilities. Replacement refers to obtaining and
installing of equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the design life or useful
life, whichever is longer, of the Treatment Facilities to maintain the capacity and performance for which
such system was designed and constructed, not the cost of future replacement of the entire facility.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.4 Sanitary Sewer System 14
Subd. 29. Permit: Written authorization from the City of Cloquet to perform acts allowed or required by
this Ordinance.
Subd. 30. Person: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation (municipal or
otherwise) or other group discharging Wastewater to the Wastewater Treatment Facilities.
Subd. 31. pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of
solution.
Subd. 32. Pretreatment: The treatment of Wastewater prior to introduction thereof in to the LUG or the
WLSSD Wastewater Treatment Facilities.
Subd. 33. Private Sewer or Private Wastewater Disposal System: A privately owned Sewer or
privately owned Wastewater disposal system, including but not limited to a privately owned On-site
Wastewater Disposal System.
Subd. 34. Properly Shredded Garbage: Garbage and/or the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under
the Flow conditions normally prevailing in the Sanitary Sewer.
Subd. 35. Public Sewer(s): Any Sewer or pumping facility owned or operated by the City of Cloquet or
the WLSSD.
Subd. 36. Residential User: A User of the Wastewater Treatment Facilities whose building is used
primarily as a private residence and discharges NDSW.
Subd. 37. Sanitary Sewer: A Sewer that carries Wastewater and to which storm, surface and ground
water are not intentionally admitted.
Subd. 38. Service Connection: The point at which the Building Sewer meets and is connected to the
Public Sewer.
Subd. 39. Septage: High strength Wastewater derived from pumping the septic tank of an On-site
Wastewater Disposal System. The term "Septage" also includes the Wastewater derived from recreational
vehicles; campers; portable toilets; boats, ships and other marine vehicles, and the like.
Subd. 40. Sewer: A pipe or conduit that carries Wastewater or drainage water.
Subd. 41. Sewer Access Charge or SAC: The fees and charges, if any, established from time to time for
access or connection to the Public Sewer.
Subd. 42. Slug: A discharge of water or Wastewater which in Load or Flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than 15 minutes, more than 5 times the average 24-hour concentration of Flow or Load
during normal operation and which may adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the
Treatment Facilities.
Subd. 43. State: The State of Minnesota.
Subd. 44. State Disposal System Permit or SDS Permit: A Permit issued by the MPCA pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes Section 115.07 for a disposal system as defined by Minnesota Statutes Section 115.01,
subdivision 5.
Subd. 45. Standard Methods: The latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks
Association and the Water Environment Federation or EPA approved method listed in 40 CFR 136.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.4 Sanitary Sewer System 15
Subd. 46. Storm Sewer: A Sewer intended to carry unpolluted surface and subsurface water from any
source.
Subd. 47. City Engineer: The official of the City of Cloquet who is authorized to enforce this Ordinance,
or their authorized deputy, agent or representative.
Subd. 48. Suspended Solids (SS) or Total Suspended Solids or (T.S.S): Means Total Suspended Solids
in Wastewater as determined under standard laboratory procedures as set forth in Standard Methods.
Subd. 49. Toxic Pollutant(s): The concentration of any pollutant or combination of pollutants which
upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause adverse affects as defined in standards issued
pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Clean Water Act or Section 115.01, Subdivision 20 of Minnesota Statutes.
Subd. 50. Unpolluted Water: Water which meets the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not
cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the Sanitary
Sewers and Wastewater Treatment Facilities provided.
Subd. 51. User Charge: A charge levied on the users of the Wastewater facilities for the cost of
operation, maintenance, including replacement and debt service.
Subd. 52. Wastewater: A combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments. The term "Wastewater" also includes Septage.
Subd. 53. Wastewater Treatment Facilities or Treatment Facilities: The land, devices, facilities,
structures, equipment and processes owned or used by the LUG and the WLSSD for the purpose of the
transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal Wastewater, or structures
necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor Sewers and the disposal of residues resulting from
such treatment. Outfall Sewers, collection Sewers, pumping, power, and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extension, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; elements essential
to provide a reliable recycled water supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities, and any
works including land which is an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of
residues resulting from such treatment.
Subd. 54. Watercourse: A channel in which a Flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
Subd. 55. WLSSD: Means Western Lake Superior Sanitary District, a public corporation and political
subdivision of the State of Minnesota established by Chapter 478, Laws of Minnesota, 1971, now codified
as Minn. Stat. Chapter 458D.
11.4.03. Use of Acceptable Wastewater Treatment System Required
Subd. 1. Suitable Treatment. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of
Cloquet any Wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
Subd. 2. Construction or Maintenance of Privies and Like Devices Prohibited. Except as hereinafter
provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, private
wastewater disposal system, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of Wastewater.
Subd. 3. Unavailability of Public Sewer. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available as described in
Section 11.4.04, Subd. 1, of this Chapter, the Building Drain must be connected to an acceptable On-Site
Wastewater Disposal System or Individual Sewage Treatment System (ISTS). All such systems must be
designed, permitted, installed and maintained in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of
Chapter 17, Cloquet Zoning Ordinance - Section 17.5.17, Subd. 16.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.4 Sanitary Sewer System 16
Subd. 4. Proper Abandonment of On-Site Disposal Systems. Whenever an existing On-Side
Wastewater Disposal Systems is abandoned, or otherwise no longer used, as a result of a building sewer
being connected to a public sewer, a building demolition or removal, or the installation of a new On-Site
System, all old septic tanks, drywells and/or holding tanks shall be properly abandoned and filled to
prevent collapse or settlement, as required by the City Engineer.
11.4.04. Service Connection Required.
Subd. 1. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties, of any character, wherein or whereon
wastewater develops or occurs, shall be hereby required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable
wastewater collection facilities in or on the houses, buildings, or properties and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter at the time of
construction of such facilities in the case of new construction or new use, or within ninety (90) days after
date of official notice to do so in the case of existing housing, buildings or properties, provided that such
public sewer is located within an easement or right-of-way adjoining the property and is within four
hundred (400) feet of such property.
Subd. 2. Connection by City. Whenever any owner or occupant fails to comply with written notice to
hook up, the City Council shall by resolution direct that connection be made with the water and sewer
system and that the cost of the installation shall be paid in the first instance out of the utility fund and then
assessed against the property benefited.
Subd. 3. Assessment For Connections By City. After the installation has been completed pursuant to
Council resolution and Section 11.4.04, Subd. 2 of this Chapter, the Administrator shall serve a written
notice of the assessment upon the owner or his or her representative directing him or her to pay the
assessment to the City Administrator within thirty (30) days after the service of the notice. If the
assessment shall not be paid within thirty (30) days, the Administrator shall certify the amount to the
County Auditor for collection in the same manner as other special assessments. The Council may, by
resolution, spread the assessment over a number of years as determined by the City Council.
Subd. 4. Variance Request. If the property owner, upon receipt of written notice, feels the order to
connect such facilities directly with the public sewer constitutes an undue hardship, is unreasonable or not
feasible, the property owner shall respond back to the City, in writing, within 30 days after receipt of the
City’s written notice and request a variance from the requirements of Subdivision 1 of this Section.
Upon receipt of the property owner's written request, the City Engineer, together with the City's Zoning
Administrator, shall review the individual case and hold a hearing to make a recommendation to the City
Council as to any revisions to the City’s original connection notice.
At least ten (10) days prior to holding this hearing the City shall notify abutting property owners, in
writing, of the request and the time and date of the hearing.
In considering the variance, evidence shall be provided to show that:
A. The hardship is based upon factors other than, or in addition to, cost (i.e. cost alone cannot be
the principal factor);
B. An extension of the City public sewer main is not feasible at this time;
C. The lot or parcel in question has a minimum size which complies with the Cloquet Zoning
Code or Ordinance provisions for On-Site Sewer Systems;
D. The property owner agrees to connect to a private wastewater disposal system complying with
the provisions of the Cloquet Zoning Code or Ordinance;
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.4 Sanitary Sewer System 17
E. The variance, if granted, shall not be contrary to the public interest or detrimental to
neighboring properties and shall not prevent or inhibit the future extension of public sewers to
serve the area in question.
11.4.05. Excavations. No excavation, for the installation of water and sewer service lines between a building and
the City mains, shall take place on City streets, alleys, sidewalks, right-of-ways or other public grounds unless all
regulations as prescribed in this Chapter and Chapter 9 (Streets) or any amendment thereto are complied with and an
excavation permit is obtained.
11.4.06. Building Sewers and Connections
Subd. 1. Sewer Connection Permit Required. Except for City employees acting in the course of
employment, no Person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any
Public Sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written Permit from the City Engineer. In
all cases, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the City. The Permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in
the judgment of the City Engineer. A Permit and inspection fee sufficient to defray the cost incidental to the
processing of such connection Permit including the cost of inspection of connection for each such class
shall be established by resolution of the City Council and shall be paid to the City at the time the
application is filed. There shall be submitted to the City Engineer a report, in form and substance
satisfactory to the City Engineer, which indicates that no I/I or Unpolluted Water will be discharged into
the Public Sewer as a result of the Service Connection for which the permit is sought.
Subd. 2. Maintenance of Building Sewer Lines. The maintenance of the Building Sewer pipeline from
and including the tap, tapping saddle, or wye branch connection on the city sewer main to the building is
the responsibility of the building owner.
Subd 3. Owner’s Responsibility. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the Building Sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify, defend and
hold harmless the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation or maintenance of the Building Sewer.
Subd. 4. Separate Sewer. A separate and independent Building Sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where an existing building stands at the rear of another and no separate Sewer has been
constructed therefore, such building may continue to be connected to the Building Sewer of the front
building and the whole considered as one Building Sewer, but the LUG shall, have no obligation or
responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.
Subd. 5. Old Sewers. Upon approval by the City Engineer, old Building Sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings but only after passing an acceptable pressure test as required by the
Minnesota State Plumbing Code.
Subd. 6. Abandonment of Building Water and Sewer Service Lines. Whenever a building water or
sewer service line is abandoned, or otherwise no longer used, as a result of a building demolition, building
relocation or the installation of new water and sewer building service lines, the old building service lines
shall be properly disconnected from the City mains, at the building owner or property owner’s expense, in
accordance with the procedures and standards as established by the City Engineer.
Subd. 7. Size, Slope and Installation. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a Building
Sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the
trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the Minnesota State Building and Plumbing Codes and
other applicable rules and regulations of the City.
Subd. 8. Elevation. Whenever possible, the Building Sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any Building Drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the Public Sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such Building Drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the Building Sewer.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.4 Sanitary Sewer System 18
Subd. 9. Tracer Wires for Non-Metallic Pipe. All non-metallic water and sewer pipes shall be installed
with a locating (tracer) wire and shall be a #6 hand drawn copper (ASTM B-1) or annealed 49-strand 203
alloy stainless steel wire, as directed by the City Engineer, to facilitate the locating of these underground
utilities.
Subd. 10. Unpolluted Water Connections.
A. No Person shall make connection of roof downspouts, areaway drains, or other sources of
Unpolluted Waters such as storm water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
unpolluted industrial water or cooling water to a Building Sewer or Building Drain which is
connected directly or indirectly to a public Sanitary Sewer.
B. Every person who owns a building which has roof drains, downspouts, areaway drains, sump
pumps which are sources of unpolluted water such as storm water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, unpolluted industrial water or cooling water connected to a building
sewer or building drain which is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer
shall disconnect and remove the roof drains, downspouts, areaway drains, sump pumps in an
effective, workmanlike manner, as approved by the City Engineer unless the disconnection
and removal shall be estimated to cost more than ten (10) percent of the assessed value of the
building.
C. If, upon inspection, any of the above described connections are identified by the City, the City
Engineer shall issue a written order to the building owner requiring disconnection within a
reasonable amount of time. If the property owner, upon receipt of the notice, feels the order
to disconnect constitutes an undue hardship, shall be unreasonable or not feasible, the
property owner shall respond back to the City, in writing, within 30 days after receipt of the
City Engineer's notice. Upon receipt of the property owner's written objection, the City
Engineer shall review the individual case and make a recommendation to the City Council as
to any revisions to the City Engineer's original disconnection notice.
D. In those cases where it shall be determined by the City that the disconnection and removal of
unpolluted sources of waters shall be either unreasonable or not in the best interest of the
public, the building owner shall be required to make special application to the City Engineer
for a special permit to allow the connections to exist. The City Engineer shall review the
application and make a recommendation to the city council as to whether the request is
warranted. If approved, a monthly permit fee, as recommended by the City Engineer, for the
following connections shall be charged to the owner/occupant and shall be billed together
with the monthly sewer user charges as established in Section 11.2.03 of this Chapter. The
City shall reserve the right to discontinue the issuance of any such permit at anytime in the
future.
Subd. 11. State Codes and Rules. The connection of the Building Drain to the Building Sewer and of the
Building Sewer to the Public Sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Minnesota State Building and
Plumbing Codes and other applicable rules and regulations of the City. All such connections shall be made
gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. The City Engineer shall have authority to promulgate
rules, regulations, and tests as to the manner in which connections shall be made and the rules, regulations
and tests when so promulgated and filed with the City Administrator shall be met.
Subd. 12. Inspection and Testing. The applicant for the Building Sewer Permit shall notify the City
Engineer when the Building Sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the Public Sewer. The area to
be inspected must be open for inspection and backfilling must not have commenced. All connections to the
Public Sewer must be made under the supervision of the City Engineer.
Subd. 13. Excavations. No excavation, for the installation of Building Sewer service lines between a
building and the City mains, shall take place on City streets, alleys, sidewalks, right-of-ways or other public
grounds unless all regulations as prescribed in Chapter 9 (Streets) or any amendment thereto are complied
with and an excavation permit is obtained.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.4 Sanitary Sewer System 19
Subd. 14. Conformance with Rules. All Building Sewers, Service Connections, pumps and other
equipment must conform to specifications established by the City from time to time. Installation of a
Building Sewer, Service Connection, pump or other equipment, which does not comply, with the
requirements of the City will be a violation of this Ordinance. The City reserves the right to discontinue
service to a property served by a Building Sewer, Service Connection, pump or other equipment, which
does not comply, with the requirements of the City.
Subd. 15 Rules. The City may, by resolution, adopt reasonable rules and regulations relating to Sewer
construction, use, maintenance, discharges, and deposit or disposal of all Wastewater, either directly or
indirectly, within the City. Such resolution may adopt rules and regulations by reference.
11.4.07. Use of the Public Sewers
Subd. 1. Unpolluted Water. No Unpolluted Water such as storm water, ground water, roof runoff,
surface drainage, cooling water, etc. may be discharged to the Sanitary Sewer. Such water must be
discharged only to Storm Sewers or to Natural Outlets approved by the City and other regulatory agencies.
Industrial cooling water may be discharged, on approval of the Engineer, to a Storm Sewer or Natural
Outlet, subject to approval and the issuance of a NPDES Permit.
Subd. 2. Septage. Septage may only be discharged or deposited into the Sanitary Sewer at locations
specifically designated by the City and WLSSD.
Subd. 3. Prohibited Substances. No Person(s) may discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following substances in or to the Public Sewer:
A. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be,
sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be
injurious in any other way to the Treatment Facilities or to the operation of the Treatment
Facilities. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, benzene,
naptha, fuel oil, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides waste oils or other petroleum based
products.
B. Any substance which either singly or by interaction with other waste will injure or interfere
with any waste treatment process or Wastewater Treatment Facilities, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals in spite of treatment, create a public nuisance or create a hazard in the
receiving waters of the Wastewater Treatment Facilities, including but not limited to cyanides
in excess of Federal and State requirements.
C. Solid or viscous substances which may, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
cause obstruction to the Flow in a Sewer, or other interference with the proper operation of
the Treatment Facilities such as, but not limited to, bone, fish heads, fish scales, fish entrails,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, sanitary napkins, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, Garbage which is not Properly Shredded Garbage, whole blood, paunch
manure, hair and fletching, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by Garbage grinders.
Subd. 4. Other Prohibited Discharges. No Person may discharge or cause to be discharged the
following described substance, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the City
Engineer that such wastes can harm either the Sewers, Sewage treatment process, or Wastewater Treatment
Facilities, have an adverse effect on the receiving waters, streams, soils, vegetation and ground water, or
can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his/her opinion as
to the acceptability of these wastes, the City Engineer will give consideration to such factors as the
District's NPDES Permit, the quantities of subject wastes in relation to the Flow and velocities in the
Sewers, materials and construction of the Sewers, nature of the treatment process, capacity of the
Treatment Facilities, degree of treatability of the Wastewater, and other factors deemed pertinent. The
substances prohibited are:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.4 Sanitary Sewer System 20
A. Any Wastewater that would directly or indirectly result in a violation of the WLSSD's
NPDES Permit.
B. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (65.6
degrees C), or causing, individually or in combination with other Wastewater, the influent at
the Treatment Facilities to have a temperature exceeding 104°F (40°C), or having heat in
amounts which will be detrimental to biological activity in the Treatment Facilities.
C. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of
100 milligrams per liter or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees F (65.6 degrees C).
D. Any Garbage that is not Properly Shredded Garbage.
E. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, nickel, lead, cadmium,
mercury, cyanide, PCBs, and similar toxic or objectionable substances to such degree that any
such material received in the composite Sewage at the Treatment Facilities exceeds the limits
established by the MPCA for such unusual materials.
F. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such
concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the City Engineer as necessary,
after treatment of the composite Sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal, or
other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
G. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the City Engineer, in compliance with applicable State and Federal regulations.
H. Materials which contain or cause, whether alone or by interaction with other substances,
release of noxious gasses or form Suspended Solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth,
lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate) that would interfere with the Treatment Facilities or create a
condition deleterious to or cause disruption to the Wastewater Treatment Facilities and
processes.
I. Materials which contain or cause excessive discoloration which cannot be removed in the
treatment process (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solution),
excessive BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or disinfection requirements in such quantities as
to constitute a significant Load on the Treatment Facilities, except by Permit or agreement.
J. Unusual volume of Flow or concentration of wastes, which constitutes a Slug.
K. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by
the treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
Treatment Facilities effluent cannot meet the requirements or cause a violation of the
regulations of the agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters or are
amenable to treatment only by the application of extraordinary processes.
L. Wastewater with BOD or Suspended Solids levels greater than that defined as Normal
Domestic Strength Waste, except as may be Permitted by specific written agreement with the
City and WLSSD.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.4 Sanitary Sewer System 21
M. Wastewater contaminated by petroleum oil, fuel, organic solvents, or other toxic organic
compound which contains more than 1 milligram per liter (mg/L) of anyone of the following
compounds; benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, and xylene (BETX). The sum of these four
compounds must not be over 3 mg/L. Diesel range organics (DRO) and gasoline range
organics (GRO) must each be less than 100 mg/l each. Lead must be under 1 mg/L and
mercury less than 0.3 ug/L. For hauled Wastewater the concentrations must be less than 3
mg/l each for BETX with the combined total less than 10 mg/l. DRO and GRO must be less
than 100 mg/L, lead less than 1 mg/L, and mercury less than 0.3 ug/L.
N. Wastewater containing substances which cannot be treated to produce effluent quality
required by agreement for Wastewater treatment with WLSSD or causing a violation of any
applicable local, County, State, or federal regulation.
O. Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids.
P. Water or waste containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the
Wastewater treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree
that the Wastewater Treatment Facilities effluent cannot meet the requirements of the NPDES
Permit issued to the WLSSD or are amenable to treatment only by the application of
extraordinary processes.
Subd. 5. Grease Interceptors and/or Grease Traps Required. Grease interceptors (sometimes called
traps) shall be required at all facilities which provide food service and/or preparation activities, including,
but not limited to, full service restaurants, fast food establishments, delicatessens, cafeterias, school
cafeterias, church kitchens, hospitals, boardinghouses, clubhouses, adult daycare facilities, assisted living
facilities, convalescent homes, meat distributors, food processing facilities, grocery stores with food
preparation/service areas, bakeries, caterers, and/or other similar types of operations where commercial
kitchen equipment is installed and the frequency of use indicates more than occasional use. The
requirements for grease interceptors shall include the following:
A. Installation and Sizing. A grease interceptor of sufficient size and efficiency shall be
installed in the waste line leading from sinks, drains, or other fixtures from which greasy
wastes can be introduced into the drainage system. All grease interceptors shall be sized and
installed in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code and the Minnesota State Plumbing
Code, however, all grease interceptors shall have an approved rate of flow which is not less
than 20 gallons per minute and a grease retention capacity of not less than 40 pounds.
B. Maintenance of Grease Interceptors. The owner will be responsible for the maintenance of
grease interceptors, including proper removal and disposal of the captured materials by
appropriate means, and must maintain a record of dates and means of disposal that are subject
to review by the City.
C. Facility Grease Management Plans. All facilities with grease interceptors or grease traps
shall develop and implement a grease management plan that incorporates generally accepted
fat, oil and grease best management practices into their operations. Such grease management
plans shall be available for review by the City and any authorized health inspector.
D. Emulsifiers or Degreasers Prohibited. No emulsifiers, surface active agents, enzymes,
degreasers, or any type of product that will liquefy grease, shall be allowed as an alternative
to providing an adequate grease interceptor and none of these products shall be placed directly
into a grease interceptor, or into any drain that leads to a grease interceptor.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.4 Sanitary Sewer System 22
E. Variance, Conditional Waiver or Exceptions. A variance or a conditional waiver from
minimum sizing requirements or installation and maintenance requirements for grease
interceptors may be granted by the City Engineer, where the food service establishment
demonstrates to the Engineer’s satisfaction that any grease discharge is negligible and will
have an insignificant impact on the sewer system. In doing so, the facility must demonstrate
that the discharge from its activities contains less than 100 mg/l of grease. The sampling and
testing to demonstrate the concentration of grease in the discharge must be conducted, at the
facilities expense, by an independent testing organization in accordance with acceptable
industry standards. Grease interceptors shall not be required for single-family residences,
duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, or apartment complexes, unless the City determines that
discharges from the property are creating problems with the public sewer system.
F. Existing Facilities: Unless a variance or conditional waiver is granted as described in
Subdivision 5E above, on or after the effective date of this ordinance, an existing facility shall
be required to install an approved, adequately sized, and property operated and maintained
grease interceptor when any of the following conditions exist:
1) If the City Engineer determines that the use of the property becomes such that the
discharge of grease from the facility to the public sewer has or is creating blockages
of the public sewer or is creating abnormally high sewer maintenance costs for the
City, the Engineer may order that an exterior grease interceptor be installed on the
property. In this case, the Engineer shall give a reasonable timeframe for
compliance, however, in no case shall a compliance deadline be more than twelve
(12) months.
2) The facility is remodeling the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing in such a
manner as to be subject to the issuance of a permit by the City Building Department.
G) Exterior Grease Interceptors for Restaurants and Other Food Processing Facilities. In
all new construction and remodeling, restaurants with a dining seating capacity exceeding one
hundred (100) or more persons and certain food processing facilities, as determined by the
City Engineer, shall have an exterior grease interceptor installed outside of the building. Said
grease interceptors shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Minnesota State
Plumbing Code and shall be sized to allow for a detention time of at least 30 minutes. The
minimum size of an exterior grease interceptor shall be 1,000 gallons.
Subd. 6. Food Grinders or Disposals Prohibited. No food grinders, disposals or shredders shall be
installed in any newly constructed food service establishment or food processing facilities. All food
grinders shall be removed from an existing food service establishment upon either a major operational
change to the facility or when the facility is remodeling the kitchen, food preparation or food processing
waste plumbing in such a manner as to be subject to the issuance of a permit by the City Building
Department.
Subd. 7. Oil and Sand Interceptors and Separators Required. Interceptors and separators for oil,
sand and other substances harmful or hazardous to the building drainage system shall be provided, sized
and installed in accordance with the Minnesota State Plumbing Code. The owner will be responsible for the
maintenance of interceptors, including proper removal and disposal of the captured materials by
appropriate means, and must maintain a record of dates and means of disposal that are subject to review by
the City. Any material removal and hauling must be performed by the property owner's personnel or a
currently licensed waste disposal firm and in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.4 Sanitary Sewer System 23
Subd. 8. Pretreatment. Where Pretreatment or Flow equalizing facilities are provided or required for any
water or wastes, plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating thereto shall be
submitted for approval of the City and the WLSSD and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until approval in writing is granted. Where such facilities are provided, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operating order by the owner at the expense of the
owner and may be subject to periodic inspection by the City and the WLSSD to determine that such
facilities are being operated in conformance with the applicable federal, State and local laws, regulations
and Permits. The owner shall maintain operating records.
Subd. 9. Metering and Testing Access Structures – Industrial and Commercial Users. Where
required by the City, Industrial and Commercial Users must install and maintain, at their own expense, a
suitable structure or control manhole with such necessary meters and other testing equipment needed to
facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of Wastewater. The manhole must be safe and accessible
at all times and must be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the City
Engineer and the WLSSD.
Subd. 10. Metering and Testing of Non-residential and Commercial Users. The City, in its sole
discretion may require Non-Residential Users and Commercial Users to install and maintain, at their own
expense, a suitable structure or control manhole with such necessary meters and other testing equipment
needed to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of Wastewater as required in Section 11.4.07,
Subd. 8, of this Chapter, for Industrial Users. The manhole must be safe and accessible at all times and
must be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer and the
WLSSD.
Subd. 11. Laboratory Analysis – Industrial Users. The City may require submission of laboratory
analyses to illustrate compliance with this Ordinance and any special conditions for discharge established
by the City or responsible regulatory agency. All measurements, tests and analyses to which reference is
made in this Ordinance must be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods.
Sampling methods, location, times, duration and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis by
the City and WLSSD. The Industrial User must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
Wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with Federal, State and local standards are being met. The
Industrial User must report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the City and WLSSD at
such times and in such manner as prescribed by the City and WLSSD. The Industrial User must bear the
expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the City and WLSSD. At such times as
deemed necessary, the City and WLSSD reserves the right to take its own measurements and samples for
analysis by an independent laboratory.
Subd. 12. Water Meters. Where required by the City, water meters must be installed on a User's water
supply lines to facilitate measurement of Wastewater generated. Water meters shall be supplied, installed
and maintained in accordance with Section 11.03.02 of this Chapter. The meters shall be accessible at all
times to the City for inspection, reading, maintenance and repair.
Subd. 13. Dilution of Discharges. No User may increase the use of process water or in any manner
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with the limitations contained in this Article, the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
and any State or local requirement.
Subd. 14. Accidental Discharges.
A. Where required by the City, Users must provide protection from an accidental discharge of
substances regulated by this Ordinance. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental
discharges of prohibited materials must be provided and maintained at the owner’s expense.
Detailed plans and operating procedures of said facilities must be submitted to the City
Engineer for review and approval prior to construction of the facility. Approval of such plans
and operating procedures will not relieve User from the responsibility of modifying the
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.4 Sanitary Sewer System 24
B. Users must notify the City and WLSSD immediately if a Slug or accidental discharge of
Wastewater occurs in violation of this Ordinance. Notification will allow measures to be
taken to minimize damage to the Treatment Facilities. Notification will not relieve Users of
liability for any expense, loss or damage to the Treatment Facilities, or for fines imposed on
the community by any State or federal agency as a result of their actions.
Subd. 15. Emergency Repairs. Notwithstanding anything in this Ordinance to the contrary, in the event
of damage to Sewers or the Treatment Facilities, which disrupts other Users, the City may without notice
repair such damage.
Subd. 16. Special Agreements or Arrangements. No statement contained in this Article shall be
construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and the WLSSD, and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City
and the WLSSD for treatment. Provided that any such agreement shall establish that charges to user shall
be in accordance with the City established User Charges.
11.4.08. Damage to Wastewater Facilities Prohibited
Subd. 1. Prohibited Activities. No Person shall maliciously or willfully break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the Wastewater facilities.
Any Person violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, shall be subject to immediate arrest,
and shall be liable to the City and the WLSSD for the cost of making necessary repairs occasioned by such
violation.
Subd. 2. Deposits or Obstructions.
A. No Person may permit any substance or matter that may form a deposit or obstruction of
Flow to be discharged into the Public Sewer. Whenever any Service Connection becomes
clogged, obstructed, detrimental to the use of the Public Sewer, or unfit for the purpose of
drainage, the owner must make repairs as directed by the City or the WLSSD.
B. If 48 hours after receiving written notice from the City the property owner has not
commenced repairs, the City may have said work done and may collect such amounts from
the property owner.
Subd. 3. Unauthorized Discharges. In the event of discharges or proposed discharges to the Public Sewers
that contain substances or possess characteristics prohibited in this Ordinance or which in the judgment of
the City Engineer may have a deleterious effect on the Treatment Facilities, processes, equipment, receiving
waters, soils, vegetation, or which create a hazard or nuisance, the City Engineer may:
1. Refuse to accept the wastes.
2. Require Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the Public
Sewers, pursuant to Section 307(b) of the Clean Water Act and all addenda
thereof.
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
4. Require payment to cover all the added costs of handling, treating and disposing
of wastes not covered by existing taxes or Sewer Access Charges or Sewer
Service Charges.
B. If the City Engineer permits the Pretreatment or equalization of Flow, the design and
installation of the plant and equipment are subject to review and approval by the District
and subject to the requirements of all applicable Federal and State codes, ordinances, and
the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.4 Sanitary Sewer System 25
11.4.09. Powers and Authority of Inspectors
Subd. 1. Right of Entry. The City Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the City and the
WLSSD bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the
Wastewater facilities in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. The City Engineer or other duly
authorized employees of the City and the WLSSD shall be provided by users with such information
concerning industrial processes as have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
Wastewater facilities.
Subd. 2. Indemnification. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
Section 11.4.11, Subd. 1, above, the City Engineer or duly authorized employees of the City and the
WLSSD shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner, and the owner
shall be held harmless for injury or death to such employees, and the City and the WLSSD respectively
shall indemnify the owner against loss or damage to its property by City and WLSSD employees and
against liability claims and demands for Personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner and
growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence of the
owner or the failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions as required under this ordinance.
Subd. 3. Easements. The City Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the City and WLSSD
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the City holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the Wastewater facilities lying within said easement.
All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of
the easement pertaining to the private property involved.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.5 Dump Stations 26
Section 11.5: Dump Stations
11.5.01. Definitions
Subd. 1. Liquid Waste Disposal Site is defined as a public dumping station owned and operated by the
City of Cloquet, or its designated agent, where commercial liquid waste haulers and/or companies that
transport liquid waste, discharge or dump such wastes into the sanitary sewer collection system owned by
the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 2. Recreational Vehicle Sewage Dump Station is defined as a facility designed and intended only
for the emptying of recreational vehicle sewage holding tanks into the City sanitary sewer system.
Subd. 3. Owner is defined as any individual, firm, company, corporation, or other group who has received
a permit from the City of Cloquet to perform acts allowed or required by this Ordinance.
Subd. 4. City is defined as the City of Cloquet, which is a municipal corporation in the State of
Minnesota.
Subd. 5. WLSSD is an abbreviation for the Western Lake Superior Sanitary District, which is a public
corporation and political subdivision of the State of Minnesota established by Chapter 478, Laws of
Minnesota, 1971 for purposes of providing waste disposal services to the public.
Subd. 6. System is defined as the sanitary sewer collection system owned and operated by the City of
Cloquet.
Subd. 7. Domestic Septage is defined as domestic sewage, water and sludge, pumped from a septic tank
with a drain field.
Subd. 8. Domestic Holding Tank Waste is defined as domestic sewage pumped from a sealed tank with
no drain field. Portable toilets are also included in this waste type category.
Subd. 9. Commercial Waste is defined as a non-industrial waste hauled from a business or service
establishment and for the purpose of this ordinance is limited to the water portion pumped from flammable
waste traps and/or car wash and parking ramp sand traps.
Subd. 10. Industrial Wastes are defined as one of the following:
A. Liquid waste resulting from an industrial or manufacturing process, or from the development,
recovery, or processing of a natural resource. Examples of Industrial Waste include but are
not limited to the following
1. Machine Coolants,
2. Metal Finishing Wastewater,
3. Antifreeze from heating and cooling systems (Ethylene or Propylene Glycol),
4. Aqueous Cleaners,
5. Neutralized Acids & Caustics,
6. Manufacturing or Production Area Sump Water,
7. Truck Wash Water (generally from the insides of trucks),
8. Food Wastes generated from the production of a food Product,
9. Photographic Chemicals.
B. Landfill Leachate: Wastewater resulting from the percolation of rain water and/or internal
liquids through the deposited material in a solid waste disposal facility.
C. Contaminated Groundwater: Polluted water pumped from a contaminated aquifer or an
underground storage tank as part of a remedial action.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.5 Dump Stations 27
11.5.02. Establishment and Operation of Liquid Waste Disposal Sites.
Subd. 1 Construction and Operation of Liquid Waste Disposal Sites. No person, other than the City of
Cloquet or its authorized agent, licensee or representative, shall establish, construct or operate a Liquid
Waste Disposal Site within the City of Cloquet or operate such a disposal site which drains to the sanitary
sewer system owned by the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 2. Construction and Operation of Recreational Vehicle Sewage Dump Stations. No person,
other than the City of Cloquet or its authorized agent, licensee or representative, shall establish, construct or
operate a Recreational Vehicle Sewage Dump Station within the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 3. Dumping of Liquid Wastes at Approved Sites Only. No person or owner of a liquid waste
hauling business shall dump or dispose of any liquid wastes, which drain to the sanitary sewer collection
system owned by the City of Cloquet, except at a Liquid Waste Disposal Site as specifically designated and
established by the City of Cloquet and the use of said facilities shall be in accordance with all applicable
rules as established by this Ordinance, the WLSSD and the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 4. Days and Hours of Operation. The days and hours of permitted dumping and all access to City
facilities shall be scheduled by the City Engineer. Any modification or change in the hours of operation or
in the use of the disposal site shall be pursuant to the written directives of the City Engineer.
11.5.03. Required Liquid Waste Hauler Permits and Permit Fees.
Subd. 1. Hauler Permit Required. No person shall discharge or dump domestic septage, domestic
holding tank waste, commercial waste, industrial waste, or any other liquid wastes into any part of a
sanitary sewer collection system, which drains into the sanitary sewer collection system owned by the City
of Cloquet, without first obtaining a Liquid Waste Hauler Permit from the WLSSD and the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 2. Hauler Permit from WLSSD Required. Prior to the issuance of a permit by the City of
Cloquet, all haulers must first obtain a Liquid Waste Hauler Permit from the WLSSD in accordance with
their Transported Liquid Waste Program.
Subd 3. Compliance with Rules. As a condition of permit issuance by the City of Cloquet, the Owner
agrees to accept and comply with all operating rules and general permit conditions as established by the
WLSSD Transported Liquid Waste Program Policies and Procedures, and this Ordinance.
Subd. 4 Annual Permit Fee. An annual Liquid Waste Hauler Permit fee, issued to each hauler by the
City, shall be established by resolution of the City Council and shall remain in effect until or unless
modified by subsequent Council resolution. This annual hauler permit fee shall be assessed by the City and
will be in addition to the Liquid Waste Hauler Permit fee required by the WLSSD. Any person or owner
utilizing a City of Cloquet Liquid Waste Disposal Site will be required to obtain both permits and pay both
permit fees.
Subd. 5. Associated Costs and Liability. All costs and expenses involved in dumping at a City Liquid
Waste Disposal Site shall be borne by the permittee. The permittee agrees as a condition of its permit to
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly result from the permittee’s
dumping of effluent into the sanitary sewer system of the City of Cloquet. As an additional condition of its
permit the Owner agrees to hold the City harmless from any and all claims of property damage or for
damage to any of permittee’s equipment when upon the premises of the City for dumping and related
purposes unless such damage or loss results from intentional acts.
11.5.04. Vehicle Identification.
Subd. 1. Registration of Vehicles with WLSSD. Liquid Waste Haulers will be required to register each
dumping vehicle with the WLSSD as part of their permit application and must display the WLSSD permit
identification number on the back of each vehicle or on the top rear of the tank on such vehicles as required
by the WLSSD.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.5 Dump Stations 28
11.5.05. Dumping Fees.
Subd. 1. Trip or Load Fees. In addition to the annual permit fees, a trip fee or load fee per 1,000 gallons
dumped shall be charged by the City of Cloquet for all discharges at the City’s Liquid Waste Disposal Site
and these rates shall be established and updated from time to time by Council resolution.
Subd. 2. Payment of Dumping Fees. All dumping fees due under this Ordinance shall be paid to and
received by the City of Cloquet no later than 30 days following the end of each month within which any
loads are dumped. Permittee who fail to submit their required monthly report and fees as established by
this Ordinance within 15 days of the due date, will be assessed a late report fee as established by Council
resolution.
11.5.06. Required Reports.
Subd. 1. Liquid Waste Report Form. All loads of liquid waste transported for disposal at the City of
Cloquet’s Liquid Waste Disposal Site must be recorded by the waste hauler on a Liquid Waste Hauler
Discharge Report form, as provided by the City. This form shall be used to account for all transported
liquid wastes discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer system.
Subd. 2. Monthly Submission of Report Forms. The waste hauler is required to submit Liquid Waste
Hauler Discharge Reports to the City once per month. This report is due thirty (30) days after the end of
the reporting month. The waste hauler must submit a report even if there were no loads dumped during the
reporting month.
Subd. 3. Required Report Information. The Liquid Waste Hauler Discharge Report requires the
Permittee to list the volume of the various waste types (as defined in the previous sections) for each
individual load discharged during the reporting period. The date of each delivery must be noted, as well as
the name, phone number and address of each liquid waste source.
Subd. 4. Signature On Report Form Required. All monthly reports must be signed by the Permittee.
By signing the report, the waste hauler certifies under penalty of law that the information provided is
correct and complete to the best of his or her knowledge.
Subd. 5. Maintenance of Records. Waste haulers are required to keep accurate records of the waste
discharged into the System for a period of not less than 3 years. In addition, the City reserves the right to
access these records, at any time during normal business hours, to verify information reported to the City
on routine discharge reports. Failure to accurately report loads will result in enforcement action.
Subd. 6. Failure to Submit Monthly Reports or Pay Fees. Permittee who fail to submit their monthly
reports or pay all fees as required by this Ordinance will be assessed a late fee as established by Council
resolution. These late fees may be assessed in addition to any other action taken concerning the Owner’s
permit and failure to file timely reports and fees shall be immediate grounds for denial, suspension and/or
revocation of the permit to dump or operate within the City of Cloquet.
11.5.07. Prohibited Wastes.
Subd. 1. No person shall dump, discharge or cause to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system of the
City of Cloquet, any prohibited liquid wastes as defined in this Section.
Subd. 2. Prohibited wastes as specified in the Industrial Pretreatment Ordinance and Sewer Ordinance
issued by the WLSSD include, but are not necessarily limited to the following:
A. Any liquids containing flammables, explosive and corrosive wastes, gasoline, fuel oil,
hydraulic oil, motor oil, or grease;
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.5 Dump Stations 29
B. Wastes that are likely to obstruct the flow within public sewers: grease, fat, or oil of animal or
vegetable origin, solid wastes, garbage, guts, bones, ash, rags, lime, metal, sand, grit, gravel,
rocks, wood, plastic, glass, or yard wastes;
C. Sand or grit removed from flammable waste traps, car wash sand traps or parking ramp sand
traps.
D. Wastes that are likely to cause interference, pass-through, or operational problems with any
waste treatment process, or wastewater facilities: slug discharges, toxic chemicals, poisons,
dyes, or inks;
E. Wastes that are likely to cause a public nuisance: noxious, malodorous, or foam producing
substances;
F. Hazardous wastes, as defined by Minnesota Statues; and
G. Radioactive wastes.
11.5.08. Discharge of Commercial Wastes.
Subd. 1. For the purposes of this Ordinance, commercial waste is limited to the following:
A. The water portion from flammable waste traps; and,
B. Wastewater from car wash or parking ramp sand traps. However, any sand and grit removed
from car wash or parking lot sand traps is expressly prohibited from being dumped or
discharged into the public sewer as per Section 11.5.07, Subdivision 2 above.
Subd. 2. The following rules shall govern the collection of wastewater from flammable waste traps, and
car wash and parking ramp sand traps:
A. All floating oil and/or gasoline shall be removed prior to pumping the trap. The service
station or business owner shall remove the petroleum layer and send it out for recycling.
Absorbent pads shall be used to remove any thin layer of oil still present on the surface of the
water and disposed of in a proper manner. Note: Petroleum products and their derivatives are
prohibited wastes to the sanitary sewer system as per Section 11.4.07, Subdivision 4 of this
Chapter and under no circumstances shall they be discharged to the System.
B. Sand or grit from the trap bottom must be separated from the liquid wastes and must be
disposed of at an approved solid waste disposal site.
C. Although the City currently accepts wastewater from flammable waste traps, under the
conditions specified above, the City reserves the right to prohibit this liquid waste if it is being
improperly handled and/or is deemed necessary due to operational or compliance problems.
11.5.09. Discharge of Industrial Wastes.
Subd. 1. Approval of Industrial Wastes by WLSSD. Prior to the discharge of any Industrial Waste
loads at any City owned Liquid Waste Disposal Site, the hauler must first obtain a written letter of approval
from the WLSSD in accordance with their Transported Liquid Waste Program. A copy of this approval
letter shall be furnished to the City of Cloquet prior to discharge.
Subd. 2. Sampling and Analysis of Industrial Wastes. All Industrial Waste loads shall be sampled and
analyzed prior to discharge. Sampling may be conducted by the waste hauler or by industry personnel
according to instructions specified by the WLSSD. The specific parameters for which the sample is to be
analyzed, as well as the acceptability of a specific industrial waste type (for disposal into the System), shall
be determined by the WLSSD.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.5 Dump Stations 30
11.5.10. General Liquid Waste Disposal Site Rules.
Subd. 1. All haulers using any City Liquid Waste Disposal Site will be required to adhere to the following
rules of operation:
A. No hauled loads of liquid waste will be discharged into the system without use of a minimum
3" inside diameter coupling and hose.
B. Under no circumstances shall waste be discharged onto the ground. If a spill occurs, it is the
responsibility of the hauler to clean up the spill at the permittee’s expense and to notify the
City immediately. To the extent that assistance from the City is required or requested, the
permittee consents to reimburse the City for all cleanup costs incurred.
C. All haulers or permittee are also required to immediately notify the City in the event that a
load discharged contained waste different from that initially represented to be in the load or
wastes that are suspected to contain Prohibited Wastes a described elsewhere in this
Ordinance.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.6 Enforcement and Penalties 31
Section 11.6: Enforcement And Penalties
11.6.01 Enforcement. The provisions of this Chapter and all standards, limitations, orders, schedules of
compliance, and all provisions and conditions of any permit issued by the City under this Chapter shall be enforced
by the City, by any one or any combination of the following: criminal prosecution; action to recover civil damages;
injunctions; action to compel performance; or termination of service.
11.6.02 Penalties.
Subd. 1. Fine. Any person who continues any violation of this Chapter or any provision of a permit issued
by the City under this Chapter beyond the time limit provided for in the City Engineer's written notice of
violation or any property owner who refuses to allow entry or otherwise interferes with the City Engineer
or other duly authorized employees of the City in carrying out inspections as authorized shall be subject to
a penalty which shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council for
each violation.
Subd. 2. Separate Offense. Each day in which a violation referred to above continues shall be deemed a
separate violation.
Subd. 3. Misdemeanor. Any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this Chapter
or any provision of a permit issued by the City under this Chapter or any person who knowingly makes any
false statement or representation in any record, report, application, plan or other document filed with the
City pursuant to this Chapter, or who falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any monitoring device or
method required under this Chapter or any permit issued by the City under this Chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished for each violation by a fine as provided for by
Minnesota Statutes for misdemeanors, or 90 days imprisonment, or both.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.7, 11.8, 11.9 (Insert) 32
INSERT
Expiration Date
Section 11.7 Granting of Natural Gas Franchise of Aquila Inc. Sept. 29, 2019
Section 11.8 Granting of Franchise to Media Com - Cable Television May 31, 2015
Section 11.9 Granting of Electric Distribution Rights to MN Power Nov. 5, 2033
THESE SECTIONS OF THE CODE MAY NOT BE AMENDED WITHOUT PRIOR
APPROVAL FROM ALL PARTIES INCLUDED IN THE AGREEMENTS.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.7 Granting Minnesota Energy Resources a Natural Gas Franchise and the Authority to Construct, Operate 33
Maintain and Extend a Natural Gas Distribution Plant and System Within the Present or Future Corporation Limits of
the City of Cloquet, MN
Section 11.7 Granting Minnesota Energy Resources, a Subsidiary of WEC Energy Group,
a Wisconsin Corporation, its Successors and Assigns, a Natural Gas Franchise and the
Authority to Construct, Operate, Maintain, and Extend a Natural Gas Distribution Plant and System,
and Granting the Right to Use the Streets, Alleys, and Other Public Places Within the
Present or Future Corporate Limits of the City of Cloquet, Minnesota
11.7.01 FRANCHISE GRANTED
The City of Cloquet, Minnesota, (hereinafter referred to as "Grantor") hereby grants a nonexclusive
franchise to
Minnesota Energy Resources, a subsidiary of WEC Energy Group, a Wisconsin corporation, (hereinafter called
"Grantee"), its lessees, successors and assigns. Grantee is hereby granted the right, privilege, franchise, permission
and authority to lay, construct, install, maintain, operate and extend in, along, over or across the present and future
streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, public rights-of-way and public places as are now within the present or future limits
of said Grantor, a natural gas distribution system and all facilities necessary for the purpose of supplying natural gas
or processed gas for all purposes to the inhabitants of said Grantor and consumers in the vicinity thereof, and for the
distribution of natural gas from or through said Grantor to points beyond the limits thereof. Such facilities shall
include, but not be limited to, all mains, services, pipes, conduits and appliances necessary or convenient for
transmitting, transporting, distributing and supplying natural gas for all purposes for which it may be used, and to do
all other things necessary and proper in providing natural gas service to the inhabitants of Grantor and in carrying on
such business. Grantee may do all reasonable things necessary or customary to accomplish these purposes, subject
however, to such reasonable regulations as may be imposed by Grantor pursuant to ordinance or permit
requirements and to the further provisions of this franchise agreement.
11.7.02 TERM
The rights and privileges granted by this Ordinance shall remain in effect for a period of Twentyfive
(25) years
from the effective date of this Ordinance.
If Grantor and Grantee are unable to agree on the terms of a new franchise by the time this franchise expires, this
franchise will remain in effect until a new franchise is agreed upon, or until 90 days after Grantor or Grantee serves
written Notice to the other party of its intention to allow the franchise to expire. However, in no event shall this
franchise continue for more than one year after expiration of the 25 year term.
11.7.03 FRANCHISE FEE
During the term of the franchise hereby granted, and in addition to permit fees being imposed or that Grantor has a
right to impose, Grantor may charge Grantee a franchise fee. The fee may be (i) a percentage of gross revenues
received by Grantee for its operations within Grantor, or (ii) a flat fee per customer based on metered service to
retail customers within Grantor or on some other similar basis, or (iii) a fee based on units of energy delivered to any
class of retail customers within the corporate limits of Grantor. The method of imposing the franchise fee, the
percentage of revenue rate, or the flat rate based on metered service may differ for each customer class or combine
the methods described in (i) -(iii) above in assessing the fee. Grantor shall seek to use a formula that provides a
stable and predictable amount of fees, without placing Grantee at a competitive disadvantage. If Grantee claims that
Grantor's required fee formula is discriminatory or otherwise places Grantee at a competitive disadvantage, Grantee
shall provide a formula that will produce a substantially similar fee amount to Grantor and reimburse Grantor's
reasonable fees and costs in reviewing and implementing the formula. Grantor will attempt to accommodate Grantee
but is under no franchise obligation to adopt Grantee-proposed franchise fee formula and each review will not delay
the implementation of Grantor-imposed fee.
The franchise fee shall be imposed by separate ordinance duly adopted by the City Council. The Grantor shall
provide Grantee written notice via certified mail, enclosing such adopted ordinance, within ten (10) days after
adoption. The Company will notify the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission of any new, renewed, expired, or
changed fee, authorized by Minn. Stat. § 216B.36 to raise revenue, at least 60 days prior to its implementation.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.7 Granting Minnesota Energy Resources a Natural Gas Franchise and the Authority to Construct, Operate 34
Maintain and Extend a Natural Gas Distribution Plant and System Within the Present or Future Corporation Limits of
the City of Cloquet, MN
The franchise fee shall be payable not less than quarterly during complete billing months of the period for which
payment is to be made. The franchise fee formula may be changed from time to time, however, the change shall
meet the same notice requirements and the fee may not be changed more often than annually. Such fee shall not
exceed any amount that Grantee may legally charge to its customers prior to payment to Grantor. Such fee is subject
to subsequent reductions to account for uncollectibles and customer refunds incurred by Grantee. Grantee agrees to
make available for inspection by Grantor at reasonable times all records necessary to audit Grantee's determination
of the franchise fee payments.
If this franchise expires and Grantor and Grantee are unable to agree upon terms of a new franchise, the franchise
fee, if any being imposed by Grantor at the time this franchise expires, will remain in effect until a new franchise is
agreed upon notwithstanding the franchise expiration.
11.7.04 GOVERNING RULES AND REGULATIONS
This Ordinance is granted subject to all conditions, limitations and immunities now provided for, or as hereafter
amended, and applicable to the operations of a public utility, by State or Federal law. The rates to be charged by
Grantee for service within the present or future corporate limits of Grantor and the rules and regulations regarding
the character, quality and standards of service to be furnished by Grantee shall be under the jurisdiction and control
of such regulatory body or bodies as may, from time to time, be vested by law with authority and jurisdiction over
the rates, regulations and quality and standards of service to be supplied by Grantee. Provided however, should any
judicial, regulatory or legislative body, having proper jurisdiction, take any action that precludes Grantee from
recovering from its customers any cost associated with services provided hereunder, then Grantee and Grantor shall
renegotiate the terms of this Ordinance in accordance with the action taken, so as to allow Grantee to be made whole
economically. In determining the rights and duties of the Grantee, the terms of this franchise Ordinance shall take
precedence over any conflicting terms or requirements contained in any other Ordinance enacted by the Grantor.
If an energy supplier is unable to furnish an adequate supply of energy due to an emergency, an order or decision of
a public regulatory body, or other acts beyond the control of the Grantee, then the Grantee shall have the right and
authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations limiting, curtailing or allocating extensions of service or supply
of energy to any customers or prospective customers, and withholding the supply of energy to new customers,
provided that such rules and regulations shall be uniform as applied to each class of customers or prospective
customers, and shall be non-discriminatory as between communities receiving service from the Grantee.
11.7.05 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF COMPANY FACILITIES
Any pavements, sidewalks or curbing taken up and any and all excavations made shall be done in such a manner as
to cause only such inconvenience to the inhabitants of Grantor and to the general public as is reasonably necessary;
and repairs and replacements shall be made promptly by Grantee, leaving such properties in as good as condition as
existed immediately prior to excavation.
After undertaking any work requiring the opening of any public right-of-way, Grantee shall restore the public rightof-
way in accordance with Minnesota Rules, part 7819.1100 and applicable City ordinances consistent with law.
Grantee shall restore the public land to as good a condition as formerly existed, and shall maintain the surface in
good condition for six months thereafter. All work shall be completed as promptly as weather permits, and if
Grantee shall not promptly perform and complete the work, remove all dirt, rubbish, equipment and material, and
put the public land in the said condition, Grantor shall have, after demand to Grantee to cure and the passage of a
reasonable period of time following the demand, but not to exceed five days, the right to make the restoration of the
public land at the expense of Grantee. Grantee shall pay to Grantor the cost of such work done for or performed by
Grantor.
Grantee agrees that for the term of this grant, it will use its best efforts to maintain facilities and equipment sufficient
to meet the current and future energy requirements of Grantor, its inhabitants and industries. While maintaining its
facilities and equipment, Grantee shall obtain permits as required by ordinance, except that in emergency situations,
Grantee shall take immediate unilateral actions as it determines are necessary to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare; in which case, Grantee shall notify Grantor as soon as reasonably possible.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.7 Granting Minnesota Energy Resources a Natural Gas Franchise and the Authority to Construct, Operate 35
Maintain and Extend a Natural Gas Distribution Plant and System Within the Present or Future Corporation Limits of
the City of Cloquet, MN
Grantee shall not open or disturb the surface of any public right-of-way or public land for any purpose without first
having obtained a permit from Grantor, if required by a separate ordinance, for which Grantor may impose a
reasonable fee. Permit conditions imposed on Grantee shall not be more burdensome than those imposed on other
utilities for similar facilities or work. Grantee may, however, open and disturb the surface of any public right-of-way
or public land without a permit if (i) an emergency exists requiring the immediate repair of Gas Facilities and (ii)
Grantee gives telephone, email or similar notice to Grantor before commencement of the emergency repair, if
reasonably possible. Within two business days after commencing the repair, Grantee shall apply for any required
permits and pay any required fees.
Grantor will give Grantee reasonable notice of plans for street improvements where paving or resurfacing of a
permanent nature is involved that affect Grantee's facilities. The notice shall contain the nature and character of the
improvements, the rights-of-way upon which the improvements are to be made, the extent of the improvements and
the time when the Grantor will start the work, and, if more than one right-of-way is involved, the order in which this
work is to proceed. The notice shall be given to the Grantee a sufficient length of time, considering seasonable
working conditions, in advance of the actual commencement of the work to permit the Grantee to make any
additions, alterations, or repairs to its facilities.
Grantee must promptly provide complete and accurate mapping information for any of its Gas Facilities in
accordance with the requirements of Minnesota Rules, parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100.
11.7.06 EXTENSION OF COMPANY FACILITIES
Upon receipt and acceptance of a valid application for service, Grantee shall, subject to its own economic feasibility
criteria, make reasonable extensions of its distribution facilities to serve customers located within the current or
future corporate limits of Grantor.
11.7.07 RELOCATION OF COMPANY FACILITIES
Grantee shall comply with Minnesota Rules, part 7819.3100 and applicable City ordinances consistent with law. If
Grantor elects to change the grade of or otherwise alter any street, alley, avenue, bridge, public right-of-way or
public place for a public purpose, Grantee, upon reasonable notice from Grantor, shall remove and relocate its
facilities or equipment situated in the public rights-of-way, if such removal is necessary to prevent interference and
not merely for the convenience of the Grantor, at the cost and expense of Grantee. If Grantor orders or requests
Grantee to relocate its facilities or equipment for the primary benefit of a commercial or private project, or as a
result of the initial request of a commercial or private developer or other nonpublic
entity, and such removal is
necessary to prevent interference and not merely for the convenience of the Grantor or other right-of-way user,
Grantee shall receive payment for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocating its facilities or
equipment. Grantor shall consider reasonable alternatives in designing its public works projects so as not arbitrarily
to cause Grantee unreasonable additional expense in exercising its authority under this section.
Grantor shall also provide a reasonable alternative location for Grantee's facilities. Grantor shall give Grantee
written notice of vacating of a public right-of-way. Vacating of a public right-ofway
shall not deprive the Grantee
of its right to operate and maintain existing facilities, until the reasonable cost of relocating the same are first paid to
the Grantee.
Any person or corporation desiring to move a building or other structure along, or to make any unusual use of any
street, alley, avenue, bridge, public right-of-way or public place which shall interfere with the facilities or equipment
of the Grantee, shall first give notice to the Grantor and the Grantee and a pay a sum sufficient to cover the expense
and damage incident to the moving of Grantee's facilities and equipment.
11.7.08 VACATION OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
Grantor shall give Grantee at least two weeks prior written notice of a hearing of a proposed vacation of a public
right-of-way. Grantor and Grantee shall comply with Minnesota Rules, part 7819.3200 and applicable ordinances
consistent with law.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.7 Granting Minnesota Energy Resources a Natural Gas Franchise and the Authority to Construct, Operate 36
Maintain and Extend a Natural Gas Distribution Plant and System Within the Present or Future Corporation Limits of
the City of Cloquet, MN
11.7.09 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
Grantor acknowledges that certain information it might request pursuant to this franchise may be of a proprietary
and confidential nature. If Grantee requests that any information provided by Grantee to Grantor be kept
confidential due to such proprietary or commercial value, Grantor and its employees, agents, and representatives
shall maintain the confidentiality of that information, to the extent allowed by law. If Grantor is requested or
required by legal or administrative process to disclose any such confidential information, Grantor shall promptly
notify Grantee of such request or requirement so that Grantee may seek an appropriate protective order or other
relief. Grantor shall use all reasonable efforts to ensure that the confidentiality of Grantee's confidential information
is maintained.
11.7.10 FORCE MAJEURE
It shall not be a breach or default under this franchise if either party fails to perform its obligations hereunder due to
Force Majeure. Force Majeure shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 1) physical events such as acts of
God, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, freezing, storms, floods, washouts, explosions, breakage or accident or
necessity of repairs to machinery, equipment or distribution or transmission lines; 2) acts of others such as strikes,
work-force stoppages, riots, sabotage, insurrections or wars; 3) governmental actions such as necessity for
compliance with any court order, law, statute, ordinance, executive order, or regulation promulgated by a
governmental authority having jurisdiction; and any other causes, whether of the kind herein enumerated or
otherwise not reasonably within the control of the affected party to prevent or overcome. Each party shall make
reasonable efforts to avoid Force Majeure and to resolve such event as promptly as reasonably possible once it
occurs in order to resume performance; provided, however, that this provision shall not obligate a party to settle any
labor strike.
11.7.11 INSURANCE
Grantee is required to maintain Commercial General Liability Insurance on an occurrence basis protecting it from
claims for damages for bodily injury, including death, and for claims for property damage, which may arise from
operations under this Ordinance. Grantor must be endorsed as an Additional Insured. Insurance minimum limits are
as follows:
• $2,000,000 - per occurrence
• $4,000,000 - annual aggregate
The following coverages shall be included: Premises and Operations Bodily Injury and Property Damage; Personal
and Advertising Injury Blanket Contractual Liability and Products and Completed Operations Liability.
With the Grantor's consent, which shall not be unreasonably withheld, Grantee shall have the option of providing a
program of self-insurance to meet its obligation under this Ordinance. In the event Grantee has an obligation to
defend and indemnify Grantor, Grantor shall be entitled to tender the defense of such lawsuit directly to Grantee as
described below.
11.7.12 HOLD HARMLESS
Grantee shall indemnify and hold Grantor harmless from any and all liability, on account of injury to persons or
damage to property occasioned by the construction, maintenance, repair, inspection, the issuance of permits, or the
operation of the Gas Facilities located in the public right-of-ways and public lands. Grantor shall not be indemnified
for losses or claims occasioned through its own negligence except for losses or claims arising out of or alleging
Grantor's negligence as to the issuance of permits for, or inspection of Grantee's plans or work.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.7 Granting Minnesota Energy Resources a Natural Gas Franchise and the Authority to Construct, Operate 37
Maintain and Extend a Natural Gas Distribution Plant and System Within the Present or Future Corporation Limits of
the City of Cloquet, MN
In the event a suit is brought against Grantor under circumstances where this agreement to indemnify applies,
Grantee at its sole cost and expense shall defend Grantor in such suit if written notice thereof is promptly given to
Grantee within a period wherein Grantee is not prejudiced by lack of such notice. If Grantee is required to indemnify
and defend, it will thereafter have control of such litigation. Grantee agrees to notify the Grantor of any settlement
discussions and to discuss with the Grantor the Grantee's settlement strategy and keep the Grantor informed
throughout the settlement process, but the Company has the authority to enter into any final settlement. This section
is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to Grantor. Grantee, in defending
any action on behalf of Grantor, shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity that Grantor
could assert on its own behalf. This franchise agreement shall not be interpreted to constitute a waiver by Grantor of
any of its defenses of immunity or limitations on liability under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 466.
11.7.14 SAFETY AND INFRASTRUCTURE REPORTING
At the Grantee's request, Grantor shall meet with Grantee at a mutually convenient time to discuss items of concern
or interest relating to Grantee's safety and service reliability in the previous year and infrastructure plans for the
coming year and other matters raised by Grantor or Grantee.
11.7.15 DISPUTE RESOLUTION
If either party asserts that the other party is in default in the performance of any obligation hereunder, the
complaining party shall notify the other party of the default and the desired remedy. The notification shall be
written. Representatives of the parties must promptly meet and attempt in good faith to negotiate a resolution of the
dispute. If the dispute is not resolved within 30 days of the written notice, the parties may jointly select a mediator
to facilitate further discussion. The parties will equally share the fees and expenses of this mediator. If a mediator is
not used or if the parties are unable to resolve the dispute within 30 days after first meeting with the selected
mediator, either party may commence an action in District Court to interpret and enforce this franchise or for such
other relief as may be permitted by law or equity.
11.7.16 SEVERABILITY
If any clause, sentence or section of this Ordinance is deemed invalid by any judicial, regulatory or legislative body
having proper jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected.
11.7.17 NON WAIVER
Any waiver of any obligation or default under this franchise shall not be construed as a waiver of any future
defaults, whether of like or different character.
11.7.18 REPEAL CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
This ordinance, when accepted by Grantee as provided below, shall constitute the entire agreement between the
Grantor and the Grantee relating to this franchise and the same shall supersede all prior ordinances pertaining to this
franchise agreement, and any terms and conditions of such prior ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed. Ordinance No. 269A of the City of Cloquet Minnesota, is hereby repealed as of the
effective date hereof.
11.7.19 EFFECT AND INTERPRETATION OF ORDINANCE
The captions which precede each section of this ordinance are for convenience in reference only and shall not be
taken into consideration in the interpretation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance.
11.7.20 AMENDMENT-PROCEDURE
Either party to this franchise agreement may at any time propose that the agreement be amended. This Ordinance
may be amended at any time by the City passing a subsequent ordinance declaring the provisions of the amendment,
which amendatory ordinance shall become effective upon the filing of the Company's written consent thereto with
the City Clerk within 60 days after the effective date of the amendatory ordinance. This amendatory procedure is
subject, however, to the City's police power and franchise rights under Minnesota Statues, Sections 216B.36 and
301B.Ol, which rights are not waived hereby. To the extent the ordinance changes the section related to the
franchise fee, Grantor would need to provide appropriate notice to the Commission under MN law.

CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.8 Cable Television 39
Section 11.8 Cable Television
See Appendix A - Ordinance No. 223A, 228A, 389A, 451A
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.9 (Ordinance No. 430A MN Power Franchise Agreement) 40
Section 11.9
ORDINANCE NO. 430A
An Ordinance Granting To Minnesota Power A Nonexclusive Franchise To Construct, Operate, Repair And
Maintain In The City Of Cloquet, Minnesota, An Electric Distribution System And Transmission Lines,
Including Necessary Poles, Lines, Fixtures And Appurtenances, For The Furnishing Of Electric Energy To
The City, Its Inhabitants, And Others, And To Use The Public Ways And Public Grounds Of The City For
Such Purposes; And Prescribing Certain Terms And Conditions Thereof.
SECTION 1. FINDINGS.
1.1 In Ordinance Number 206A and Section 11.9 of the City Code, the City has required each Utility
Service Provider to obtain and maintain a franchise with the City and to provide consideration to the general
fund of the City for the rights afforded to it in the franchise.
1.2 In the interest of fairness and comparable treatment, the City finds it necessary and desirable to
formalize its rules and regulations and to implement the terms of Ordinance Number 430A with respect to the
City of Cloquet, and, to the extent feasible and practicable, to all other Utility Service Providers.
1.3 That Section 11.9 of the City Code be hereby replaced in its entirety with Ordinance
No. 430A.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this Ordinance, the following capitalized terms listed in alphabetical
order shall have the following meanings:
City. The City of Cloquet, County of Carlton, State of Minnesota and the corporate limits thereof on the
Effective Date and as they may be adjusted from to time to time hereafter.
City Utility System. Facilities used for providing public utility service owned or operated by the City or
agency thereof, including sewer, storm sewer, water service, street lighting and traffic signals.
Commission. The Minnesota Public Utilities Commission, or any successor agency or agencies, including an
agency of the federal government, which preempts all or part of the authority to regulate electric retail rates
now vested in the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.
Company. Minnesota Power, an operating division of ALLETE, Inc., its successors and assigns including all
successors or assignees that own or operate any part or parts of the Electric Facilities subject to this Franchise.
Company Service Area. Those areas within the City to which the Company has been assigned the right to
provide electric service, as in effect on the Effective Date or as may be hereafter revised.
Council. The City Council of the City of Cloquet as from time to time constituted.
Effective Date. The effective date of this Ordinance.
Electric Facilities. Electric transmission and distribution substations, towers, poles, lines, guys, anchors,
conduits, fixtures, and necessary appurtenances owned or operated by the Company for the purpose of
providing electric energy for public or private use.
Extension Rules. The rules adopted from time to time by the Company governing its extension of Electrical
Facilities.
Franchise. The grant of rights made by the City to the Company in this Ordinance, subject to its terms and
conditions.
Notice. A writing served by any party or parties on any other party or parties at the following addresses:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.9 (Ordinance No. 430A MN Power Franchise Agreement) 41
If to the City: City of Cloquet
1307 Cloquet Avenue
Cloquet, MN 55720
Attn: City Administrator
If to the Company: Minnesota Power
30 West Superior Street
Duluth, MN 55802
Attn: Vice President of Marketing
Any party may change its respective address for the purpose of this Ordinance by written notice to the other
parties.
Person. A natural person or any partnership, joint venture, corporation, cooperative, limited liability company
or any public corporation, political subdivision or agency of the State or any other legal entity that may be
created by law.
Public Ground. All real property owned by or dedicated to the City with respect to which the City holds the
legal right or title to grant or withhold easement, leasehold or occupancy rights or servitudes.
Public Way. Any street, alley and other public rights-of-way within the City.
Utility. Transmitting, furnishing, transporting, distributing, delivering, selling, receiving, importing,
manufacturing, or causing to be produced, transmitted, furnished, transported, delivered, sold, received,
imported, or manufactured, electric energy, natural gas, mixed gas, heat, light, power, and services provided
through a cable communication system.
Utility Service Provider. Any Person who performs any one or more of the activities of a Utility to or for the
public or to or for any one or more persons within the corporate limits of the City and may, as contemplated
herein, be the ultimate user or consumer of the Utility service provided.
SECTION 3. THE FRANCHISE.
3.1. Grant of Franchise. The City hereby grants the Company, for a period of twenty (20) years from the
date this Ordinance is passed and approved by the City, the right to transmit and furnish electric energy for any
public or private use within and through the Company Service Area. For these purposes, the Company may
construct, operate, repair and maintain Electric Facilities in, on, over, under and across the Public Ways and
Public Grounds within the Company Service Area, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance. The Company
may do all reasonable things necessary or customary to accomplish these purposes, subject however, to all
applicable design and safety codes, the provisions of this Ordinance, zoning ordinances, other applicable
ordinances, permit procedures and the customary and necessary practices of the City.
3.2 Not Exclusive. This Franchise is not exclusive.
3.3. Effective Date. This Franchise shall be in force and effect from and after the passage of this
Ordinance and publication as required by law and upon the Company’s duly authorized acceptance below as
executed within thirty (30) days after passage and publication of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto.
3.4. Continuation of Franchise. If the City and Company are unable to agree on the terms of a new
Franchise by the time this Franchise expires, this Franchise will remain in effect until a new Franchise is agreed
upon, or until ninety (90) days after the City or the Company serves written notice to the other party of its
intention to allow the Franchise to expire. However, in no event shall this Franchise continue for more than one
(1) year after the expiration of the twenty (20) year term set forth in Section 3.1.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.9 (Ordinance No. 430A MN Power Franchise Agreement) 42
SECTION 4. LOCATIONS; CONSTRUCTION; OTHER REGULATIONS.
4.1. General. Electric Facilities shall be located, constructed and maintained by the Company: (i) in as
safe and secure a condition or manner as reasonably possible, (ii) so as not to interfere with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel along and over Public Ways, and (iii) so as not to disrupt or interfere with the
normal use or operation of any Public Ways, Public Ground or the City Utility System. Electric Facilities may
only be located on Public Ground as determined by the City in its sole discretion. The Company's construction,
reconstruction, operation, repair, maintenance, location and relocation of Electric Facilities shall be subject to
permits if required by separate ordinance and to other reasonable regulations of the City to the extent not
inconsistent with the terms of this Ordinance and such other regulations of the City consistent with authority
granted the City to manage its Public Ways and Public Grounds under state law, to the extent not inconsistent
with a specific term of this Ordinance.
4.2. Construction; Maintenance; Repairs. Whenever the Company desires to open or disturb any Public
Way or Public Ground for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, or repairing Electric Facilities, it shall give
the City reasonable advance Notice, but not less than ten (10) business days, by filing a written Notice with the
City Administrator and City Engineer. In any case, the Company shall not commence such work before
obtaining any applicable permit for which the City may impose a reasonable fee, or other appropriate written
consent from the City. The Company shall not, during the progress of the work, endanger or unnecessarily
obstruct the passage of traffic or the normal and customary use of the Public Ways and Public Ground. During
the progress of such work, the Company shall keep the affected Public Ways or Public Ground guarded in order
to avoid accidents to persons or property. All work performed by the Company shall comply with all
applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules, and regulations.
4.3 Emergencies. The requirements for obtaining permits from the City pursuant to Section 5.2 shall not
apply if (i) an emergency exists requiring the immediate repair of Electric Facilities and (ii) the Company gives
telephone notice to the City before, if reasonably possible, commencement of the emergency repair. Within
two (2) business days after commencing the repair, the Company shall apply for any required permits and pay
any required fees.
4.4. Restoration. Following the completion of any work, the Company shall promptly and diligently
restore the affected Public Ways and/or Public Ground to as good a condition as before the work commenced.
If the Company fails to promptly restore such Public Ways and/or Public Ground within ten (10) days of Notice
by the City, the City may engage an independent contractor at the expense of the Company to perform the
restoration of the Public Ways and/or Public Ground as required under this Section. The Company shall pay to
the City upon demand the cost to the City of affecting such restoration including the City’s administrative
expenses and overhead.
4.5. Avoidance of Damage. The Company must take reasonable measures to prevent the Electric
Facilities from causing damage to persons or property. The Company must take reasonable measures to protect
the Electric Facilities from damage that could be inflicted on the Electric Facilities by persons, property, or the
elements. The Company must take protective measures when the City performs work near the Electric
Facilities, if given reasonable Notice by the City of such work prior to its commencement.
4.6. Field Locations. The Company shall provide field locations for all its underground Electric Facilities
when requested by the City within a reasonable period of time. The period of time will be deemed reasonable if
it meets the requirements of the one call excavation notice system as now provided in Minnesota Statutes,
chapter 216D (commonly known as of the Effective Date as the “Gopher State One Call” system).
4.7. Shared Use of Poles; Street Lights. If the City desires to place facilities on the Company’s poles, the
City shall enter into a License Agreement for Pole Attachment Rental with the Company containing terms and
conditions substantially similar to those contained in other such Agreements that the Company has with other
governmental entities.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.9 (Ordinance No. 430A MN Power Franchise Agreement) 43
4.8. Vegetation Control. Subject to such procedures, regulation and supervision as the Council may
establish, the Company may, at its cost, trim all trees and shrubs in the Public Ways located within the
Company Service Area to the extent the Company finds it necessary to avoid interference with the proper
construction, operation, repair and maintenance of any of the Company’s Electric Facilities installed or
maintained hereunder provided that Company shall hold the City harmless from any liability arising therefrom,
and subject to permit or other reasonable regulation by the City.
4.9. Notice of City Improvements. The City will give the Company reasonable advance Notice of plans
for improvements to Public Ways and Public Ground in the Company Service Area where the City has reason
to believe that the Company’s Electric Facilities may affect or be affected by such improvements. The Notice
will contain: (i) the nature and character of the improvements, (ii) the Public Ways and/or Public Ground upon
which the improvements are to be made, (iii) the extent of the improvements, (iv) the time when the City will
start the work, and (v) if more than one Public Way or parcel of Public Ground is involved, the order in which
the work is to proceed.
4.10 Acquisition. The City shall have the right to purchase or otherwise acquire the Company’s Electric
Facilities or the Company Service Area, or portion(s) thereof, at any time by way of eminent domain under
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 117 or under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 216B, in either case, as such statutes or
amendments to such are in effect on the date the City commences such purchase or acquisition. In that event,
the pleading commencing the acquisition proceeding by the City shall be noticed to the Company for it to make
any adjustments to its long-range planning for facilities and service for the area affected by the proceeding.
Any damages to the Company as a result of such proceeding shall be determined as of the commencement of
such proceeding. The Company shall continue to operate the Electric Facilities at the City's sufferance only
until such acquisition is completed. The expiration or termination of this Franchise as hereinbefore provided
shall not, by itself, be an independent basis of any claim by the Company against the City.
SECTION 5. ELECTRIC FACILITIES RELOCATION.
5.1. Relocation. In the event the City reasonably determines that it is necessary for the Company to move
any part of its Electric Facilities because the City has determined to change, move or improve its Public Ways
or that the Electric Facilities have become or will become a substantial impairment to the existing or imminent
public use of Public Ground, upon reasonable Notice by the City to the Company, then the Company will move
its Electric Facilities at its sole cost. The City shall consider reasonable alternatives in designing its public
works projects so as not to arbitrarily cause the Company unreasonable additional expense in exercising its
authority under this Section 5.1. This Section 5.1 shall not constitute a taking by the City nor be construed as a
waiver or modification of any easement or prescriptive rights acquired by the Company independent of and
without reliance by the Company on this Franchise.
5.2. No Release of Liability. Nothing contained herein shall relieve any third party from liability arising
out of their failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring the Company’s Electric Facilities while
performing any work connected with grading, regarding or changing the line of any Public Way or with any
construction on or adjacent to any Public Way; provided, however, this Section 5.2 shall not limit the City’s
rights to indemnification under Section 6.1 nor shall the City in any way be liable to the Company for claims
arising from the negligence of any third party.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.9 (Ordinance No. 430A MN Power Franchise Agreement) 44
SECTION 6. INDEMNIFICATION.
6.1. Indemnification. If at any time any claim of any kind is made against the City for injury to persons
or property arising from the acts or failure to act by the Company, its agents, servants, or employees in
connection with the operations of the Company under and pursuant to this Franchise, the Company shall fully
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its agents, servants or employees from any and all such claims,
including, but not limited to, reimbursement of any reasonable attorneys fees and costs and expenses the City
may incur in handling, denying, or defending such claims. The Company’s obligation to indemnify the City
shall not extend to any injury to persons or property caused by the negligent act or failure to act by the City or
any actions taken by the Company pursuant to directions of the City if performed within the scope of the City’s
directions without negligence by the Company. The City shall determine who will defend any such claims
arising under this Section 6.1 and the Company will thereafter have complete control of such litigation;
provided, however, the Company may not settle any such claims without the prior approval of the City, which
approval will not be unreasonably withheld. This Section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or
immunity otherwise available to the City; and the Company, in defending any action shall be entitled to assert
every defense or immunity that the City could itself assert in its own behalf. The Company’s obligations under
this Section shall survive the expiration, amendment, or termination of this Ordinance.
6.2. Insurance. Before the Effective Date, the Company shall furnish the City a summary of insurance, if
any, carried by the Company, or of its self-insured status, in either case demonstrating adequate protection to
the City from any and all obligations, liabilities, or claims of any nature whatsoever, growing out of the
operation, construction, and maintenance of its Electric Facilities within the City. The Company shall maintain
such insurance coverage at all times during this Franchise.
6.3. Compliance with Laws; Hazardous Substances. In its operation under this Ordinance, the
Company shall observe all federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and orders with respect to the
transmission, distribution, transformation or furnishing of electric energy and the handling of materials,
substances and wastes deemed toxic or hazardous to health, natural resources or the environment (collectively,
“Hazardous Substances”). The Company shall remove or remediate any Hazardous Substances located on, in
or surrounding its Electric Facilities or caused to be located on, in or surrounding the Public Ways and Public
Grounds or elsewhere in the City in compliance with all applicable laws, regulations and lawful government
orders, and pay or cause to be paid all costs associated therewith. The indemnification terms and conditions of
Section 6.1 shall apply to all claims made against the City by any Person, including any governmental agency,
who or which asserts any right to costs, damages or other relief based upon the terms and conditions imposed
upon the Company under this Section 6.3 or which arise from or are related to the Company’s acts or failure to
act in compliance with any law, rule, regulation or lawful order governing Hazardous Substances.
SECTION 7. VACATION OF PUBLIC WAYS. The City will consult with the Company at least four (4) weeks
prior to its action on any proposed vacation of a Public Way. Except where ordered pursuant to Section 5.1, the vacation
of any Public Way after the installation of Electric Facilities shall not operate to deprive the Company of its rights to
operate and maintain such Electric Facilities until the reasonable cost of relocating the same and the loss and expense
resulting from such relocation are first paid to the Company. However, in no case shall the City be liable to the
Company for failure to specifically preserve a Public Way in the exercise of its authority under Minnesota Statutes,
Section 160.29.
SECTION 8. ABANDONED FACILITIES. The Company shall comply with City ordinances and Minnesota
Statutes, Section 216D.01 et seq., as they may be amended from time to time. The Company shall maintain records
describing the exact location of all abandoned and retired Facilities within the City, produce such records at the City’s
request and comply with the location requirements of Section 216D.04 with respect to all Electric Facilities, including
abandoned and retired Electric Facilities.
SECTION 9. RATES AND SERVICE. The electric service provided and the rates charged by the Company for
electric service, as of the Effective Date, are subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission as provided in Minnesota
Statutes, chapter 216B. In the event the Company shall determine after the Effective Date to change its rates or terms
and conditions of electric service, the Company shall provide reasonable advance Notice of such proposed action to the
City.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.9 (Ordinance No. 430A MN Power Franchise Agreement) 45
SECTION 10. FRANCHISE FEE.
10.1. Authority. The City reserves all rights under Minnesota Statutes, Sections 216B.36 and 301B.01 or
other law to require a franchise fee at any time during the term of, and in consideration for, this Franchise. The
franchise fee may be expressed (i) as a specified charge per measurable unit of electricity being provided,
transported, transmitted, sold, furnished, delivered, or received within the City, or (ii) as a percentage of the
Gross Revenues received by the Company for its operations within the City, or (iii) a flat fee per customer
based on service to retail customers within the City or on some other similar basis, or (iv) in such other manner
or fashion as the City may determine. The method of imposing the franchise fee may differ by customer class,
by type of Utility, by particular circumstances of a Utility Service Provider, or by other relevant factor, and may
combine the methods described in (i) through (iv) above.
10.2. Payment of Fee. The franchise fee shall be payable not less often than quarterly and shall be based
on the complete billing month for which payment is due. The payment shall be due forty-five (45) days after
the end of the month for which the payment is due. Each payment shall be accompanied by a brief report
showing the basis for the computation of the payment and such other relevant facts to support the computation
as may be requested by the City from time to time. The Company may, in its sole discretion, impose a
surcharge equivalent to the franchise fee in its rates for electric service. The Company shall pay the City the
franchise fee based upon the prevailing rate and as billed to the customer, but subject to subsequent adjustment
in either of the following events: (i) if any amount so billed subsequently becomes uncollectible after
reasonable efforts of collection by the Company or (ii) if the Company shall, after any said billings,
retroactively reduce its rates or costs to its retail electric customers so that a refund is due from the Company of
an amount previously paid or incurred by the retail electric customers.
10.3. No Waiver or Release. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the
payment made is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of the payment be construed as a release
of any claim that the City may have for further sums payable under the provisions of this Ordinance. All
amounts paid shall be subject to audit and re-computation by the City. The Company agrees to make all
records necessary to audit the Company’s calculation of any payment available for inspection by the City or its
designated representative at reasonable times.
10.4. Separate Ordinance. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the franchise fee may be changed by
the City from time to time by separate ordinance; provided, however, such changes shall not occur more often
than once in any calendar year and shall be effective upon the earlier of (1) approval by the Commission
authorizing the Company to incorporate such fee within its rate schedule, or (2) sixty (60) days after the
Company has provided timely notice to the Commission of the ordinance adopting the change. Notice of the
proposed change shall be given to the Company not later than the effective date of the ordinance adopting the
change.
SECTION 11. DEFAULTS. If the Company shall be in default in the performance of any of the material terms and
conditions of this Ordinance, and shall continue in default for more than thirty (30) days (or fails to initiate the cure of
the default within said period and diligently pursue said cure, if the cure of the default cannot reasonably be
accomplished within said 30 days) after receiving Notice from the City of such default, the City may elect to cure such
default and charge the Company for the costs thereof.
SECTION 12. AMENDMENT PROCEDURE. The City reserves the right to amend this Franchise by ordinance.
The Company’s rights hereunder are subject to the police power of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to
the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and this Franchise may be amended by the City as deemed necessary or
appropriate in the exercise of such power.
SECTION 13. GENERAL PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE.
13.1. Governing Law. This Franchise is granted and is intended to be performed in the State of Minnesota
and shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the laws of the State of Minnesota. The Company shall
be subject to personal jurisdiction in the State of Minnesota. All actions related to this Ordinance or its
enforcement shall be venued in the District Court of the State of Minnesota within which venue the City is
located.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.9 (Ordinance No. 430A MN Power Franchise Agreement) 46
13.2. Right to Repeal. If this Franchise, having become final and operative as herein provided, shall be
declared in any part illegal or void, then the City, in its sole discretion, may repeal the entire or any portion of
this Ordinance. If any material portion of this Ordinance is declared void or illegal, then this Ordinance shall be
void in its entirety.
13.3. Limitation on Applicability. This Ordinance constitutes a franchise between the City and the
Company as the only parties and no provision of this Franchise shall in any way inure to the benefit of any third
person (including the public at large) so as to constitute any such person as a third party beneficiary of the
agreement or of any one or more of the terms hereof, or otherwise give rise to any cause of action in any person
not a party hereto.
13.4. Assignment. The Company may assign this Franchise without the prior approval of, but upon not
less than thirty (30) days’ prior Notice to, the City. Such Notice shall include the identity of and contact
information for, the assignee and the statement of the assignee's plans and intentions for the operation of the
Electric Facilities under this Franchise.
SECTION 14. ACCEPTANCE BY THE COMPANY.
14.1. Acceptance by the Company. The Company shall, within thirty (30) days after passage and
publication of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto, file with the City Administrator in writing its
acceptance or rejection as provided in Section 15.2. If such acceptance is not filed or if a rejection is filed
within said period, the Company, by its continuing operations, shall be deemed to have accepted the terms and
conditions of this Franchise or any amendment hereto, except with respect to such particulars as it may
successfully challenge under the procedures specified in Section 14.2.
14.2. Rejection Procedures. A rejection of this Franchise or any amendment hereto may be made by the
Company only upon the grounds that the terms and conditions hereof or of such amendment exceed the lawful
authority of the City under the Constitutions or Laws of the United States or the State of Minnesota or are
otherwise unlawful. Any rejection shall be submitted in writing to the City, stating with particularity the points
and authorities of law upon which the Company relies. If the City fails to amend this Franchise or otherwise
satisfy the Company’s objections as stated within thirty (30) days of its receipt of the Company’s rejection, the
Company shall have the right thereafter to seek appropriate judicial or administrative relief based solely upon
those provisions it has alleged are unlawful in its rejection notice. If the Company fails to initiate such legal
action within thirty (30) days from the expiration of the aforementioned thirty (30) day period provided for the
City’s amendment or cure, the Company shall be deemed to have waived its objections and to have accepted
the terms of this Franchise or any amendment hereto.
SECTION 15. REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
herewith are repealed.
SECTION 16. EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage
and publication in accordance with law.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.9 (Ordinance No. 430A MN Power Franchise Agreement) 47
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.10 Stormwater Utility Charges 48
Section 11.10 Stormwater Utility Charges
11.10.01. Stormwater Utility and Authority. There is hereby established a public utility to be known as the
Stormwater Utility for the City of Cloquet. The Stormwater Utility shall be operated as a public utility pursuant to
City Code and Minnesota Statutes, Section 444.075.
11.10.02. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide a funding mechanism for the following services:
A. The administration, planning, analysis, installation, operation, maintenance and
replacement of public drainage systems.
B. The administration, planning, implementation, construction, and maintenance of
stormwater Best Management Practices (BMPs) to reduce the introduction of sediment
and other pollutants into local water resources.
C. Other education, engineering, inspection, monitoring, testing and enforcement activities
as necessary to maintain compliance with local, state and federal stormwater
requirements.
D. Activities necessary to maintain compliance with the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4) Permit
requirements established by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, including
preparation, implementation and management of a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP) to address the following control measures:
(1) Public education and outreach on storm water impacts.
(2) Public involvement/participation.
(3) Illicit discharge detection and elimination.
(4) Construction site stormwater runoff control.
(5) Post-construction runoff control in new development and redevelopment.
(6) Pollution prevention for municipal operations.
11.10.03. Definitions
Subd. 1. Residential Equivalency Factor, referred to herein as “REF”, is defined as the average impervious
area of residential property per dwelling unit located within the city. A typical 0.33 acre single-family
residential parcel with 30% impervious shall represent the basic unit of the stormwater utility’s charge
structure.
Subd. 2. REF Rate is defined as a utility fee applied to each REF or 4,312 square feet of impervious
surface as established by resolution of the Cloquet City Council as provided herein.
Subd. 3. Single-Family Residential is defined as the land use classification of parcels with one (1) living
unit.
Subd. 4. Duplex Residential is defined as the land use classification of parcels with two (2) or three (3)
living units.
Subd. 5. Nonresidential Property is defined as any developed property that is not classified as singlefamily
or duplex residential by the definitions given above. Property that has a mixture of residential and
nonresidential uses shall be considered nonresidential.
Subd. 6. Impervious Area is defined as areas on a property that prevent or impede the infiltration of
stormwater into the soil at the same rate as natural or pre-developed conditions. Common impervious areas
may include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots,
storage areas, compacted gravel or soil surfaces, and any other surface that prevents or impedes the natural
infiltration of stormwater runoff.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.10 Stormwater Utility Charges 49
Subd. 7. Developed Land is defined as property altered from a natural state by construction or installation
of more than five hundred square feet of impervious surfaces as defined in this Section.
Subd. 8. Stormwater Drainage System or System is defined as the existing constructed and natural
stormwater drainage facilities and channels of the City and all improvements thereto which are the property
and responsibility of the Utility, to be operated by the Utility to, among other things, conserve water,
control discharges necessitated by rainfall events, incorporate methods to collect, convey, store, absorb,
inhibit, treat, use or reuse water to prevent or reduce flooding, over-drainage, environmental degradation
and water pollution or otherwise affect the quality and quantity of discharge from such system.
11.10.04. Rates and Charges
Subd. 1. Minimum or Maximum Fees. The City Council may establish minimum or maximum monthly
fees per property.
Subd. 2. Estimated Charges. If, for any reason, precise information related to the use, development or
impervious area of a premise is not available; then Stormwater Utility Charges for such premise shall be
estimated, and billed, based upon information then available to the City.
Subd. 3. Standardized Charges. The following rules shall apply for the purpose of simplifying and
equalizing charges:
A. A typical surface area of 0.33 acres containing 30% impervious (i.e. 4,312 sq. ft. of
impervious surface) shall be used as the single-family residential equivalency factor.
B. Any duplex or triplex which is situated on a single parcel shall be billed at 1.5 REFs.
C. Parcels subject to these standardized charges shall not be eligible for adjustments
(credits) to charges or adjustments to impervious area as set forth elsewhere herein.
Subd. 4. Exceptions. The following land uses are exempt from the Stormwater Utility Fees established
herein:
A. Public Street right-of-way.
B. Wetlands and public waters as defined by state law.
C. Undeveloped properties.
D. Airport runways and taxiways.
E. Tribal owned land within the Fond du Lac Reservation.
Subd. 5. Establishing Rates. Each developed property shall pay a rate per Residential Equivalency
Factor (REF). The REF Rate so established shall be on file with the City Administrator/Clerk and shall be
used to compute the stormwater charges for a given property based on the following formulas for each land
use designation.
11.10.05. Stormwater Fee Adjustments. Stormwater Utility fees may be adjusted under the conditions stated
below. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to provide justification for the fee adjustment.
Subd. 1. Appeals Process. Any person liable for the payment of stormwater utility fees on a property
may, appeal to the City Engineer for a utility fee adjustment if the person believes the utility fee to be
incorrect. The request for adjustment shall be made in writing and shall state, in detail, the grounds upon
which relief is sought. The Engineer may require the applicant to submit, at applicant’s expense,
supplemental information including, but not limited to, survey data certified by a registered land surveyor
and engineering reports certified by a registered professional engineer. The director may grant an
adjustment if it is found that:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.10 Stormwater Utility Charges 50
A. A substantial error was made in the calculation of the impervious area on a nonresidential
property.
B. The land use designation used to calculate the stormwater fee is inaccurate
Acceptance and denials of appeals for adjustment shall be made in writing by the Engineer. No adjustment
shall be made retroactively, except for initial appeals filed within one year of the effective date of this
ordinance.
Any person denied an adjustment by the Engineer may appeal the denial to the City Council by filing
written notice of appeal with the city clerk within 30 days of receipt of the Director’s decision. The City
Council shall hear the appeal and affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Director, applying the
standards for granting adjustments set forth in this Section.
Subd. 2. Credits. In determining charges, the City Council may adopt a Stormwater Utility Credit Policy
in order to provide an incentive for property owners to manage stormwater quantity and quality. All
applications for credits shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works and are subject to the following
provisions:
A. Residential properties subject to standardized charges shall not be eligible for credits.
B. Maximum Credits are cumulative and cannot exceed 90 percent.
C. It the responsibility of the property owner to provide all documentation, maintenance and
inspection records as required the Public Works Director in order to prove the benefit of
any Best Management Practice (BMP).
11.10.06. Collections and Penalties
Subd. 1. Billing Schedule. The City shall render invoices for stormwater fees monthly, quarterly or semiannually
as the City Council shall determine suitable and necessary. Charges shall be payable to the City
and may be rendered in conjunction with other utility billings.
Subd. 2. Accounts in Name of Owner and/or Occupant. All accounts shall be carried in the name of the
owner of the premises connected to the water and sewer services, and/or the occupant of the premises, if
the owner is not directly paying for the services. Where the term “user” appears in this Code in reference to
the payment for stormwater fees, the term shall include the owner and the occupant of the premises.
Subd. 3. Required Information. The owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises shall furnish
the City with such information as may reasonably be required relating to services provided by the City
system. Willful failure to provide the information, willful falsification of the information, or willful failure
to comply with any requirement or order issued pursuant to this Section shall constitute a violation of this
Section.
Subd. 4. Minimum Fee. The minimum stormwater utility fee that shall be billed by the City for all
developed properties within the City of Cloquet shall be one Residential Equivalency Factor.
Subd. 5. Penalty for Late Payment. All charges for stormwater fees and miscellaneous service shall be
due on the date specified by the City for the respective account. Penalty for past due bills shall be 5% of the
total bill, except, no penalty shall be charged on past due sales tax.
Subd. 6. Delinquent Accounts. All charges for stormwater utility fees shall be due on the date specified
by the City for the respective amount and shall be delinquent twenty (20) days thereafter. The City shall
endeavor to collect delinquent accounts promptly. When satisfactory arrangements for payment have not
been made, delinquent accounts shall be certified to the City Administrator who shall prepare an
assessment roll each year providing for assessment of the delinquent amounts against the respective
properties served. The assessment roll shall be delivered to the Council for adoption on or before
November 30th of each year for certification to the County Auditor for collection along with taxes. Such
action shall be optional and may be subsequent to taking legal action to collect delinquent accounts.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.10 Stormwater Utility Charges 51
If the delinquent customer shall be a tenant who has vacated the property or an owner who no longer has an
ownership interest because of mortgage foreclosure, cancellation of contract for deed or for any other
reason, collection of the delinquent account shall, at the option of the City Administrator, be either through
a collection agency or legal proceedings in accordance with the City's Collection Policy.
Subd. 7. Liability for Payment of Services. The owner of developed property, and the occupant thereof,
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to the premises and the service shall be furnished
to the premises by the City only upon the condition that the owner and occupant of the premises shall be
jointly and severally liable to the City for the charges. The owner of rental property agrees, as a condition
of receiving service, to be personally liable for stormwater utility fees charged to the tenants, lessees, or
other occupants. A claim for unpaid charges which have been billed to the occupant of the premises or the
user of the service may be recovered against the owner or occupant in a civil action in any court of
competent jurisdiction or in the discretion of the City Administrator may be certified to the County Auditor
to be collected with taxes against the premises so served or reported to a collection agency. Money paid to
the County Auditor on the account shall belong to the City and shall be remitted to the City Administrator
by the County Auditor in the manner provided by law for the payment of other money belonging to the
City.
Subd. 8. Disposition of Revenues. All revenues derived from charges imposed under this Section shall be
respectively credited to the City Stormwater Enterprise Fund, unless otherwise designated by City Council
resolution.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.11 (Ordinance 461A Lake Country Power Franchise Agreement) 52
Section 11.11
ORDINANCE NO. 461A
An Ordinance Granting To Lake Country Power A Nonexclusive Franchise To Construct, Operate, Repair
And Maintain In The City Of Cloquet, Minnesota, An Electric Distribution System And Transmission Lines,
Including Necessary Poles, Lines, Fixtures And Appurtenances, For The Furnishing Of Electric Energy To
The City, Its Inhabitants, And Others, And To Use The Public Ways And Public Grounds Of The City For
Such Purposes; And Prescribing Certain Terms And Conditions Thereof.
SECTION 1. FINDINGS.
1.1 In Ordinance Number 206A and Section 11.9 of the City Code, the City has required each Utility
Service Provider to obtain and maintain a franchise with the City and to provide consideration to the
general fund of the City for the rights afforded to it in the franchise.
1.2 In the interest of fairness and comparable treatment, the City finds it necessary and desirable to
formalize its rules and regulations and to implement the terms of Ordinance Number 430A with respect to
the City of Cloquet, and, to the extent feasible and practicable, to all other Utility Service Providers.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this Ordinance, the following capitalized terms listed in
alphabetical order shall have the following meanings:
City. The City of Cloquet, County of Carlton, State of Minnesota and the corporate limits thereof on the
Effective Date and as they may be adjusted from to time to time hereafter.
City Utility System. Facilities used for providing public utility service owned or operated by the City or
agency thereof, including sewer, storm sewer, water service, street lighting and traffic signals.
Commission. The Minnesota Public Utilities Commission, or any successor agency or agencies, including
an agency of the federal government, which preempts all or part of the authority to regulate electric retail
rates now vested in the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.
Company. Lake Country Power, a Minnesota Corporation, its successors and assigns including all
successors or assignees that own or operate any part or parts of the Electric Facilities subject to this
Franchise.
Company Service Area. Those areas within the City to which the Company has been assigned the right to
provide electric service, as in effect on the Effective Date or as may be hereafter revised.
Council. The City Council of the City of Cloquet as from time to time constituted.
Effective Date. The effective date of this Ordinance.
Electric Facilities. Electric transmission and distribution substations, towers, poles, lines, guys, anchors,
conduits, fixtures, and necessary appurtenances owned or operated by the Company for the purpose of
providing electric energy for public or private use.
Extension Rules. The rules adopted from time to time by the Company governing its extension of
Electrical Facilities.
Franchise. The grant of rights made by the City to the Company in this Ordinance, subject to its terms and
conditions.
Notice. A writing served by any party or parties on any other party or parties at the following addresses:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.11 (Ordinance 461A Lake Country Power Franchise Agreement) 53
If to the City:
City of Cloquet
1307 Cloquet Avenue
Cloquet, MN 55720
Attn: City Administrator
If to the Company:
Lake Country Power
2810 Elida Drive
Grand Rapids, MN 55744
Attn: General Manager
Any party may change its respective address for the purpose of this Ordinance by written notice to the other parties.
Person. A natural person or any partnership, joint venture, corporation, cooperative, limited liability
company or any public corporation, political subdivision or agency of the State or any other legal entity
that may be created by law.
Public Ground. All real property owned by or dedicated to the City with respect to which the City holds
the legal right or title to grant or withhold easement, leasehold or occupancy rights or servitudes.
Public Way. Any street, alley and other public rights-of-way within the City.
Utility. Transmitting, furnishing, transporting, distributing, delivering, selling, receiving, importing,
manufacturing, or causing to be produced, transmitted, furnished, transported, delivered, sold, received,
imported, or manufactured, electric energy, natural gas, mixed gas, heat, light, power, and services
provided through a cable communication system.
Utility Service Provider. Any Person who performs any one or more of the activities of a Utility to or for
the public or to or for any one or more persons within the corporate limits of the City and may, as
contemplated herein, be the ultimate user or consumer of the Utility service provided.
SECTION 3. THE FRANCHISE.
3.1. Grant of Franchise. The City hereby grants the Company, for a period of twenty (20) years from
the date this Ordinance is passed and approved by the City, the right to transmit and furnish electric energy
for any public or private use within and through the Company Service Area. For these purposes, the
Company may construct, operate, repair and maintain Electric Facilities in, on, over, under and across the
Public Ways and Public Grounds within the Company Service Area, subject to the provisions of this
Ordinance. The Company may do all reasonable things necessary or customary to accomplish these
purposes, subject however, to all applicable design and safety codes, the provisions of this Ordinance,
zoning ordinances, other applicable ordinances, permit procedures and the customary and necessary
practices of the City.
3.2 Not Exclusive. This Franchise is not exclusive.
3.3. Effective Date. This Franchise shall be in force and effect from and after the passage of this
Ordinance and publication as required by law and upon the Company’s duly authorized acceptance below
as executed within thirty (30) days after passage and publication of this Ordinance or any amendment
thereto.
3.4. Continuation of Franchise. If the City and Company are unable to agree on the terms of a new
Franchise by the time this Franchise expires, this Franchise will remain in effect until a new Franchise is
agreed upon, or until ninety (90) days after the City or the Company serves written notice to the other party
of its intention to allow the Franchise to expire subject to the parties agreement on new terms and
conditions.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.11 (Ordinance 461A Lake Country Power Franchise Agreement) 54
SECTION 4. LOCATIONS; CONSTRUCTION; OTHER REGULATIONS.
4.1. General. Electric Facilities shall be located, constructed and maintained by the Company: (i) in
as safe and secure a condition or manner as reasonably possible, (ii) so as not to interfere with the safety
and convenience of ordinary travel along and over Public Ways, and (iii) so as not to disrupt or interfere
with the normal use or operation of any Public Ways, Public Ground or the City Utility System. Electric
Facilities to be located on Public Ground must be approved as determined by the City in its sole discretion.
The Company's construction, reconstruction, operation, repair, maintenance, location and relocation of
Electric Facilities shall be subject to permits if required by separate ordinance and to other reasonable
regulations of the City to the extent not inconsistent with the terms of this Ordinance and such other
regulations of the City consistent with authority granted the City to manage its Public Ways and Public
Grounds under state law, to the extent not inconsistent with a specific term of this Ordinance.
4.2. Construction; Maintenance; Repairs. Whenever the Company desires to open or disturb any
Public Way or Public Ground for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, or repairing Electric Facilities,
it shall give the City reasonable advance Notice, but not less than ten (10) business days, by filing a written
Notice with the City Administrator and City Engineer. In any case, the Company shall not commence such
work before obtaining any applicable permit for which the City may impose a reasonable fee, or other
appropriate written consent from the City. The Company shall not, during the progress of the work,
endanger or unnecessarily obstruct the passage of traffic or the normal and customary use of the Public
Ways and Public Ground. During the progress of such work, the Company shall keep the affected Public
Ways or Public Ground guarded in order to avoid accidents to persons or property. All work performed by
the Company shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules, and regulations.
4.3 Emergencies. The requirements for obtaining permits from the City pursuant to Section 5.2 shall
not apply if (i) an emergency exists requiring the immediate repair of Electric Facilities and (ii) the
Company gives telephone notice to the City before, if reasonably possible, commencement of the
emergency repair. Within two (2) business days after commencing the repair, the Company shall apply for
any required permits and pay any required fees.
4.4. Restoration. Following the completion of any work, the Company shall promptly and diligently
restore the affected Public Ways and/or Public Ground to as good a condition as before the work
commenced. If the Company fails to promptly restore such Public Ways and/or Public Ground within ten
(10) days of Notice by the City, the City may engage an independent contractor at the expense of the
Company to perform the restoration of the Public Ways and/or Public Ground as required under this
Section. The Company shall pay to the City upon demand the cost to the City of affecting such restoration
including the City’s administrative expenses and overhead.
4.5. Avoidance of Damage. The Company must take reasonable measures to prevent the Electric
Facilities from causing damage to persons or property. The Company must take reasonable measures to
protect the Electric Facilities from damage that could be inflicted on the Electric Facilities by persons,
property, or the elements. The Company must take protective measures when the City performs work near
the Electric Facilities, if given reasonable Notice by the City of such work prior to its commencement.
4.6. Field Locations. The Company shall provide field locations for all its underground Electric
Facilities when requested by the City within a reasonable period of time. The period of time will be
deemed reasonable if it meets the requirements of the one call excavation notice system as now provided in
Minnesota Statutes, chapter 216D (commonly known as of the Effective Date as the “Gopher State One
Call” system).
4.7. Shared Use of Poles; Street Lights. If the City desires to place facilities on the Company’s
poles, the City shall enter into a License Agreement for Pole Attachment Rental with the Company
containing terms and conditions substantially similar to those contained in other such Agreements that the
Company has with other governmental entities.
4.8. Vegetation Control. Subject to such procedures, regulation and supervision as the Council may
establish, the Company may, at its cost, trim all trees and shrubs in the Public Ways located within the
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.11 (Ordinance 461A Lake Country Power Franchise Agreement) 55
Company Service Area to the extent the Company finds it necessary to avoid interference with the proper
construction, operation, repair and maintenance of any of the Company’s Electric Facilities installed or
maintained hereunder provided that Company shall hold the City harmless from any liability arising
therefrom, and subject to permit or other reasonable regulation by the City.
4.9. Notice of City Improvements. The City will give the Company reasonable advance Notice of
plans for improvements to Public Ways and Public Ground in the Company Service Area where the City
has reason to believe that the Company’s Electric Facilities may affect or be affected by such
improvements. The Notice will contain: (i) the nature and character of the improvements, (ii) the Public
Ways and/or Public Ground upon which the improvements are to be made, (iii) the extent of the
improvements, (iv) the time when the City will start the work, and (v) if more than one Public Way or
parcel of Public Ground is involved, the order in which the work is to proceed.
4.10 Acquisition. The City shall have the right to purchase or otherwise acquire the Company’s
Electric Facilities or the Company Service Area, or portion(s) thereof, at any time by way of eminent
domain under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 117 or under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 216B, in either case,
as such statutes or amendments to such are in effect on the date the City commences such purchase or
acquisition. In that event, the pleading commencing the acquisition proceeding by the City shall be noticed
to the Company for it to make any adjustments to its long-range planning for facilities and service for the
area affected by the proceeding. Any damages to the Company as a result of such proceeding shall be
determined as of the commencement of such proceeding. The Company shall continue to operate the
Electric Facilities at the City's sufferance only until such acquisition is completed. The expiration or
termination of this Franchise as hereinbefore provided shall not, by itself, be an independent basis of any
claim by the Company against the City.
SECTION 5. ELECTRIC FACILITIES RELOCATION.
5.1. Relocation. In the event the City reasonably determines that it is necessary for the Company to
move any part of its Electric Facilities because the City has determined to change, move or improve its
Public Ways or that the Electric Facilities have become or will become a substantial impairment to the
existing or imminent public use of Public Ground, upon reasonable Notice by the City to the Company,
then the Company will move its Electric Facilities at its sole cost. The City shall consider reasonable
alternatives in designing its public works projects so as not to arbitrarily cause the Company unreasonable
additional expense in exercising its authority under this Section 5.1. This Section 5.1 shall not constitute a
taking by the City nor be construed as a waiver or modification of any easement or prescriptive rights
acquired by the Company independent of and without reliance by the Company on this Franchise.
5.2. No Release of Liability. Nothing contained herein shall relieve any third party from liability
arising out of their failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring the Company’s Electric Facilities
while performing any work connected with grading, regarding or changing the line of any Public Way or
with any construction on or adjacent to any Public Way; provided, however, this Section 5.2 shall not limit
the City’s rights to indemnification under Section 6.1 nor shall the City in any way be liable to the
Company for claims arising from the negligence of any third party.
SECTION 6. INDEMNIFICATION.
6.1. Indemnification. If at any time any claim of any kind is made against the City for injury to
persons or property arising from the acts or failure to act by the Company, its agents, servants, or
employees in connection with the operations of the Company under and pursuant to this Franchise, the
Company shall fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its agents, servants or employees from
any and all such claims, including, but not limited to, reimbursement of any reasonable attorneys fees and
costs and expenses the City may incur in handling, denying, or defending such claims. The Company’s
obligation to indemnify the City shall not extend to any injury to persons or property caused by the
negligent act or failure to act by the City or any actions taken by the Company pursuant to directions of the
City if performed within the scope of the City’s directions without negligence by the Company. The City
shall determine who will defend any such claims arising under this Section 6.1 and the Company will
thereafter have complete control of such litigation; provided, however, the Company may not settle any
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.11 (Ordinance 461A Lake Country Power Franchise Agreement) 56
such claims without the prior approval of the City, which approval will not be unreasonably withheld. This
Section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the City; and
the Company, in defending any action shall be entitled to assert every defense or immunity that the City
could itself assert in its own behalf. The Company’s obligations under this Section shall survive the
expiration, amendment, or termination of this Ordinance.
6.2. Insurance. Before the Effective Date, the Company shall furnish the City a summary of
insurance, if any, carried by the Company, or of its self-insured status, in either case demonstrating
adequate protection to the City from any and all obligations, liabilities, or claims of any nature whatsoever,
growing out of the operation, construction, and maintenance of its Electric Facilities within the City. The
Company shall maintain such insurance coverage at all times during this Franchise.
6.3. Compliance with Laws; Hazardous Substances. In its operation under this Ordinance, the
Company shall observe all federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and orders with respect to the
transmission, distribution, transformation or furnishing of electric energy and the handling of materials,
substances and wastes deemed toxic or hazardous to health, natural resources or the environment
(collectively, “Hazardous Substances”). The Company shall remove or remediate any Hazardous
Substances located on, in or surrounding its Electric Facilities or caused to be located on, in or surrounding
the Public Ways and Public Grounds or elsewhere in the City in compliance with all applicable laws,
regulations and lawful government orders, and pay or cause to be paid all costs associated therewith. The
indemnification terms and conditions of Section 6.1 shall apply to all claims made against the City by any
Person, including any governmental agency, who or which asserts any right to costs, damages or other
relief based upon the terms and conditions imposed upon the Company under this Section 6.3 or which
arise from or are related to the Company’s acts or failure to act in compliance with any law, rule, regulation
or lawful order governing Hazardous Substances.
SECTION 7. VACATION OF PUBLIC WAYS. The City will consult with the Company at least four (4) weeks
prior to its action on any proposed vacation of a Public Way. Except where ordered pursuant to Section 5.1, the
vacation of any Public Way after the installation of Electric Facilities shall not operate to deprive the Company of its
rights to operate and maintain such Electric Facilities until the reasonable cost of relocating the same and the loss
and expense resulting from such relocation are first paid to the Company. However, in no case shall the City be
liable to the Company for failure to specifically preserve a Public Way in the exercise of its authority under
Minnesota Statutes, Section 160.29.
SECTION 8. ABANDONED FACILITIES. The Company shall comply with City ordinances and Minnesota
Statutes, Section 216D.01 et seq., as they may be amended from time to time. The Company shall maintain records
describing the exact location of all abandoned and retired Facilities within the City, produce such records at the
City’s request and comply with the location requirements of Section 216D.04 with respect to all Electric Facilities,
including abandoned and retired Electric Facilities.
SECTION 9. RATES AND SERVICE. The electric service provided and the rates charged by the Company for
electric service, as of the Effective Date, may be subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission as provided in
Minnesota Statutes, chapter 216B. In the event the Company shall determine after the Effective Date to change its
rates or terms and conditions of electric service, the Company shall provide reasonable advance Notice of such
proposed action to the City.
SECTION 10. FRANCHISE FEE.
10.1. Authority. The City reserves all rights under Minnesota Statutes, Sections 216B.36 and 301B.01
or other law to require a franchise fee at any time during the term of, and in consideration for, this
Franchise. The franchise fee may be expressed (i) as a specified charge per measurable unit of electricity
being provided, transported, transmitted, sold, furnished, delivered, or received within the City, or (ii) as a
percentage of the Gross Revenues received by the Company for its operations within the City, or (iii) a flat
fee per customer based on service to retail customers within the City or on some other similar basis, or (iv)
in such other manner or fashion as the City may determine. The method of imposing the franchise fee may
differ by customer class, by type of Utility, by particular circumstances of a Utility Service Provider, or by
other relevant factor, and may combine the methods described in (i) through (iv) above.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.11 (Ordinance 461A Lake Country Power Franchise Agreement) 57
10.2. Payment of Fee. The franchise fee shall be payable not less often than quarterly and shall be
based on the complete billing month for which payment is due. The payment shall be due forty-five (45)
days after the end of the month for which the payment is due. Each payment shall be accompanied by a
brief report showing the basis for the computation of the payment and such other relevant facts to support
the computation as may be requested by the City from time to time. The Company may, in its sole
discretion, impose a surcharge equivalent to the franchise fee in its rates for electric service. The Company
shall pay the City the franchise fee based upon the prevailing rate and as billed to the customer, but subject
to subsequent adjustment in either of the following events: (i) if any amount so billed subsequently
becomes uncollectible after reasonable efforts of collection by the Company or (ii) if the Company shall,
after any said billings, retroactively reduce its rates or costs to its retail electric customers so that a refund is
due from the Company of an amount previously paid or incurred by the retail electric customers.
10.3. No Waiver or Release. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the
payment made is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of the payment be construed as a
release of any claim that the City may have for further sums payable under the provisions of this
Ordinance. All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and re-computation by the City. The Company
agrees to make all records necessary to audit the Company’s calculation of any payment available for
inspection by the City or its designated representative at reasonable times.
10.4. Separate Ordinance. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, including the provisions of 10.1
herein, the franchise fee may be changed by the City from time to time by separate ordinance; provided,
however, such changes shall not occur more often than once in any calendar year and shall be effective
upon the earlier of (1) approval by the Commission authorizing the Company to incorporate such fee within
its rate schedule, or (2) sixty (60) days after the Company has provided timely notice to the Commission of
the ordinance adopting the change. Notice of any proposed change must be given to all electrical service
providers and shall be applied equally and shall be given to the Company(s) not later than the effective date
of the ordinance adopting the change.
SECTION 11. DEFAULTS. If the Company shall be in default in the performance of any of the material terms
and conditions of this Ordinance, and shall continue in default for more than thirty (30) days (or fails to initiate the
cure of the default within said period and diligently pursue said cure, if the cure of the default cannot reasonably be
accomplished within said 30 days) after receiving Notice from the City of such default, the City may elect to cure
such default and charge the Company for the costs thereof.
SECTION 12. AMENDMENT PROCEDURE. The City reserves the right to amend this Franchise by ordinance.
The Company’s rights hereunder are subject to the police power of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances
necessary to the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and this Franchise may be amended by the City as deemed
necessary or appropriate in the exercise of such power.
SECTION 13. GENERAL PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE.
13.1. Governing Law. This Franchise is granted and is intended to be performed in the State of
Minnesota and shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the laws of the State of Minnesota. The
Company shall be subject to personal jurisdiction in the State of Minnesota. All actions related to this
Ordinance or its enforcement shall be venued in the District Court of the State of Minnesota within which
venue the City is located.
13.2. Right to Repeal. If this Franchise, having become final and operative as herein provided, shall be
declared in any part illegal or void, then the City, in its sole discretion, may repeal the entire or any portion
of this Ordinance. If any material portion of this Ordinance is declared void or illegal, then this Ordinance
shall be void in its entirety.
13.3. Limitation on Applicability. This Ordinance constitutes a franchise between the City and the
Company as the only parties and no provision of this Franchise shall in any way inure to the benefit of any
third person (including the public at large) so as to constitute any such person as a third party beneficiary of
the agreement or of any one or more of the terms hereof, or otherwise give rise to any cause of action in
any person not a party hereto.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 11 - UTILITIES
Section 11.11 (Ordinance 461A Lake Country Power Franchise Agreement) 58
13.4. Assignment. The Company may assign this Franchise without the prior approval of, but upon not
less than thirty (30) days’ prior Notice to, the City. Such Notice shall include the identity of and contact
information for, the assignee and the statement of the assignee's plans and intentions for the operation of
the Electric Facilities under this Franchise.
SECTION 14. ACCEPTANCE BY THE COMPANY.
14.1. Acceptance by the Company. The Company shall, within thirty (30) days after passage and
publication of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto, file with the City Administrator in writing its
acceptance or rejection as provided in Section 14.2. If such acceptance is not filed or if a rejection is filed
within said period, the Company, by its continuing operations, shall be deemed to have accepted the terms
and conditions of this Franchise or any amendment hereto, except with respect to such particulars as it may
successfully challenge under the procedures specified in Section 14.2.
14.2. Rejection Procedures. A rejection of this Franchise or any amendment hereto may be made by
the Company only upon the grounds that the terms and conditions hereof or of such amendment exceed the
lawful authority of the City under the Constitutions or Laws of the United States or the State of Minnesota
or are otherwise unlawful. Any rejection shall be submitted in writing to the City, stating with particularity
the points and authorities of law upon which the Company relies. If the City fails to amend this Franchise
or otherwise satisfy the Company’s objections as stated within thirty (30) days of its receipt of the
Company’s rejection, the Company shall have the right thereafter to seek appropriate judicial or
administrative relief based solely upon those provisions it has alleged are unlawful in its rejection notice. If
the Company fails to initiate such legal action within thirty (30) days from the expiration of the
aforementioned thirty (30) day period provided for the City’s amendment or cure, the Company shall be
deemed to have waived its objections and to have accepted the terms of this Franchise or any amendment
hereto.
SECTION 15. REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
herewith are repealed.
SECTION 16. EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage
and publication in accordance with law.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 12
FINANCING AND ASSESSMENT OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Effective Date: March 7, 2006
Amendments: 06-05-07 340A /
12.2.01. General Policy. It shall be the policy of the City to finance certain street and utility improvements by the
methods prescribed in this Section. The apportionment of the cost between benefited property and the City at large
and the method of levying assessments prescribed in those sections shall be followed in each case unless the
Council, by resolution, finds that because of special circumstances, as provided for by Statute, a different policy
shall be necessary or desirable. Any local improvement described in Minn. Stat., Chapter 429 and not specifically
addressed by this Section shall be financed as the Council determines to be most feasible and equitable in each case.
12.2.02. Applicable State Statutes. All procedures for the construction and financing of local improvements,
when at least part of the cost shall be defrayed by special assessments against benefited property, shall conform with
the applicable regulations of this Section and Minn. Stat., Chapter 429 and the definitions as set forth in the statutes.
12.2.03. Method of Initiation.
Subd. 1. Petition. No petition for construction of sidewalks, curb and gutter, sanitary sewer and water or
permanent street surfacing filed in compliance with State law shall be required to be accepted or acted upon
by the Council unless it shall be filed with the City Administrator on or before August 1 of the year prior to
the year of requested construction.
Subd. 2. Initiation Of Improvements Without Petitions. The City may initiate improvements covered
by this Section without first receiving a petition from affected property owners; however, in order to do so,
a 6/7ths vote of the City Council shall be required.
12.2.04. Establishment Of Assessment Districts For Street Improvements. For the purpose of determining
special assessments associated with various street improvements covered by this Section, the City shall be divided
into two separate assessment districts as specified in the following Subdivisions.
Subd. 1. Assessment District #1. Assessment District #1 for the purpose of this Section shall be the
corporate limits of the City of Cloquet prior to the Knife Falls Township consolidation of 1975. It shall
also include those properties of the consolidated Knife Falls area to which City sanitary sewer and water
utilities have been extended to within four hundred feet.
Subd. 2. Assessment District #2. Assessment District #2 shall be that part of the Knife Falls Township
which was consolidated with the City of Cloquet in 1975 and to which City sanitary sewer and water
utilities have not been extended to within four hundred feet. (As a condition of the 1975 consolidation
agreement, this area currently pays ¼ of the City's property tax rate until such time that these utilities are
extended to within four hundred feet). Once City sanitary sewer and water utilities are extended to
properties within Assessment District #2, they shall then be reclassified into Assessment District #1 and
any future special assessment made in conjunction with improvements covered by this Section shall follow
the applicable regulations for Assessment District #1.
12.2.05. Classification of Street Improvement Projects. Street improvement projects shall be divided into two
classifications as specified in the following subdivisions and to property specially served by the improvement. The
project classification shall depend on the designation of the particular street as either part of Cloquet's Municipal
State Aid (MSA) street system or part of Cloquet's local street system.
Subd. 1. Construction or Reconstruction of MSA Routes. MSA routes shall refer to those City streets,
under the ownership and jurisdiction of Cloquet, which have been specifically designated, by resolution of
the City Council, in accordance with the "Rules and Regulations for State Aid Operations" under Minn.
Stat., Chapters 161 and 162.
Subd. 2. Construction or Reconstruction of Non-MSA Routes. Non-MSA routes shall refer to those
City streets, under the ownership and jurisdiction of Cloquet, which have not been specifically designated
MSA routes in accordance with Subdivision #1 above.
Section 12.2 1
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 12
FINANCING AND ASSESSMENT OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
12.2.06. Improvement or Reconstruction of MSA Routes.
Subd. 1. In General. The regulations and requirements of this Section shall apply to the improvement or
reconstruction of all MSA routes as designated by the City Council and established for public travel.
Subd. 2. Curb and Gutter. When curb and gutter shall be installed in either new construction or
reconstruction, 50% of its cost shall be assessed to the adjacent property on the basis of frontage.
Subd. 3. Sidewalks. The cost of sidewalk construction or reconstruction shall be paid for by the City at
the time the entire street is constructed to State Aid standards with the use of State Aid funds. The cost of
any sidewalk improvements, whether construction or reconstruction, not associated with a State Aid street
project, shall be assessed 100% against the adjacent property on the basis of frontage.
Subd. 4. Pavement. When a street shall be paved or repaved, the abutting property shall be assessed on
the basis of frontage, for the cost of a ten foot wide strip of bituminous surface constructed to a three inch
thickness. The cost of the pavement in excess of the assessed twenty foot width shall be paid for by the
City. If the street shall be paved with concrete or to standards higher than those the City would use for a
typical residential street, all costs in excess of the three inch bituminous design shall be paid for by the
City.
Subd. 5. Grading and Base Construction. All grading and gravel base construction or reconstruction
costs shall be paid for by the City.
Subd. 6. Storm Sewers. All storm sewer construction or reconstruction costs shall be paid for by the City.
Subd. 7. Project Development, Design and Administrative Fees. The City may assess the cost of
applicable project development, design and administrative fees associated with any assessed improvements.
Subd. 8. Miscellaneous Construction Costs. All miscellaneous street construction costs not specifically
addressed by this Section shall be paid for by the City
Subd. 9. Corner Lots. In any assessment made on the basis of frontage for curbs, sidewalks and
pavement installations, where these improvements are installed on both sides of a platted corner lot, these
corner lots shall be assessed for the frontage of their short side plus 1/3rd the frontage of their long side.
This adjustment shall not apply to lots, who because of their size could be subdivided into two or more
buildable lots.
Subd. 10. Double Frontage Lots. In the case of double frontage lots where assessable street
improvements are made along both the front and backyards of a single lot, double-frontage lots shall be
assessed for one side only. This adjustment shall not apply to lots who’s backyards front on an alley, or to
lots who because of their size and lot depth could be subdivided into two separate buildable lots.
Subd. 11. Adjusted Frontage - Irregular Shaped Lots. When the amount of an assessment shall be
determined by frontage, in the case of pie-shaped or irregular shaped lots, an equivalent assessable front
footage shall be determined by dividing the square footage of the lot by the general lot depth of the
subdivision.
Subd. 12. Special Cases. In special cases, the City Council may, by resolution, exempt certain properties
from special assessments if the property shall be considered unsuitable for residential, commercial or
industrial development or would otherwise not be benefited or improved by the installation of sanitary
sewer or water utilities. As an alternative to assessing the cost of certain utility extensions on the basis of
frontage, the City Council may elect to assess these improvements on a per connection or on a per lot basis.
Furthermore, as an alternative to assessing the cost of certain utility extensions at the time of construction,
the City Council may elect to establish utility connection fees to be charged to certain properties at their
time of connection.
Section 12.2 2
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 12
FINANCING AND ASSESSMENT OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Subd. 13. Federal, State And County Aid Use. If the City shall receive financial assistance from the
federal government, the State or the County to defray a portion of the cost of a particular street
improvement, the aid shall be used first to reduce the share of the project cost which would be met from
general City funds according to the assessment formulas contained in this Section. If such aid shall be
more than the amount of the improvement cost to be borne by the City, the remainder of the aid so received
shall be credited to the City's Permanent Improvement Fund.
Subd. 14. Minimum Project Assessable Cost. If a portion of a particular improvement shall be financed
through special assessments as shall be provided for by this Section, under no circumstances shall the total
project assessable cost be less than twenty percent (20%) of the total improvement cost. If in the use of the
formulas as established by this Section, the total assessable cost for a particular improvement shall be less
than twenty percent, the front foot assessment for each benefited parcel shall be adjusted so that a minimum
of twenty percent of the total project cost shall be assessed.
12.2.07. Improvement or Reconstruction of Non-MSA Routes.
Subd. 1. In General. The regulations and requirements of this Section shall apply to the improvement or
reconstruction of all Non-MSA routes as designated by the City Council and established for public travel.
Subd. 2. Curb and Gutter. When curb and gutter shall be installed in either new construction or
reconstruction, in Assessment District #1, 50% of its cost shall be assessed to the adjacent property on the
basis of frontage. In Assessment District #2, 100% of its cost shall be assessed to the adjacent property on
the basis of frontage.
Subd. 3. Sidewalks. The cost of sidewalk construction or reconstruction shall be assessed 100% against
the adjacent property on the basis of frontage.
Subd. 4. Pavement. When a street shall be paved or repaved, the abutting property shall be assessed on
the basis of frontage. In Assessment District #1, the abutting property shall be assessed for the cost of a ten
foot wide strip of bituminous surface constructed to a three inch thickness. In Assessment District #2, the
abutting property shall be assessed for the cost of a twelve foot wide strip of bituminous surface
constructed to a three inch thickness. The cost of the pavement in excess of the assessed widths shall be
paid for by the City. If the street shall be paved with concrete or to standards higher than those the City
would use for a typical residential street, all costs in excess of the three inch bituminous design shall be
paid for by the City.
Subd. 5. Grading and Base Construction. All grading and gravel base construction or reconstruction costs
shall be paid for by the City.
Subd. 6. Storm Sewers. All storm sewer construction or reconstruction costs shall be paid for by the City.
Subd. 7. Driveway Culverts. All required driveway culverts for newly constructed driveways or new
homes shall be furnished, installed and paid for by either the developer or property owner.
Subd. 8. Alleys. In the case of alley construction or reconstruction, the cost of all grading and gravel base
construction shall be paid for by the City. When an alley shall be paved, the abutting property shall be
assessed, on the basis of frontage, for the full width of a bituminous surface constructed to a three inch
thickness.
Subd. 9. Bituminous Overlays In Assessment District #1. In Assessment District #1, the cost of all
bituminous pavement overlays on existing paved streets shall be paid for by the City.
Section 12.2 3
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 12
FINANCING AND ASSESSMENT OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Subd. 10. Bituminous Overlays In Assessment District #2. In Assessment District #2, the cost of all
bituminous overlays on existing paved streets shall be assessed, on the basis of frontage, for a twelve foot
wide strip of bituminous surface constructed to a one and one-half inch thickness. The cost of the
pavement overlay in excess of the assessed twenty-four foot width shall be paid for by the City. For the
purpose of determining the assessable cost of the twelve foot wide strip, the cost of any tack coat material,
if applicable, shall be included. For the purpose of the assessment of bituminous overlays within
Assessment District #2, the City shall establish a maximum assessed frontage of 200 feet for large
unplatted property owned by a single owner. However, if the property has been subdivided or platted into
smaller individual lots conforming to applicable zoning requirements and all of the lots exist under single
ownership, the 200 foot maximum assessment shall not apply and the full frontage shall be assessed.
Subd. 11. Project Development, Design and Administrative Fees. The City may assess the cost of
applicable project development, design and administrative fees associated with any assessed improvements.
Subd. 12. Miscellaneous Construction Costs. All miscellaneous street construction costs not specifically
addressed by this Section shall be paid for by the City.
Subd. 13. Corner Lots. In any assessment made on the basis of frontage for curbs, sidewalks and
pavement installations, where these improvements are installed on both sides of a platted corner lot, these
corner lots shall be assessed for the frontage of their short side plus 1/3rd the frontage of their long side.
This adjustment shall not apply to lots, who because of their size could be subdivided into two or more
buildable lots.
Subd. 14. Double Frontage Lots. In the case of double frontage lots where assessable street
improvements are made along both the front and backyards of a single lot, double-frontage lots shall be
assessed for one side only. This adjustment shall not apply to lots whose backyards front on an alley, or to
lots who because of their size and lot depth could be subdivided into two separate buildable lots.
Subd. 15. Adjusted Frontage - Irregular Shaped Lots. When the amount of an assessment shall be
determined by frontage, in the case of pie-shaped or irregular shaped lots, an equivalent assessable front
footage shall be determined by dividing the square footage of the lot by the general lot depth of the
subdivision.
Subd. 16. Special Cases. In special cases, the City Council may, by resolution, exempt certain properties
from special assessments if the property shall be considered unsuitable for residential, commercial or
industrial development or would otherwise not be benefited or improved by the installation of sanitary
sewer or water utilities. As an alternative to assessing the cost of certain utility extensions on the basis of
frontage, the City Council may elect to assess these improvements on a per connection or on a per lot basis.
Furthermore, as an alternative to assessing the cost of certain utility extensions at the time of construction,
the City Council may elect to establish utility connection fees to be charged to certain properties at their
time of connection.
Subd. 17. Federal, State And County Aid Use. If the City shall receive financial assistance from the
federal government, the State or the County to defray a portion of the cost of a particular street
improvement, the aid shall be used first to reduce the share of the project cost which would be met from
general City funds according to the assessment formulas contained in this Section. If such aid shall be
more than the amount of the improvement cost to be borne by the City, the remainder of the aid so received
shall be credited to the City's Permanent Improvement Fund.
Subd. 18. Minimum Project Assessable Cost. If a portion of a particular improvement shall be financed
through special assessments as shall be provided for by this Section, under no circumstances shall the total
project assessable cost be less than twenty percent (20%) of the total improvement cost. If in the use of the
formulas as established by this Section, the total assessable cost for a particular improvement shall be less
than twenty percent, the front foot assessment for each benefited parcel shall be adjusted so that a minimum
of twenty percent of the total project cost shall be assessed.
Section 12.2 4
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 12
FINANCING AND ASSESSMENT OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
12.2.08. Establishment and Construction of Streets Within Newly Established Subdivisions.
Subd. 1. In General. The regulations and requirements of this Section shall apply to all street and
infrastructure improvements within new subdivisions, which shall be platted and formally accepted by the
City after the effective date of this ordinance and shall require that developers finance and complete certain
minimum improvements prior to acceptance by the City.
Subd. 2. Developer’s Agreement Required. As part of the subdivision approval process, the owner’s
and developers of all new subdivisions shall enter into a written Developer’s Agreement with the City,
which will outline the conditions of approval of the proposed subdivision and minimum improvements to
be completed prior to final acceptance of any and all infrastructure improvements related to the new
development. Prior to the execution of the Developer’s Agreement, the final subdivision plat cannot be
recorded with the County Recorders Office.
Subd. 3. Storm Water Drainage and Erosion Control Plans. Prior to the acceptance of any newly
dedicated streets within a new subdivision, the developers shall complete and pay for the cost of all
required grading to provide for necessary storm water runoff in accordance with a written plan approved by
the City. This shall include the furnishing and installation of any storm water treatment or detention ponds,
necessary culverts and storm sewer related systems. Prior to the commencement of any site construction
that would disturb more than one acre of land, the owner and contractor shall apply for and obtain the
appropriate NPDES permits from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and provide a copy of the
approved permits to the City. All storm water drainage systems and erosion control plans shall be
developed and constructed in accordance with all other State and City rules.
Subd. 4. Street Grading and Base Construction. Prior to the acceptance of any newly dedicated streets,
the developer shall complete and pay for the cost of all required street grading and gravel base construction
in accordance with a written grading plan approved by the City.
Subd. 5. Street Signage. Prior to the acceptance of any newly dedicated streets, the developer shall
complete and pay for the cost of all required street signage in accordance with a written sign plan approved
by the City.
Subd. 6. Curb, Sidewalks and Pavement. In accordance with the Developer’s Agreement, if curbs,
sidewalks, pavement and other infrastructure improvements are not initially installed by the development,
these improvements may take place at a later date upon the filing of a valid petition by the property owners
residing within the subdivision. Upon approval of the City Council, the City will arrange for the
completion of these improvements and the assessment of benefited properties in accordance with this
Section and all other applicable State and City rules.
Subd. 7. Other Applicable Rules, Regulations and Ordinances. All development within new
subdivisions shall be in conformance with the requirements of all other applicable State and City statutes,
codes, rules regulations and/or ordinances, which are in effect at the time of development.
12.2.09. New Sanitary Sewer and Water Main Extensions.
Subd. 1. When new sanitary sewer and water mains are constructed or extended to properties previously
unserviced by these utilities, the cost of water mains not exceeding eight inches in diameter and of sanitary
sewer mains not exceeding eight inches in diameter shall be assessed 100% against abutting property on the
basis of frontage. The cost of water mains to be assessed shall include building water service lines if
furnished, hydrants, valves and other related construction expenses. The cost of the sanitary sewer main to
be assessed shall include all manholes, building sewer service lines and other related construction expenses.
Assessments for both water and sanitary sewer extensions may also include related engineering design and
construction costs.
Section 12.2 5
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 12
FINANCING AND ASSESSMENT OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Subd. 2. Intersections. In the case of new sanitary sewer and water main extensions, as covered under
Subdivision 1 above, the cost of water and sewer improvements in street intersections shall be included as
part of the total project cost in determining the assessable costs.
Subd. 3. New Sanitary Sewer Lift Station Installations. When a new sanitary sewer lift station shall be
constructed to service an area previously unserviced by sanitary sewer the cost of the lift station shall be
assessed against the property actually benefited by the lift station.
Subd. 4. Corner Lots. In any assessment made on the basis of frontage for sanitary sewer and water
extensions, where these improvements are installed on both sides of a platted corner lot, these corner lots
shall be assessed for the frontage of their short side only or an equivalent front footage determined by
dividing the square footage of the lot by the general lot depth of the subdivision where other rules do not
apply. In no case shall the assessed frontage for corner lots be less than the average assessed frontage for
other properties within the project.
Subd. 5. Double Frontage Lots. In the case of double frontage lots where assessable utility extension
improvements are made along both the front and backyards of a single lot, double-frontage lots shall be
assessed for one side only. This adjustment shall not apply to lots whose backyards front on an alley, or to
lots who because of their size and lot depth could be subdivided into two separate buildable lots.
Subd. 6. Adjusted Frontage - Irregular Shaped Lots. When the amount of an assessment shall be
determined by frontage, in the case of pie-shaped or irregular shaped lots, an equivalent assessable front
footage shall be determined by dividing the square footage of the lot by the general lot depth of the
subdivision.
Subd. 7. Project Development, Design and Administrative Fees. The City may assess the cost of
applicable project development, design and administrative fees associated with any assessed improvements.
Subd. 8. Special Cases. In special cases, the City Council may, by resolution, exempt certain properties
from special assessments if the property shall be considered unsuitable for residential, commercial or
industrial development or would otherwise not be benefited or improved by the installation of sanitary
sewer or water utilities. As an alternative to assessing the cost of certain utility extensions on the basis of
frontage, the City Council may elect to assess these improvements on a per connection or on a per lot basis.
Furthermore, as an alternative to assessing the cost of certain utility extensions at the time of construction,
the City Council may elect to establish utility connection fees to be charged to certain properties at their
time of connection.
Subd. 9. Federal, State And County Aid Use. If the City shall receive financial assistance from the
federal government, the State or the County to defray a portion of the cost of a particular utility
improvement, the aid shall be used first to reduce the share of the project cost which would be met from
general City funds according to the assessment formulas contained in this Section. If such aid shall be
more than the amount of the improvement cost to be borne by the City, the remainder of the aid so received
shall be credited to the City's Sewer and or Water Enterprise funds.
Subd. 10. Minimum Project Assessable Cost. If a portion of a particular improvement shall be financed
through special assessments as provided for by this Section, under no circumstances shall the total project
assessable cost be less than twenty percent (20%) of the total improvement cost. If in the use of the
formulas as established by this Section, the total assessable cost for a particular improvement shall be less
than twenty percent, the front foot assessment for each benefited parcel shall be adjusted so that a minimum
of twenty percent of the total project cost shall be assessed.
Section 12.2 6
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 12
FINANCING AND ASSESSMENT OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
12.2.10. Sanitary Sewer and Water Main Reconstruction Projects.
Subd. 1. When existing City owned sanitary sewer and water mains are reconstructed, replaced or
rehabilitated as a result of system age or deterioration, in areas that have already been previously serviced,
a portion of the reconstruction cost shall be assessed against benefited abutting property on the basis of
frontage. After completion of the project, the City Engineer shall recommend, and the City Council shall
adopt by resolution, a Front Foot Assessable Cost which shall apply to that project. This Front Foot
Assessable Cost shall be calculated and established in accordance with the following "Typical Design
Assessment Formula" utilizing current unit construction prices as experienced during that year. If
numerous reconstruction contracts are let during that year, average unit prices shall be calculated. In
calculating the Front Foot Assessment, 50% of the Total Construction Cost, as established by the Typical
Design Assessment Formula, shall be assessed against an Assessable Frontage of 864 feet. The Front Foot
Assessment shall then be applied to all benefited properties in accordance with other applicable rules.
Typical Design Assessment Formula
Current
Quantity Item Unit Price Total
575 LF 8" PVC Sewer @ $ = $
660 LF 6" DIP Water @ $ = $
27 LF 4' Manhole @ $ = $
2 EA 6" Valves @ $ = $
1 EA Hydrant @ $ = $
3 EA MH Castings @ $ = $
75 CY Rock Exc. @ $ = $
200 CY Gr. Bedding @ $ = $
1 EA Misc. Fittings @ $2,500 = $ 2,500
TOTAL CONSTRUCTION COST --------------------- = $
(Summation of Above)
FRONT FOOT ASSESSMENT = (TOTAL CONSTRUCTION COST x 50%) ÷ 864'
Subd. 2. Trunk Sanitary Sewer and Water Mains in Excess of Eight Inches. When trunk sanitary
sewer mains shall be constructed or replaced in excess of eight inches in diameter, or trunk water mains
shall be constructed or replaced in excess of eight inches in diameter, the abutting property shall be
assessed for only the cost of the eight-inch mains. All costs in excess of an eight-inch installation shall be
paid for by the City.
Subd. 3. Corner Lots. In any assessment made on the basis of frontage for sanitary sewer and water
reconstruction, where these improvements are installed on both sides of a platted corner lot, these corner
lots shall be assessed for the frontage of their short side only or an equivalent front footage determined by
dividing the square footage of the lot by the general lot depth of the subdivision where other rules do not
apply. In no case shall the assessed frontage for corner lots be less than the average assessed frontage for
other properties within the project.
Subd. 4. Double Frontage Lots. In the case of double frontage lots where assessable utility
reconstruction improvements are made along both the front and backyards of a single lot, double-frontage
lots shall be assessed for one side only. This adjustment shall not apply to lots who’s backyards front on an
alley, or to lots who because of their size and lot depth could be subdivided into two separate buildable lots.
Subd. 5. Sewer and Water Service Line Replacement. In the case of sewer and water main
reconstruction projects, the cost of individual water and sewer building service line replacement from the
mains to the property line shall be paid for by the City up to a maximum footage of sixty feet and all other
building service line replacement costs shall be borne by the property owner.
Section 12.2 7
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 12
FINANCING AND ASSESSMENT OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Subd. 6. Sanitary Sewer Lift Station Replacement Or Reconstruction. When an existing sanitary
sewer lift station shall be constructed or replaced as a result of system age, deterioration, or overload, the
cost of the lift station replacement shall be paid for by the City.
Subd. 7. Adjusted Frontage - Irregular Shaped Lots. When the amount of an assessment shall be
determined by frontage, in the case of pie-shaped or irregular shaped lots, an equivalent assessable front
footage shall be determined by dividing the square footage of the lot by the general lot depth of the
subdivision.
Subd. 8. Project Development, Design and Administrative Fees. The City may assess the cost of
applicable project development, design and administrative fees associated with any assessed improvements.
Subd. 9. Special Cases. In special cases, the City Council may, by resolution, exempt certain properties
from special assessments if the property shall be considered unsuitable for residential, commercial or
industrial development or would otherwise not be benefited or improved by the reconstruction of sanitary
sewer or water utilities. As an alternative to assessing the cost of certain utility reconstruction projects
extensions on the basis of frontage, the City Council may elect to assess these improvements on a per
connection or on a per lot basis.
12.2.11. Deferral of Special Assessments for Seniors and Retired, Disabled Homeowners.
Subd. 1. Legislative Authority. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 435.193, the City Council may
defer special assessments levied against the homestead property of a senior citizen or retired, disabled
homeowner for whom it would be a hardship to make the annual payments. The City Council will act on
all deferral requests once an application, as adopted by the City, has been completed.
Subd. 2. Eligibility For Deferral; Application: Any person sixty-five (65) years of age or older or
retired due to total or permanent disability may apply for a deferral of special assessments, provided the
following conditions are met:
a. Homestead: The property being assessed must be the applicant’s principal place of domicile.
The Classification of the property as homestead on the County’s tax rolls combined with the
applicant’s name being shown as owner shall be considered adequate proof that the property
is the applicant’s homestead.
b. Annual Gross Income: The annual gross income of the applicant and spouse, according to
their previous year’s federal income tax return, plus their tax exempt income, does not exceed
110% of the federal poverty line as defined for Carlton County. If no such return was made,
the City Administrator shall require the applicant to submit other pertinent information to
show that this qualification is met.
c. The average annual payment due, principal and interest for the assessments levied against the
property exceeds three percent (3%) of the applicant’s annual income as thus calculated. (i.e.
$10,000 income x 0.03 = $300).
d. The special assessments to be deferred exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000).
e. The total assets of the applicant and spouse, exclusive of the homestead, do not exceed thirty
thousand dollars ($30,000).
f. The County Assessors market value of the applicant’s homestead parcel shall not exceed one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000)
g. Parcels located within the F-R, Farm Residential, Zoning District must be five (5) acres or
less in size. Parcels located within all other zoning districts must be less than one (1) acre in
size.
Section 12.2 8
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 12
FINANCING AND ASSESSMENT OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
h. The applicant shall not have signed a petition for the improvement for which the assessment is
proposed.
i. The application, in a form prescribed by the City, shall be completed and filed annually with
the City Administrator not later than August 31 of each year. The City Administrator will
verify that the applicant meets the above conditions. Any additional forms required by the
County for recording the deferral shall also be completed.
j. Exceptional and Unusual Circumstances. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
subsection, the City Council may consider exceptional and unusual circumstances pertaining
to an applicant not covered by the above standards; but any determination shall be made in a
nondiscriminatory manner and shall not give the applicant an unreasonable preference or
advantage over other applicants.
Subd. 3. Interest on Deferred Assessments: All deferred assessments shall be subject to and charged
simple interest at the rate established by the City Council in the resolution adopting the assessment roll.
This interest shall accrue over the life of the assessment. No interest shall accrue past the date at which the
assessment would have been fully paid if not deferred.
Subd. 4. Termination of Deferral Status: It shall be the duty of the applicant, his/her heirs or legal
representative to notify the City Administrator of any changes in status which affect the eligibility for the
deferral. Special assessments deferred pursuant to the eligibility requirements set forth herein shall
terminate and become payable, together with accumulated interest, upon the occurrence of any one of the
following events:
a. Transfer of Ownership: The property is sold, transferred, subdivided or in any way conveyed
to another by the individual for whom the deferral was granted.
b. Death of Owner: The death of the owner qualified for the deferral, unless a surviving joint
tenant or tenant in common is eligible for the deferral benefit provided herein.
c. Loss of Homestead Status: The property loses its homestead status for any reason.
d. No Hardship: The City Council determines that there would be no hardship to require an
immediate or partial payment.
Subd. 5. Disability: Retirement by reason of permanent and total disability shall be deemed prima facie
to exist when the applicant presents a sworn affidavit by a licensed medical doctor attesting that the
applicant is unable to be gainfully employed because of a permanent and total disability in any occupation
for which he/she may be qualified.
Section 12.2 9
CHAPTER 13: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section Title Page
13.1.01 General Requirements .............................................................................................................1
Subd. 1 Purpose and Intent ................................................................................................1
Subd. 2 Legal Authority .....................................................................................................1
Subd. 3 Title .......................................................................................................................1
Subd. 4 Short Title .............................................................................................................1
Subd. 5 Jurisdiction ............................................................................................................1
Subd. 6 Application of Ordinance......................................................................................1
Subd. 7 Conveyance by Metes and Bounds .......................................................................2
Subd. 8 Right of Building Permit Refusal .........................................................................2
Subd. 9 Public Street Grants ..............................................................................................2
13.1.02 Variances ...................................................................................................................................2
13.1.03 Definitions ..............................................................................................................................2
13.1.04 Administrative Adjustments and Minor Subdivisions ..........................................................8
Subd. 1 General Requirements...........................................................................................8
Subd. 2 Administrative Adjustment Procedure ..................................................................9
Subd. 3 Minor Subdivision Procedure ............................................................................. 10
Subd. 4 Minor Subdivision Distribution .......................................................................... 11
Subd. 5 Planning Commission Consideration and Action on a Minor Subdivision ......... 12
Subd. 6 City Council Consideration and Action .............................................................. 12
Subd. 7 Recording ............................................................................................................ 12
13.1.05 Major Subdivisions, Sketch Plan Review ............................................................................. 13
13.1.06 Major Subdivision, Preliminary Plat .................................................................................... 13
Subd. 1 Preliminary Plat Required ................................................................................... 13
Subd. 2 Preliminary Plat Procedures ................................................................................ 13
Subd. 3 Preliminary Plat Data .......................................................................................... 15
13.1.07 Major Subdivision, Final Plat ............................................................................................... 20
Subd. 1 Final Plat Required ............................................................................................. 20
Subd. 2 Application Requirements .................................................................................. 20
Subd. 3 Final Plat Review ................................................................................................ 21
Subd. 4 Planning Commission Review ............................................................................ 21
Subd. 5 City Council Action ............................................................................................ 21
Subd. 6 Final Plat Recording ........................................................................................... 22
Subd. 7 Final Plat Data Requirements ............................................................................. 22
13.1.08 Minimum Improvements Required ...................................................................................... 23
13.1.09 Public Sites and Open Spaces ................................................................................................ 24
13.1.10 Street and Block Layout ........................................................................................................ 25
13.1.11 Minimum Widths for Streets and Alley Right of Way ........................................................ 27
13.1.12 Minimum Pavement Widths and Surface Types ................................................................. 27
13.1.13 Street Grades, Curves and Sight Distances .......................................................................... 28
CHAPTER 13: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section Title Page
13.1.14 Intersections ............................................................................................................................ 29
13.1.15 Lots ............................................................................................................................ 29
13.1.16 Utilities and Drainage ............................................................................................................ 29
Subd. 1 Water Lines ......................................................................................................... 30
Subd. 2 Sanitary Sewers .................................................................................................. 30
Subd. 3 Storm Drainage ................................................................................................... 30
Subd. 4 Extensions Not in Platted Area ........................................................................... 30
Subd. 5 Building Permit ................................................................................................... 30
Subd. 6 Design of Improvements ..................................................................................... 31
13.1.17 Other Requirements ............................................................................................................... 31
Subd. 1 Sidewalks ............................................................................................................ 31
Subd. 2 Driveways ........................................................................................................... 31
Subd. 3 Screen Planting ................................................................................................... 31
Subd. 4 Street Names ....................................................................................................... 31
Subd. 5 Street Name Signs ............................................................................................... 31
Subd. 6 Easements ........................................................................................................... 31
13.1.18 Public Utilities......................................................................................................................... 32
13.1.19 Public Improvement Installation .......................................................................................... 32
Subd. 1 Private Installation .............................................................................................. 32
Subd. 2 City Installation .................................................................................................. 33
13.1.20 Development Agreement........................................................................................................ 34
13.1.21 Construction Plans ................................................................................................................. 34
13.1.22 Maintenance of Improvements ............................................................................................. 35
13.1.23 Modifications and Exceptions ............................................................................................... 35
13.1.24 Enforcement ........................................................................................................................... 35
13.1.25 Penalty ............................................................................................................................ 35
13.1.26 Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses ............................................................................. 35
13.1.27 Separability ............................................................................................................................ 35
13.1.28 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances ......................................................................................... 35
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Effective Date: March 7, 2006
Amendments: 10-21-08 353A / 04-01-14 434A /
Section 13.1 1
13.1.01 General Requirements.
Subd. 1 Purpose and Intent: This Ordinance is enacted for the following purposes to:
Protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City;
A. Establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and
resubdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout and use of land and to ensure proper
legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land;
B. Prevent piecemeal planning of subdivisions, undesirable, disconnected patchwork of
pattern, and poor circulation of traffic;
C. Implement land subdivision in accordance with the Cloquet Comprehensive Plan and
Cloquet Zoning Ordinance;
D. Secure the rights of the public, with respect to access to public lands and waters;
E. Protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City, the value of buildings and
improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and
buildings;
F. Prevent the pollution of air, streams, and lakes; ensure the adequacy of drainage facilities;
protect underground water resources and encourage the wise use and management of
natural resources in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the City.
Subd. 2 Legal Authority. This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 1965, Section
462.358.
Subd. 3 Title. This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the Rules and
Regulations for the Platting and Subdividing of Land in the City of Cloquet, Minnesota.
Subd. 4 Short Title. Subdivision Regulations for the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 5 Jurisdiction. The regulations herein governing plats and the subdivision of land shall apply within
the corporate limits of the City as determined by plat at the time of application and the unincorporated area
within two miles of its limits; provided that where a municipality lies less than four miles from the limits of
the City of Cloquet, these regulations shall apply only to a line equidistant from the City of Cloquet and
said municipality; and provided further, that the governing body or bodies of unincorporated towns
adjacent to the City have not adopted ordinances for the regulation of subdivision of land or platting.
Copies of resolutions approving subdivision plats of land outside the City but not subject to Township
subdivision regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the town in which the land is situated.
Subd. 6 Application of Ordinance. Any plat, hereafter made, for each subdivision or each part thereof
lying within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance, shall be prepared, presented for approval and recorded as
herein prescribed. The regulations contained herein shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of
land into two or more lots, tracts or other division of land for the purpose of sale or building development,
or public dedication, whether immediate or future, including the resubdivision or replatting of land or lots.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 2
Subd. 7 Conveyance by metes and bounds. No conveyance of one or more parcels in which the land is
described by metes and bounds or by reference to an unapproved registered land survey made after the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be recorded if the parcels do not qualify for a
lot split according to Section 13.1.04, unless such parcel was a separate parcel of record or was the subject
of a written agreement to convey entered into prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter.
Whenever any subdivision or plat of land is proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of a portion
of property, and prior to an application for a building permit for a structure within a proposed subdivision is
granted, the subdivider shall apply for and receive approval of a subdivision in accordance with the
procedures of Sections 13.1.04, 13.1.05, 13.1.06 and 13.1.07 of this Ordinance.
Subd. 8 Right of Building Permit Refusal. The City Engineer and/or Building Official shall refuse
building permits and utility services to any parcel or property conveyed by metes and bounds description in
violation of this Ordinance.
Subd. 9 Public Street Grants. No grant of a public street to the City by deed shall be filed without the
approval of the Council by a resolution to that effect.
13.1.02 Variances. The City Council may grant a variance from these regulations following a finding that all of the
following conditions exist:
Subd. 1 There are special circumstances or conditions affecting said property which were not created by
the landowner.
Subd. 2 The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the
petitioner.
Subd. 3 The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other
property in the territory in which said property is situated.
In making this finding the Council shall consider the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use
of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the
probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. In granting a variance as
herein provided the Council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems desirable or necessary to the
public interest.
Subd. 4 Special Application Requirements: Application for any such variance shall be made in writing
by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for the consideration of the Planning
Commission and City Council, stating fully and clearly all facts relied upon by the petitioner, and shall be
supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data which may aid the Planning Commission and City
Council in the analysis of the proposed project. The plans for such development shall include such
covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the plan.
13.1.03 Definitions.
Subd. 1 Access. A way of approaching or entering property without trespassing upon another’s property.
Subd. 2 Access Easement. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for the purpose of
gaining access over and across a parcel to another’s property.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 3
Subd. 3 Administrative Adjustment. A line adjustment, simple lot split or lot consolidation. An
Administrative Adjustment is not a subdivision under these regulations.
Subd. 4 Alley. A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
Subd. 5 Arterial Streets and Highways. Are those designed or utilized primarily for high vehicular
speeds and/or for heavy volumes of traffic.
Subd. 6 Attorney. Attorney shall mean the City Attorney of the City of Cloquet, Minnesota.
Subd. 7 Best Management Practices (BMP’s). Erosion and sediment control and water quality
management practices that are the most effective and practicable means of controlling, preventing, and
minimizing the degradation of surface water, including; construction-phasing, minimizing the length of
time soil areas are exposed, prohibitions, and other management practices published by federal, state, or
designated area-wide planning agencies.
Subd. 8 Block. A block is the distance as measured along a street between intersecting streets from center
line to center line; and where the context required, it also means the enclosed area within the perimeter of
the streets or property lines enclosing it.
Subd. 9 Bluff. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having the following
characteristics (an area with an average slope of less than 18 % over a distance for 50’ or more shall not be
considered part of the bluff):
A. Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;
B. The slope rises at least 25’ above the ordinary high water level of the water body;
C. The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet or more above the
ordinary high water level averages 30 percent or greater; and
D. The slope must drain toward the water body.
Subd. 10 Boulevard. Boulevard shall mean the portion of the street right-of-way between the curb lines, or
boundaries of the subdivision.
Subd. 11 Building Line. A line running parallel with the bluffline, ordinary high water mark or a lot line,
whichever is applicable, at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.
Subd. 12 Build-out Plan. A subdivision or resubdivision concept plan illustrating possible future lot
layout, and road networks for oversized lots, outlots, or undeveloped land within or adjoining a preliminary
plat.
Subd. 13 Certificate of Survey. A document prepared by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor
which precisely describes area, dimensions and locations of a parcel or parcels of land.
Subd. 14 City. City of Cloquet, Minnesota.
Subd. 15 City Council. City Council of the City of Cloquet, Minnesota.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 4
Subd. 16 Collector Streets. Collector streets are those designed or utilized to carry intermediate volumes
of traffic from minor streets to arterial streets.
Subd. 17 Commission. The Planning Commission of the City of Cloquet, Minnesota.
Subd. 18 Cul-de-sac. Cul-de-sac shall mean a street with only one outlet and having a turnaround at the
end.
Subd. 19 Dead End Street. A road that does not connect to another road.
Subd. 20 Detention Facility. A natural or manmade structure, including wetlands, used for the temporary
storage of runoff and which may contain a permanent pool of water, or may be dry during times of no
runoff.
Subd. 21 Drainage Course. A drainage course is a water course or indenture for the drainage of surface
water.
Subd. 22 Drainage Easement. A right to use the land of another for a specific purpose, such as a right-ofway
for the movement of water across or under the land surface or the storage of water.
Subd. 23 Engineer. A person who is trained in or follows as a profession a branch of engineering.
Subd. 24 Erosion & Sediment Control Plan (E & S Control Plan). A written description and/or plan
indicating the number, locations, sizes, and other pertinent information about best management practice
methods designed to reduce erosion of the land surface and the deposition of sediment within a waterway.
An E&S Control Plan is required as part of a Storm Water Management Plan. Both the Storm Water
Management Plan and E&S Control Plans are used in developing the State mandated Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). An E&S Control Plan may be required for certain projects not
requiring a full Storm Water Management Plan, as outlined in this ordinance or determined necessary by
the City Engineer.
Subd. 25 Final Plat. A drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all of the requirements of the City and
Minnesota State Statutes regarding the platting of land and in a form that is recordable with the County
Recorder’s office.
Subd. 26 Financial Guarantee. A financial security posted with the City, guaranteeing compliance with
the approved final plat, construction plans, and conditions of approval set forth by the City.
Subd. 27 ISTS. Individual sewage treatment system.
Subd. 28 Lake Level. Lake level is defined as the mean vertical elevation of the lake or water course into
which a property does or will drain.
Subd. 29 Land Development. Any land disturbance activity that changes the site's runoff characteristics in
conjunction with residential, commercial, industrial or institutional construction or alteration.
Subd. 30 Local Streets. Are those which are used or will be used primarily for access to abutting
properties and which carry limited volumes of traffic.
Subd. 31 Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a principal use and its accessory buildings, together with
such open spaces as are required under Chapter 17 of the City Code and having its required frontage upon a
street or right-of-way or easement shown on a plat of survey which has been submitted, approved and
officially recorded in the manner required by this Chapter.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 5
Subd. 32 Lot Area. The total area within the lot lines of a lot.
Subd. 33 Lot Consolidation. The combining of two or more tax parcels into one tax parcel.
Subd. 34 Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and rear lot line.
Subd. 35 Lot Frontage. The portion or side of a lot that abuts public right of way.
Subd. 36 Lot Line. A property boundary line of any land parcel.
Subd. 37 Lot Line Adjustment. The relocation of a lot line between two existing tax parcels.
Subd. 38 Lot, Corner. A lot abutting upon two intersecting streets. The greater frontage of a corner lot
shall be the lot depth and the lessor frontage is the lot width.
Subd. 39 Lot, Double Frontage. A lot having frontage on two separate streets.
Subd. 40 Lot Line, Front. A lot line abutting a public right of way.
Subd. 41 Lot Line, Rear. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
Subd. 42 Lot Line, Side. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
Subd. 43 Lot of Record. A parcel of land whose legal description was established in the Carlton County
property records by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law.
Subd. 44 Lot Remnant. An irregular parcel of land that serves no purpose and is not in conformance with
City ordinances. Remnants of a lot pattern should not be called “outlots” merely because they are less than
minimum lot size. Any lot remnant must be attached to the adjoining lot.
Subd. 45 Lot Width. The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines or a lot measured at the
minimum required front setback line.
Subd. 46 Map. A drawing showing one or more parcels of land.
Subd. 47 Metes and Bounds Description. A method of property description described by the direction
and distance from an identifiable point of beginning.
Subd. 48 MN/DNR. Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
Subd. 49 MN/DOT. Minnesota Department of Transportation
Subd. 50 MPCA. Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
Subd. 51 Minor Street. Minor street shall mean a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to
the abutting properties and the local needs of a neighborhood.
Subd. 52 National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Permit. Any permit
or requirement enforced pursuant to the Clean Water Act as amended for the purposes of regulating Storm
Water discharge.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 6
Subd. 53 Official Map. A map which designates certain existing and proposed alignment and right-of-way
streets, alleys, other public ways, streams, storm water drainage channels and sewers and sanitary sewers,
and site of parks, schools and other public grounds. Such map shall have been adopted by Ordinance
following public hearing procedures and is intended to guide future development in the City as it is related
to thoroughfares and community facilities.
Subd. 54 Outlot. A parcel of land shown on a subdivision plat as an outlot, and designated
alphanumerically, (for example - Outlot A.) Outlots are used to designate one of the following:
A. land that is part of the subdivision but is to be subdivided into lots and blocks at a later
date;
B. land that is to be used for a specific purpose as designated in a developer's agreement, or
C. other agreement between the City and the subdivider; or for a public purpose.
Subd. 55 Owner. Owner is an individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, trust or
any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land.
Subd. 56 Parks. Parks are areas of public land developed and maintained primarily as pleasurable
landscaped areas providing for both active and passive recreational pursuits, including tot-lots,
playgrounds, neighborhood parks, playfields and special purpose areas.
Subd. 57 Pedestrian/Bicycle Trail. A public or private sidewalk or path and associated right of way across
a lot or lots to provide access for pedestrians, and non-motorized vehicles and which may be used for the
installation of utilities.
Subd. 58 Percentage of Grade. The distance vertically (up or down) from the horizontal in feet and tenths
of a foot for each one hundred feet of horizontal distance on street centerline.
Subd. 59 Person. Person is any individual, firm, association, syndicate or partnership, corporation, trust, or
any legal entity as recognized by laws of the State of Minnesota.
Subd. 60 Planning Commission. The Cloquet Planning Commission.
Subd. 61 Plat. A map showing a plan for the subdivision of land which is submitted for approval and is
intended in final form for recording.
Subd. 62 Private Street. Private street is a purported street, way or strip of land reserved for the use of a
limited number of persons or purposes as distinguished from a publicly dedicated street.
Subd. 63 Protective Covenants. A restriction of the use placed upon the property by a present or former
owner and recorded in the County Recorder or the Registrar of Titles offices. The City is not a responsible
authority for the enforcement of private protective covenants.
Subd. 64 Public Improvement. Any drainage facility, road, parkway, park, lot improvement or other
facility for which the City or any other government agency may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation.
Subd. 65 Public Walkway. Public walkway is a public way designated for the use of pedestrian traffic.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 7
Subd. 66 Registered Land Survey (RLS). A survey map of registered land designed to simplify a
complicated metes and bounds description, designating the same into a tract or tracts of Registered Land
Survey Number.
Subd. 67 Resubdivision. A change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat if the change affects any
street layout, area reserved for public use, or any lot line on the plat; or if it affects any map, or plan legally
recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.
Subd. 68 Right of Way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a road, street, railroad,
pedestrian/bicycle trails and utilities as authorized by the City Council, State or Federal law. Right of way
intended for streets, water main, sanitary sewers, storm drains, pedestrian/bicycle trails or any other use
involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the recording of the plat on
which the right of way is established.
Subd. 69 Road. An improved corridor and associated drainage ways affording primary access to abutting
properties for vehicles and pedestrians, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway,
road, avenue, boulevard, place or however otherwise designated.
Subd 70 Road Right of Way Width. The horizontal distance between the outside edges of a road right of
way.
Subd. 71 Sanitary Sewer. Sanitary sewer is a constructed conduit connected with a sewer system for the
carrying of liquids and solids other than storm sewer waters to a sanitary treatment facility.
Subd. 72 Service Drive/Frontage Road. Minor streets which are parallel and adjacent to higher classified
thoroughfares and which serve to reduce the number of access points to those thoroughfares and thereby
increase traffic safety.
Subd. 73 Setback. Setback is the building setback distance of a line as measured from the nearest street,
road, or water shoreline or property boundary line.
Subd. 74 Sketch Plan. A drawing that shows the conceptual subdivision of property.
Subd. 75 Street. A public thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to abutting property.
Subd. 76 Storm Sewer. Storm sewer is a constructed conduit for carrying surface waters to a drainage
course.
Subd. 77 Subdivider. Is any person, individual, firm, associations, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation,
trust or other legal entity commencing proceedings under this Ordinance to effect a subdivision of land.
Subd. 78 Subdivision. The “division” of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous units on the
last preceding tax roll, by platting, conveyance, registered land survey or other means, into two or more
parcels, sites or lots, any one of which is less than five acres for the purpose, whether immediate or future,
of transfer of ownership; provided, however, that the sale or exchange of parcels between adjoining lot
owners, where such sale or exchange does not create additional building sites, shall be exempted; also,
The division of land, regardless of area, if such division or plat provides for the granting or dedication of a
public street; also,
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 8
The resubdivision of land heretofore divided or platted into lots, sites or parcels, where the total area of
land being resubdivided is one acre or more. The division or allocation of land as open space for common
use by owners, occupants or lease holders, or as easements for the extension and maintenance of public
sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facilities.
Subd. 79 Surveyor. Surveyor is a duly Registered Land Surveyor employed by the subdivider for the
preparation of subdivision surveys or plats as required by this Ordinance and State Statute, and in
accordance with City Ordinance and State Law.
Subd. 80 Traditional Neighborhood Design. A compact, mixed use neighborhood where residential,
commercial and civic buildings are within close proximity to each other. The variety of uses permits
educational facilities, civic buildings and commercial establishments to be located within walking distance
of private homes. A traditional neighborhood development is served by a network of paths, streets and
lanes designed for pedestrian as well as vehicles.
Subd. 81 Transportation Plan. The part of the Comprehensive Plan, now or here-after adopted which
includes a major street and highway plan and sets forth the location, alignment, dimension, identification
and classification of existing and proposed streets, highways and other thoroughfares.
Subd. 82 Utility Easement. An easement granted by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for the
purpose of constructing and maintaining utilities, including, but not limited to, sanitary sewers, water
mains, electric lines, telephone lines, and gas lines.
Subd. 83 Zoning Administrator. The Cloquet City Planner/Zoning Administrator or authorized
representative.
Subd. 84 Zoning Ordinance. City Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17, including the official Zoning Map
which divides the local political jurisdiction into districts with regulations, requirements and procedures for
the establishment of land use controls.
13.1.04 Administrative Adjustments and Minor Subdivisions.
Subd. 1 General Requirements. The provisions of this Section shall only apply to those subdivisions
classified as Administrative Adjustments (Line Adjustment/Simple Lot Split/Lot Consolidation) and Minor
Subdivisions as described as follows.
A. The following shall be considered an Administrative Adjustments (Line
Adjustment/Simple Lot Split/Lot Consolidation):
1) A Line Adjustment including the exchange of abutting land between owners,
and/or the relocation of the boundary line between two abutting, existing parcels
of property, provided that:
a. the exchange, addition or relocation does not create an additional lot,
and
b. the resulting lot(s) comply with all provisions of the Cloquet Zoning
Ordinance and the provisions of Carlton County Ordinance – Individual
Sewage Treatment Systems if applicable.
2) A Simple Lot Split resulting in no more than two (2) lots, provided all of the
following conditions are met:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 9
a. all lots have frontage on an existing public road for the minimum lot
width required in the Cloquet Zoning Ordinance,
b. the minimum lot size and frontage requirements for lots created in all
zoning districts shall meet the minimum dimensional standards
prescribed in the Cloquet Zoning Ordinance, and
c. the subdivision complies with all other requirements of the Cloquet
Zoning Ordinance.
3) Lot Consolidation involving a consolidation of property(s) into one tax parcel.
B. A subdivision qualifies as a Minor Subdivision provided all of the following conditions
are met:
1) The subdivision is for residential development with a maximum of eight (8) lots.
2) The minimum lot dimensions and area shall be consistent with the requirements
of the zoning district in which the lots are located.
3) The proposed lots shall have frontage on an existing public road for the
minimum lot width required in the Cloquet Zoning Ordinance.
4) There shall be no new road or utility extensions involved in a Minor
Subdivision.
5) The subdivision complies with all other requirements of the Cloquet Zoning
Ordinance.
Any subdivision regulated by this Ordinance that is not an Administrative Adjustment or Minor
Subdivision as specifically described in Subd. 1 above shall be considered a Major Subdivision and
proceed with a Sketch Plan, Preliminary and Final Plat as spelled out later in this chapter.
Lots within a Minor Subdivision may be described by recorded plat or registered land survey, lots within an
Administrative Adjustment may be described by metes and bounds.
Shared driveway access on major thoroughfares are encouraged to enhance highway safety and may be
required to meet highway access spacing guidelines. Shared driveway access is accommodated by creating
private easements on one or more parcels that allow private access to one or more parcels. Shared access
easements may be located on common lot lines or may be located exclusively on one parcel. Easement
dimensions shall be sufficient in area to contain the driveway improvements, including drainage and snow
storage areas. Easements shall be in a form approved by the City and recorded against the encumbered
properties.
The purpose of the Administrative Adjustment and Minor Subdivisions is to allow relatively simple and
timely procedures for the subdivision of single parcels of land. The provisions in this Section are not
intended for the subdivision of land that results in the creation of undeveloped parcels or remnants that may
be further subdivided nor are these provisions intended to replace Major Subdivision requirements for
larger parcels.
Subd. 2 Administrative Adjustment Procedure The applicant shall submit an application for approval of
an Administrative Adjustment to the City Planner/Zoning Administrator that includes the following:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 10
A. A completed application on a form provided by the Planning and Zoning Office, and
documents demonstrating the subdivider has sufficient interest in the property to apply
for an Administrative Adjustment.
B. Two (2) copies of a survey and a pdf, prepared by a registered land surveyor, containing
the following information:
1) The original property description and the proposed legal descriptions of the
proposed lots.
2) Proposed new property lines with the dimensions noted.
3) Proposed use and driveway locations on the lots.
4) Location of all structures and distance from existing and proposed lot lines.
5) Location and provisions for individual water supply and sewage disposal that
meets the requirements of Carlton County Ordinance – Individual Sewage
Treatment Systems.
6) Name and address, including telephone number, of the property owner, the
subdivider, and surveyor.
7) A fee established by resolution of the City Council, and as provided in the City
Fee Schedule.
8) Any other information as required by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator.
The City Planner/Zoning Administrator may refer the documents to the City Engineer for review and
comment. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator may approve the Administrative Adjustment when the
applicant complies with the recommendations of the City Engineer, if any, and is consistent with the
Cloquet Zoning Ordinance, and any other official controls of the City.
The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall act on the Administrative Adjustment within sixty (60) days
of submittal of a complete application, unless an extension is agreed to by the subdivider in writing or is
otherwise allowed by statute.
The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall approve or deny the application in writing, providing the
reasons therefore to the Applicant by U.S. mail postmarked within 60 days of submission of the completed
application by Applicant, or within any allowed period of extension as provided for above.
Subd. 3 Minor Subdivision Procedure Prior to subdividing the property, the subdivider shall file an
application for approval of a Minor Subdivision including the following:
A. A completed application on a form provided by the Planning and Zoning Office, and
documents demonstrating the subdivider has sufficient interest in the property to apply
for a Minor Subdivision.
B. Fifteen (15) paper copies and one pdf and AutoCAD drawing of a Minor Subdivision
Plat, prepared by a registered land surveyor containing the following information:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 11
1) The original property description and the proposed legal descriptions of the
proposed lots.
2) Proposed new property lines with the dimensions noted.
3) All contiguous property and all roads and their proper names.
4) Proposed use and driveway locations on the lots within the subdivision.
5) Location of all structures and distance from existing and proposed lot lines.
6) General location of any existing tile lines, individual sewage treatment systems,
existing and abandoned wells, water courses, drainageways, lakes and delineated
wetlands under the Wetland Conservation Act, the ordinary high water level and
100 year flood elevations (if available or required by the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator), and the toe and top of any bluff.
7) Location and provisions for individual water supply and sewage disposal for
each lot that meets the requirements of Carlton County Ordinance – Individual
Sewage Treatment Systems.
C. Name and address, including telephone number, of the property owner, the subdivider,
and surveyor.
D. A fee established by resolution of the City Council, and as provided in the City Fee
Schedule.
E. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the Minor Subdivision
conforms to the design standards established within this Ordinance, the Zoning
Ordinance and the City Comprehensive Plan or is otherwise determined to be incomplete.
The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall provide written notice to the subdivider by
U.S. mail postmarked within 7 business days of receipt of the application if the
application is found incomplete, and shall identify the items required to complete the
submittal.
Subd. 4 Minor Subdivision Distribution. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall distribute copies
of the complete application to the following agencies prior to consideration by the Planning Commission
and City Council:
A. Mn/DOT, if abutting a state or federal highway, or access is requested from a state or
federal highway.
B. County Highway Engineer and Surveyor, if abutting a county road, or access is requested
from a county road.
C. The City Engineer.
D. The Commissioner of the MN/DNR, if the property is located within any shoreland or
floodplain district as defined by Minnesota Statutes (2013), Sections 105.485 and 104.02,
respectively, and any amendments thereto or renumbering thereof.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 12
E. Any other agency, such as the Soil and Water Conservation District, Cloquet Area Fire
District (CAFD) and watershed districts, deemed appropriate by the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator.
Subd. 5 Planning Commission Consideration and Action on a Minor Subdivision:
A. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator will publish a notice in the legal newspaper and
provide a notice to property owners within 350 feet of the proposed Minor Subdivision of
a public hearing to be held before the Planning Commission a minimum of 10 days prior
to the public hearing.
B. The subdivider shall appear before the Planning Commission at the public hearing to
answer questions pertaining to the application.
C. The Planning Commission shall review the determination of the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator as to whether the Minor Subdivision conforms to the design standards
established within this Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance and the City Comprehensive
Plan.
D. The Planning Commission shall recommend that the City Council approve, approve with
modifications, or deny the Minor Subdivision. If approval is not recommended to the
City Council, the applicant shall be notified of the reason for recommendation of denial.
The recommendation shall be forwarded to the City Council for consideration.
Subd. 6 City Council Consideration and Action:
A. The City Council shall act on the Minor Subdivision within 60 days of submittal of a
complete application, unless an extension is agreed to in writing by the applicant, or is
otherwise allowed by statute.
B. The City Council shall approve, approve with modifications or deny the Minor
Subdivision, and shall include findings of fact pertaining to the Minor Subdivision as part
of the proceedings of the City Council.
C. If denied, the City Council shall provide reasons for denial on the record at the time of
denial, and in writing to the Applicant or as soon thereafter as is reasonable, which
written reasons must be adopted by the City Council at the same or next meeting of the
City Council. Reasons for denial must explain the nonconformity of the application with
the design standards of the Subdivision Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance and the City
Comprehensive Plan.
Subd. 7 Recording:
A. The applicant shall file the minor subdivision plat or registered land survey with the
County Recorder’s Office within six (6) months of the City Council’s approval.
B. The applicant shall provide to the City the following:
1) One 17” x 24” Reduced Cloth (hardshell) marked “Copy”
2) One digital copy in AutoCAD (.dwg format), using North American Datum
(NAD 83) Carlton County coordinates.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 13
3) One GIS shapefile (.shp format).
C. No building permits shall be issued unless the applicant has furnished evidence that the
minor subdivision plat or registered land survey have been filed with the County
Recorder’s Office.
13.1.05 Major Subdivisions, Sketch Plan Review.
Subd. 1 Prior to the filing of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit a sketch plan depicting the
proposed subdivision for review with the City Planner/Zoning Administrator.
Subd. 2 The following information shall be submitted on the sketch plan:
A. The proposed lot layouts and size, intended land use, general street layout, and
generalized natural features.
B. Any required zoning changes.
Subd. 3 The sketch plan and accompanying information shall serve as the basis for informal discussion
between the subdivider and staff. Submission of a sketch plan shall not constitute formal filing of a
subdivision plat with the City. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator will informally advise the
subdivider of the extent to which the proposed subdivision conforms to the standards of City Ordinances
and will discuss possible plan modifications as necessary to ensure conformance with this Ordinance.
Subd. 4 The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall review the sketch plan to determine if environmental
review documents must be completed in accordance with Minnesota Rules 4410.0200 – 4410.7800. If
environmental review is required, the City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall notify the subdivider of this
requirement.
13.1.06 Major Subdivision, Preliminary Plat.
Subd. 1 Preliminary Plat Required. Before submission of a Final Plat the subdivider shall prepare and
submit to the City Planner/Zoning Administrator Preliminary Plats of the land he proposes to develop as
described in Subd. 2, below. The Preliminary Plat shall be submitted only after the Sketch Plan Review
with the City Staff and prior to the making of any street improvements or the installation of any utilities.
Subd. 2 Preliminary Plat Procedures.
A. Application Requirements: Following Sketch Plan Review, the subdivider shall submit
the following to the City Planner/Zoning Administrator:
1) A completed application on a form provided by the Planning and Zoning Office,
and documents demonstrating the subdivider has sufficient interest in the
property to apply for a subdivision.
2) Fifteen (15) copies of the preliminary plan including an 11” x 17” reproducible
copy, PDF copy and AutoCAD copy, and supporting documentation of the
proposed subdivision containing information required in Subdivision 3 of this
Section, together with protective covenants or restrictions, if any.
3) A subdivision fee established by resolution of the City Council, and as provided
in the City Fee Schedule.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 14
4) Completed environmental review documents as required by law. The subdivider
shall comply with the regulations and follow the procedures for environmental
review.
5) The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall provide written notice to the
subdivider by U.S. mail postmarked within 7 business days of receipt of the
application if the application is found incomplete and shall identify the items
required to complete the submittal.
B. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall distribute copies of the complete application
and preliminary plat to the following agencies for review and comment at least ten (10)
days prior to consideration by the Planning Commission and City Council:
1) MN/DOT, if abutting a state or federal highway, or access is requested from a
state or federal highway.
2) Carlton County Engineer if abutting a County Road.
3) City Engineer and/or Assistant City Engineer.
4) Cloquet Area Fire District (CAFD).
5) The Commissioner of the MN/DNR, if the subdivision is located within any
floodplain district as defined by Minnesota Statutes, Sections 105.485 and
104.02, respectively, and
6) Any other agency as deemed appropriate by the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator.
C. Public Hearing Required.
1) The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall set a date for a public hearing on
the plat and submit the complete application, preliminary plat and comments
from any agency listed above to the Planning Commission.
Notice of the public hearing stating the date, time, and location of the hearing
before the Planning Commission; a description of the request to be heard; and
the address or location of the property to be subdivided shall be:
a. published in the official newspaper of the City, a minimum of ten (10)
days prior to the hearing.
b. written notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to property owners
within 350 feet of the property to be subdivided, a minimum of ten (10)
days prior to the hearing.
D. Planning Commission Hearing and Action.
1) The subdivider shall appear before the Planning Commission to answer
questions pertaining to the application and preliminary plat.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 15
2) The Planning Commission may request the subdivider to submit additional
information to properly consider the plan before or after the hearing.
3) The Planning Commission may seek professional advice, to be paid by the
subdivider, concerning the preliminary plat.
4) The Planning Commission shall determine whether the preliminary plat
conforms to the standards established within this Ordinance, the Cloquet Zoning
Ordinance and the Cloquet Comprehensive Plan.
5) The Planning Commission shall recommend that the City Council approve,
approve with modifications or deny the preliminary plat. If approval is not
recommended to the City Council, the subdivider shall be notified of the reason
for denial. The recommendation shall be forwarded to the City Council for
consideration.
E. City Council Consideration and Action.
1) The City Council shall act on the preliminary plat within 120 days of submittal
of a complete application, unless a delay is agreed to by the subdivider in
writing.
2) The City Council shall approve, approve with modifications or deny the
preliminary plat, and shall include findings of fact pertaining to the preliminary
plat as part of the proceedings of the City Council.
3) If the City Council approves the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall proceed to
complete a final plat in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
4) If the final plat has not been submitted by the subdivider for approval by the
City Council within one year of preliminary plat approval, the preliminary plat
shall be void, unless a request for a time extension is submitted by the
subdivider and approved by the City Council.
Subd. 3 Preliminary Plat Data. The Preliminary Plat shall meet the standards of design as set forth in
Section 13.1.08 and shall show the following information:
A. Identification and Description.
1) The proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or be similar in
pronunciation or spelling to the name of any other plat recorded in the County.
2) Legal description of the property.
3) Names and addresses of the property owners, the subdivider, and surveyor,
engineer or designer of the plat.
4) A north arrow and a graphic scale that is not less than 1” to 100’, except that a
smaller scale for large subdivisions may be permitted, if authorized by the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator.
5) Vicinity map of area showing geographical points for orientation within a ¼
mile radius of the property.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 16
6) Date of preliminary plat preparation.
B. Existing Features and Conditions.
1) The outside boundary line survey and legal description of the property to be
subdivided.
2) Existing zoning classification and land use for the property and abutting
properties including floodplain districts.
3) The total acreage of the property to be subdivided.
4) Location, right of way width and names of existing or platted streets or other
public roadways; parks and other public lands; permanent buildings and
structures including utility poles; public and private easements or other
encumbrances and their purpose; and property boundaries including the names
and addresses of the owners, section lines and municipal or township boundaries
within the property to be subdivided and adjacent properties up to 100’ beyond
the outside boundary of the property to be subdivided.
5) All contiguous land owned or controlled by the owner of the property to be
subdivided.
6) Topographic data showing contour intervals of not more than two (2) feet within
the boundaries of the property to be subdivided.
7) Water courses, drainage ways, lakes and wetlands delineated in accordance with
the Wetland Conservation Act, the ordinary high water level and 100 year flood
elevations (if available or required by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator);
the toe and top of any bluffs; wooded areas and significant features.
8) Location, size and capacity of existing and abandoned drainage, stormwater and
agricultural tiles; ISTS, wells and utilities including poles and corridors located
on the property to a distance 100’ beyond the outside boundary of the property
to be subdivided.
9) Soils map showing soil types, rock outcrops, and other information from the
Natural Resource Conservation Service. Soil test results demonstrating the
adequacy of the property for the intended development in terms of ground water
level, load bearing capacity and ability to meet Carlton County Ordinance –
Individual Sewage Treatment Systems.
10) Other information as required by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator.
C. Proposed Features and Conditions.
1) Proposed lot and block layout, lot lines and dimensions including acreage or
square footage, and lot and block numbers of all new lots.
2) Proposed uses and densities of all lots within the subdivision including public
areas, drainage areas and common open space.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 17
3) The minimum setbacks, including any floodplain setbacks, from the exterior lot
lines, public right of way, ordinary high water levels or bluff areas.
4) The location and general design of individual access from lots within the
subdivision to public roads.
5) Location, right of way, grade and width of all proposed roads and
pedestrian/bicycle trails. A description of planned short and long-term road
maintenance responsibility.
6) Location, right of way and width of road extensions to adjacent properties, as
required by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or City Engineer.
7) Location and width of proposed easements.
8) Street profiles (may be on separate map) including drainage facilities when
required by the City Engineer.
9) Grading plans showing how the site will be graded and showing the final
contours of the property, drainage facilities, and erosion control measures to
prevent erosion and sedimentation both during and after development.
10) Location and provisions for individual water supply and sewage disposal (if
applicable) including the location of two suitable sites for ISTS for each lot that
meets the requirements of Carlton County Ordinance – Individual Sewage
Treatment Systems if applicable.
11) Location and design of any public sanitary sewer and water lines, if applicable,
and drainage facilities.
12) If the entire property will not be developed, a sketch showing how the remaining
property can be subdivided and how access will be provided.
13) The City Planner/Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission may
require the applicant to submit a sketch plan demonstrating how the proposed
subdivision will relate to the layout, land use and access of the existing and
potential subdivisions of adjacent properties.
14) A copy of all proposed private restrictions or covenants, and establishment of
homeowners associations for the proposed subdivision.
15) Other information as required by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or
Planning Commission
D. Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) Requirements. Any person, firm, sole
proprietorship, partnership, corporation, state agency, or political subdivision proposing a
subdivision of land, a subdivision plat, or any type of construction project that results in a
land disturbing activity involving 1 acre or more within the City, must submit to the City
a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for review and approval, unless an
exemption waiver is provided in accordance with this Section.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 18
1) The SWPPP shall contain and be prepared in accordance with the City of
Cloquet’s “Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan Criteria and Requirements”
document on file with the City Engineer’s office. In addition, any further
requirements of the MPCA’s NPDES permit program must be followed. These
requirements shall include a drawing or drawings delineating the features
incorporated into the SWPPP, including details of perimeter protection,
construction phasing, storm drain inlet protection, erosion control measures,
temporary and final stabilization measures, drainage easements and storm water
management facilities, including all BMP's to be utilized. In addition any
construction specifications for the project shall contain technical provisions
describing erosion, sedimentation, and water control measures to be utilized
during and after construction as well as to define the entities responsible for the
installation and maintenance of the BMP's. The project SWPPP must be
incorporated into the construction project’s specification documents.
2) The SWPPP developed for all projects, including all plans, drawings,
specifications, and computations for storm water management facilities, shall be
prepared, reviewed and signed by a Professional Engineer registered in the State
of Minnesota, except in the following cases:
a. All residential or non-commercial/industrial projects that include less
than five acres of impervious surface.
b. All residential development projects with an ultimate planned density
of less than one-half (0.5) units per acre.
3) The provisions of this Section shall also apply to any project site that is part of a
larger Common Plan of Development or Sale that will disturb greater than or
equal to one acre.
4) Subdivision Plat Approval and Subdivision Registration Process. No subdivision
approval, plat approval or building permit shall be issued, nor shall any land be
disturbed until the SWPPP has been approved by the City and a copy of a State
issued NPDES permit for the project has been provided to the City. Upon the
sale of individual lots, the new owners shall be required to file a Subdivision
Registration Form with the MPCA, which allows the original permittee to
transfer the responsibilities of the project NPDES permit for a portion of the site
to another party without reapplying for permit coverage. Each new owner must
complete this form and submit it to the MPCA and provide the assigned
registration number to the City.
5) For sites or projects that are less than one acre, but are within 100 feet of Special
Waters or Protected Waters such as Otter Creek, Fond du Lac Creek, any
protected wetlands, or are within an existing subdivision or development with
documented flooding problems associated with storm water runoff, a SWPPP
shall be provided to the City in compliance with the provisions of this Section to
preserve or protect the water quality of downstream resources. In addition, a
Grading permit must be obtained for all grading projects in accordance with the
Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the City of Cloquet.
6) Erosion and Sediment Control. Erosion and sediment control, at a minimum,
shall meet the requirements and provisions defined in the most current MPCA
NPDES General Storm Water Permit for Construction Activities, also referred
to as the NPDES Construction Permit.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 19
7) Storm Water Detention/Retention/Treatment Facilities. Storm Water Detention,
Retention or Treatment facilities proposed to be constructed in the Storm Water
Management Plan shall be designed and maintained according to the most
current practices as reflected in the Nationwide Urban Runoff Program study
and in accordance with the MPCA’s NPDES Permit requirements. All above
ground Storm Water Detention, Retention or Treatment Facilities shall have a
minimum setback from all property lines as established by the Cloquet Zoning
Ordinance.
8) Regional Ponds. Regional ponds may be used provided they are constructed
ponds, (not a natural wetland or water body) and designed in accordance with
the NPDES permit program requirements for all water from impervious surfaces
that reach the pond. Permittees shall not construct regional ponds in wetlands,
regardless of their condition, quality or designation, unless such wetlands are
mitigated in accordance with applicable rules. The owner must obtain written
authorization from the City or private entity that owns and maintains the
regional pond. If the City is the owner of the regional pond, the City may apply
a System Charge or Assessment that would cover a prorated share of the pond’s
construction and operation and maintenance costs.
9) Adequacy of Outlets. The adequacy of any Outlet used as a discharge point for
proposed Storm Water Management Systems must be assessed and documented
to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. To the extent practicable, hydraulic
capacities of downstream natural channels, storm sewer systems, or streets shall
be evaluated to determine if they have sufficient conveyance capacity to receive
and accommodate post-development runoff discharges and volumes. In addition,
projected velocities in downstream natural or manmade channels shall not
exceed that which is reasonably anticipated to cause erosion.
10) Storm Water Discharges to Trunk Highway Right-of-Way. For development
projects which lie adjacent to trunk highway right-of-ways and include Storm
Water Management Systems that will discharge storm water onto highway rightof-
way, a drainage permit must first be obtained from the Minnesota Department
of Transportation (Mn/DOT) prior to the City approving any SWPPP for the
project.
11) Drainage Easements and Discharges to Adjacent Property. No constructed
Storm Water Management Systems or Permanent Facilities, proposed as part of
the SWPPP for a development, may discharge storm water onto adjacent
property unless a drainage easement is in place or the peak design flow rate for
the Permanent Facilities maintains the pre-development existing flow rates and
hydrologic conditions for the 2-year, 10-year, and 100-year rainfall events.
12) Maintenance Agreements for Privately Owned Storm Water Management
Facilities. For storm water management facilities that are on private property or
owned by an entity other than the City and discharge within the City, a plan for
maintenance and inspections of the system must be submitted to and approved
by the City as part of any SWPPP.
13) Exemptions. Exemptions to the SWPPP requirements of this section include:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 20
a. An individual SWPPP is generally not required for individual lots or
properties located within a subdivision or plat for which a SWPPP has
already been approved. All construction, however, must be in
accordance with the previously permitted SWPPP for the subdivision,
including the NPDES Permit requirements and Subdivision Agreement.
(See No. 4 above)
b. A parcel for which a building permit has been approved on/or before
the effective date of this Chapter and an NPDES permit was not
required.
c. Any land disturbance activity not associated with building construction
that will affect less than 1 acre of undeveloped land.
d. Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property.
13.1.07 Major Subdivision, Final Plat
Subd 1. Final Plat Required. Before submission of a Final Plat, the subdivider must meet the following:
A. The final plat shall be in substantial compliance with the preliminary plat and shall
incorporate all of the conditions of the City Council approval of the preliminary plat. The
final plat may include only a portion of the approved preliminary plat that the subdivider
proposes to develop to record and develop at the time, provided that the portion included
in the final plat conforms to all requirements of this Ordinance.
B. The subdivider shall file the final plat no later than one (1) year from the date of approval
of the preliminary plat by the City Council or all, or the remaining portion of, the
preliminary plat shall become void unless a request for a time extension is submitted by
the applicant and approved by the City Council.
C. If the final plat is for a portion of the preliminary plat, the remainder of the preliminary
plat excluded within the final plat must be submitted as a final plat within three (3) years
from the date of preliminary plat approval by the City Council or the preliminary plat
shall become void unless a request for a time extension is submitted by the subdivider
and approved by the City Council.
Subd. 2 Application Requirements: The subdivider shall submit the following to the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator:
A. A complete application on a form obtained from the Planning and Zoning Office.
B. Fifteen (15) copies and an 11” x 17” reproducible copy, PDF copy and AutoCAD copy,
of the final plat that meets the requirements of subpart 5 of this Subdivision.
C. An up-to-date Abstract of Title or a Certificate of Title and a title opinion prepared by the
subdivider’s attorney.
D. A fee for final plat review established by resolution of the City Council.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 21
E. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall provide written notice to the subdivider by
U.S. mail postmarked within 7 business days of receipt of the application if the
submission is found incomplete and shall identify the items required to complete the
submittal.
Subd. 3 Final Plat Review
A. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall distribute copies of the complete application
including the final plat to the following agencies to obtain comments and requirements
prior to consideration by the Planning Commission and City Council:
1) County Surveyor to determine compliance with the Minnesota Land Surveyors
Association Plat Manual of Minnesota Guidelines and Minnesota Statutes.
2) City Engineer.
Subd. 4 Planning Commission Review.
A. The Zoning Administrator shall submit the application, final plat and requirements and
comments of the City staff to the Planning Commission.
B. The Planning Commission shall review the final plat and all supporting documentation
for compliance with the preliminary plat approval by the City Council. A report of the
Planning Commission recommendation shall be provided to the City Council.
Subd. 5 City Council Action.
A. The City Council shall act on the Final Plat within sixty (60) days of the date the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator has determined the application, including the final plat and
supporting documentation is complete and meets the requirements of this Ordinance.
B. The City Council shall consider conformance of the final plat to the preliminary plat
approval, the design standards of this Ordinance, the comments and recommendations of
the City staff, the Planning Commission recommendation, and Minnesota State Statutes.
The City Council shall approve or deny the final plat and shall include findings of fact
supporting the motion that shall be entered into the proceedings of the City Council and
transmitted to the subdivider in writing, and authorization for the Mayor and City
Administrator to sign the plat.
C. Upon approval by the City Council, the subdivider shall submit a reproducible mylar
print or other permanent prints suitable for recording and meeting the requirements of
Chapter 505 of Minnesota State Statutes for signature by the Mayor and City
Administrator.
D. If denied, the City Council shall provide reasons for denial on the record at the time of
denial, and in writing to the Applicant or as soon thereafter as is reasonable, which
written reasons must be adopted by the City Council at the same or next meeting of the
City Council. Reasons for denial must explain the nonconformity of the application with
the design standards of the Subdivision Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance and the City
Comprehensive Plan.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 22
Subd. 6 Final Plat Recording
A. Within six (6) months of the City Council’s approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall
submit to the County Recorder one (1) reproducible mylar print and three (3) permanent
prints (hardshells) as required by the City signed by the Mayor and City Administrator
for recording.
B. The applicant shall provide to the City the following:
1) One 17” x 24” Reduced Cloth (hardshell) marked “Copy”
2) One digital copy in AutoCAD (.dwg format), using North American Datum
(NAD 83) Carlton county coordinates.
3) One GIS shapefile (.shp format).
C. Immediately upon recording, the subdivider shall furnish the Community Development
Department Office with one (1) print of the final plat showing evidence of the recording.
No zoning permits shall be issued unless the subdivider has furnished evidence that the
plat has been filed with the County Recorder’s Office.
Subd. 7 Final Plat Data and Requirements.
A. The form and content of the final plat shall conform to the Minnesota Land Surveyors
Association Plat Manual of Minnesota Guidelines and Chapter 505 of Minnesota State
Statutes.
B. Other data, certificates, affidavits, and endorsements that may be required by the City
staff, the Planning Commission or by the City Council.
C. Accompanying the final plat shall be a final plan of all improvements installed or to be
installed by the applicant, with grades, profiles and other details for the improvements
recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council.
D. Any financial guarantees required for improvements as approved by the City Council
shall be submitted to the Community Development Department Office in a form
satisfactory to the City Attorney. The time period required for the completion of public
improvements shall be specified in the resolution approving the final plat and shall be
incorporated into the financial guarantee.
E. Name and right-of-way width of each street, highway, easement, or other rights of way as
required by State Law.
F. Lot numbers, lot lines, and dimensions.
G. Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved.
H. Location of rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds, wetlands as required by State Law.
I. Location and description of monuments as required by State Law.
J. Names and location of adjoining subdivision, streets and unplatted properties.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 23
K. Certification on plat of title showing that the applicant is the owner and a statement by
such owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way, and any other sites for public use.
L. Certification on plat by surveyor as to the accuracy of survey and plat.
M. Certification on plat by the City Clerk/City Administrator that the plat has been approved
for recording in the office of the County Register of Deeds.
N. Certification that the subdivider has complied with one of the following alternatives shall
be submitted with the Final Plat;
1) All the improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements
of these regulations, or
2) A financial guarantee has been posted with the City which is in an amount
determined by the Council to be sufficient to complete the improvements and
installations in compliance with these regulations, is with a surety satisfactory to
the Council, and which specifies the time for the completion of the
improvements and installations.
O. Cross-sections, profiles and grades of streets, curbs, gutters and sidewalks showing
locations of in-street utilities, and drawn to standard scales and elevations shall be
submitted with the Final Plat.
P. Protective covenants, if any, shall be submitted with the Final Plat.
Q. Letters of approval of highway access points and service roads from the Commissioner of
Highways and the County Engineer, as applicable, shall be submitted with the Final Plat.
13.1.08 Minimum Improvements Required. The developer shall provide the following improvements before
approval of a plat; and shall provide the necessary funds in escrow; or shall provide a financial guarantee in an
amount necessary to insure compliance with the installation of improvements as herein required plus 25%. A
Development Agreement must also be signed per the requirements of Section 13.1.20. Provided, however, that the
City Council may also accept petitions for said improvements to be installed on a special assessment basis. All of
the improvements required in this section shall be constructed only after the plans and specifications thereof have
been approved by the City.
No areas platted after the date of this Ordinance outside the City of Cloquet or properties subdivided by metes and
bounds description after date of this Ordinance will be accepted for annexation unless it shall substantially conform
or can be made to substantially conform to the minimum standards herein.
Subd. 1 General. The plat shall conform to the Official Map and other parts of the adopted
Comprehensive Plan of the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 2 Official Map. Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces any part of an arterial or collector
street or highway, so designated on the Official Map, such part shall be platted for dedication to the City by
the subdivider in the location and at the width indicated on said plan.
Subd. 3 Land Subject to Poor Drainage. The right is reserved to disapprove any subdivision which is
subject to poor drainage. However, if the subdivider agrees to make such improvements as will make the
area safe for residential occupancy, the subdivision may be approved, subject, however, to the approval of
the Engineer.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 24
Subd. 4 Community Assets. In all subdivisions, due regard shall be shown for natural features such as
trees, unusual rock formations, and water courses; for sites which have historical significance; and for
similar assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the subdivision and to the
community. The Planning Commission may prepare a list of all such features within its area of subdivision
jurisdiction which it deems worthy of preservation.
Subd. 5 Monuments and Stakes. All subdivision boundary corners, block and lot corners, street
intersection corners, and points of tangency and curvature shall be marked with survey monuments
consisting of minimum 5/8” steel rods 24” in length. Inscribed on the monument or cap, according to State
Statute, shall be the registration number of the land surveyor making the survey. All U.S., State, County
and other official bench marks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be
preserved in precise position.
13.1.09 Public Sites and Open Spaces. The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions within the
jurisdiction of these regulations:
Subd. 1 In subdividing land or resubdividing an existing plat, due consideration shall be given by the
subdivider, and by the Planning Commission upon review, to dedication or reservation of suitable sites for
schools, conservation areas or other public or semi-public recreational areas, or open spaces and parks.
A. Where a proposed public park, recreation area or open space, as determined by the
Comprehensive Plan, Planning Commission and/or City Council, is located in whole or in
part within a subdivision, the subdivider shall make available such lands to the City of
Cloquet, provided, however, that the total dedication (exclusive of public streets, alleys
and pedestrian ways and exclusive of all other purchased sites such as fire and police
stations, water towers and treatment plants and sewer lift stations) shall not exceed ten
percent of the total gross acreage owned or controlled by the subdivider in the case of
proposed subdivision of five lots or more, and five percent of the total acreage in the case
of proposed subdivisions of four lots or less.
B. Where an area that is specifically designated by the Comprehensive Plan or City Council
for public park, recreation area or open space exceeds the percentage of the total acreage
controlled by the subdivider as stipulated in Subd.1, A above, the entire area shall be
reserved for such use on all subdivision plans and plats; and the acquisition of such
additional area shall then be secured by the City of Cloquet, or arrangements made for its
acquisition, within a period not to exceed one year from the date of approval of the
preliminary plan. The value of the subject land at the time of subdivision but before
improvements shall be established by three qualified appraisers, one of whom shall be
appointed by the City Council, one by the subdivider, and one of whom shall be mutually
agreed upon by the other two parties.
C. Where less than the five or ten percent of the total gross area being subdivided, as
stipulated in Subd. 1, A above, is proposed for public parks, recreation areas or open
spaces as designated by the Comprehensive Plan, the Planning Commission or City
Council, the subdivider shall dedicate such area that is less than the required percentage,
and in addition, pay to the City of Cloquet a sum of money so that either or both the
dedicated and the payment equal the required percentage of the land before it is
subdivided.
D. The entire sum of money equal to the appraised value of land comprising an area
equivalent to the required percentage of the total area of the tract, shall be paid by the
owner or subdivider to the City of Cloquet in the event that there are no public parks,
recreation areas or open spaces required by the Planning Commission and City Council
or offered for dedication by the subdivider.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 25
Subd. 2 Sums of money so received by the City of Cloquet shall be placed in a special account to be
known as the Park Dedication Fund, and allocated by the City Council solely for acquisition of land for
public parks, recreation areas or open spaces, development of existing parks and recreation areas, or debt
retirement in connection with lands previously acquired for parks, recreation areas or open spaces.
Subd. 3 In residential subdivisions, the subdivider may at the City’s option, in lieu of the dedication of
land for public use, contribute an equivalent amount in cash as determined in “A” above.
13.1.10 Street and Block Layout. The following requirements are applicable to all subdivision within the City of
Cloquet.
Subd. 1 The Subdivision shall be so designed as to be in harmony with adjacent subdivisions and provide
for the continuation or existing streets. Provisions shall be made for streets through the subdivision for the
platting of contiguous property. No strip of unplatted land or portion of street or artifice shall be used or
retained by the subdivider to impede the platting of adjacent parcels.
Subd. 2 The street layout shall provide access adequate for emergency and public service vehicles to all
lots and parcels of land within the subdivision.
Subd. 3 Where appropriate to the design, streets shall be established to avoid jogs at intersections and to
promote continuity of local streets and those of higher classifications. Street jogs with centerline offsets of
less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet shall be discouraged.
Subd. 4 Streets shall be established to take advantage of the contour of the land so as to produce usable
lots, cause a minimum of cutting and filing, and to produce streets with reasonable grades as defined in
Section 13.1.13.
Subd. 5 Certain proposed streets, where appropriate, shall be extended to the boundary line of the tract to
provide for adequate circulation of traffic within the vicinity for adjacent but as yet undeveloped or platted
land tracts.
Subd. 6 Streets shall intersect other streets as near to a 90 degree angle as topography and other factors
permit. Intersections of streets with arterial or collector streets shall be limited to a minimum angle of 70
degrees unless specifically approved by the Commission.
Subd. 7 Whenever there exists a dedicated or platted portion of a street or alley adjacent to the proposed
subdivision which conforms to the Official Map, the remainder of the street or alley shall be platted to the
prescribed width within the proposed subdivision.
Subd. 8 Half-width streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the
subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations. Where an existing, half-width
street adjoins a portion of the boundary of a proposed subdivision, street dedication in a width needed to
make this a full-width street may be required.
Subd. 9 Street right-of-way widths shall conform to those indicated in the Transportation Plan. Where such
widths are not prescribed therein, the widths shall not be less than the minimums stated in Section 13.1.11.
Subd. 10 Alleys may be platted in the rear of all lots to be used for commercial or industrial purposes.
Alleys will not be approved in single family residential areas, unless required by unusual topography or
other exceptional conditions, or unless designed as part of a Traditional Neighborhood Design.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 26
Subd. 11 Land abutting arterial or collector streets shall be platted with the view of making the lots, if for
residential use, desirable for such use by cushioning the impact of heavy traffic on such traffic ways; and
with the view also of minimizing interference with traffic on such traffic ways as well as the accident
hazard. This may be accomplished in several ways:
A. By platting the lots abutting such traffic ways at very generous depth, with setbacks or
front yards at least ten (10) feet greater or deeper than otherwise required; and providing
vehicular access to them by means of frontage access roads next to the traffic way,
connected therewith at infrequent intervals;
B. By not fronting the lots on the highway or thoroughfare but on a parallel local street at a
distance of a generous lot depth, in which case private driveways shall connect with such
local street;
C. By a collector street platted more or less parallel with the highway or thoroughfare, six
hundred (600) to one thousand (1000) feet distance therefrom, from which loop streets or
dead end streets would extend toward the highway, the ends of which provide access to
the lots abutting the highway to their rear.
Subd. 12 Dead end streets will be approved if limited to five hundred (500) feet in length, provided a
permanently designed turn around area having a minimum diameter to the edge of the finished street or
curb line of not less than eighty (80) feet and a minimum right of way diameter of one hundred (100) feet,
is constructed.
Subd. 13 Closed subdivisions (with only one exit) shall not be permitted. Unique circumstances may allow
this with the approval of a variance.
Subd. 14 Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth, unless, in
the opinion of the Commission, prevented by unusual topography or other physical conditions.
Subd. 15 The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks, and lots within blocks, shall be determined with due
regard to:
A. Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the principal and all
required accessory uses.
B. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions, and provisions regulating off-street
parking and loading spaces.
C. Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
D. Limitations and opportunities of topography.
E. Generally, blocks shall not exceed thirteen hundred twenty (1320) feet nor less than five
hundred (500) feet in length measured along the greatest dimension of the block.
Subd. 16 Residential blocks shall normally be of sufficient width for two tiers of lots. Block lengths shall
be determined by circulation and other needs. Where residential blocks with lots deeper than two hundred
(200) feet are proposed, a reservation for a future street through the middle of the block, longitudinally,
may be required.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 27
Subd. 17 Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than ten (10) feet wide, shall be required where deemed essential
to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other
community facilities.
Subd. 18 The number of intersecting streets along arterial and collector streets shall be held to a minimum,
and where practicable, blocks along such traffic ways shall not be less than eight hundred (800) feet in
length.
13.1.11 Minimum Widths for Streets and Alley Right-of Way. For all public ways hereafter dedicated and
accepted, the minimum right-of-way widths for streets and thoroughfares shall be shown in the Comprehensive Plan
and where not shown therein, the minimum right-of-way width for streets, arterial highways or pedestrian ways
included in any subdivision shall not be less than the minimum dimensions for each classification as follows:
Classification Desirable Acceptable
Principal Arterial Highways 104 feet 80 feet
Minor Arterial Highway 80 feet 80 feet
Collector Streets 80 feet 80 feet
Local Streets 66 feet 66 feet
Service Drives 60 feet 32 feet
Alley 20 feet
Pedestrian Way 20 feet 12 feet
Where existing or anticipated traffic on principal and minor arterial highways warrants greater widths of rights-ofway,
these shall be required.
13.1.12 Minimum Pavement Widths and Surface Types. The following requirements are applicable to all
subdivisions within the jurisdiction of these regulations:
Subd. 1 Pavements widths for arterial and collector streets will be designated in the Transportation Plan.
Where required to be provided as part of the subdivision the subdivider will be responsible for thirty-three
(33) feet. The difference, if any, between the cost of the portion to be provided at the expense of the
subdivider including the cost of curb and gutter, if any, and that of the total width designated in the
Transportation Plan shall be borne by the City of Cloquet, the County of Carlton or by the Minnesota
Highway Department where applicable, unless it is determined by the City Council that such greater width
will benefit the subdivider in proportion to its cost.
Subd. 2 Local streets and dead end streets shall have minimum paved widths of thirty-three (33) feet.
Where curb and gutter is required the total width, face to face of curb, shall be thirty-three (33) feet. Curb
and gutter is required on all urban streets (streets with both sewer and water). The pavement of a turning
circle at the end of a dead end street shall have a minimum finished outside diameter of eighty (80) feet.
Subd. 3 Alleys shall have minimum paved widths of twenty (20) feet.
Subd. 4 Alleys, where permitted, will be constructed with a concrete pavement of a minimum thickness of
six (6) inches or of asphaltic concrete of a minimum thickness of two (2) inches mat and eight (8) inches
base. This requirement may be varied by the City Council if, in their opinion, the requirement imposes too
severe a restriction when related to the projected use of the alley.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 28
Subd. 5 The subdivider shall perform all initial grading of all streets from property line to property line,
including temporary approved ditching and the supply and installation of culverts where necessary for over
the ground drainage until curb and gutter is installed, to within one (1) foot below the final approved grade
prior to installation of water and sewer facilities. Centerline street grades are to be established by the
subdivider subject to approval of the City Engineer.
Subd. 6 After the subdivider has performed the initial street grading and after sewer and water mains are
in, a minimum of six (6) inch compacted gravel street 33 feet in width shall be constructed in accordance
with current City policy established by resolution of the City Council.
Subd. 7 Upon receipt of a valid petition therefore, and/or in accordance with current City policy
established by resolution of the City Council, streets shall be graded full width and fully constructed with a
concrete pavement or of asphaltic concrete for a seven-ton axle weight capacity in residential areas and a
nine-ton axle weight capacity in commercial and industrial areas, unless otherwise required by the City
Council. If the classification of the street justifies the construction of a thicker section, the additional cost
thereof may be borne by the City of Cloquet, the County of Carlton, or the Minnesota Department of
Transportation, depending upon the agency having jurisdiction.
Subd. 8 Concrete curb and gutter is the standard for all paved streets, unless the City Council determines
that a rural street section is appropriate.
13.1.13 Street Grades, Curves and Sight Distances. The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions
within the jurisdiction of the City of Cloquet:
Subd. 1 The grades of any street or alley shall not be less than four-tenths (0.4) percent. (Where
specifically approved by the City Engineer, alleys may be redesigned with a 0.25 grade when constructed
with concrete pavements).
Subd. 2 Street Grades: The grades in all streets, arterial highways, collector streets, minor streets and
alleys in any subdivision shall not be greater than the maximum grades for each classification as follows:
Principal Arterial Highway 6 percent
Minor Arterial Highway 6 percent
Collector Street 6 percent
Local Street 8 percent
Alley 8 percent
Pedestrian Way 20 percent (May be increased if steps of
an acceptable design are provided)
Subd. 3 All changes in street grade of one (1) percent of more shall be connected by vertical curves. The
length of the vertical curve will be determined on the basis of providing stopping sight distances for each
road classification where design speed for arterial and collector streets is forty (40) mph and local streets is
twenty-five (25) mph. In no case shall the length of the required vertical curve be less than fifteen (15)
times the algebraic difference in rate of grades for arterial and collector streets or one-half (1/2) of this
minimum for all other streets.
Subd. 4 The radius of curvature on the center line of the street shall not be less than that required to
produce stopping sight distance as defined in Subd. 3 above. In no case, however, shall the radius of
curvature for arterial and collector streets be less than three hundred (300) feet or for local streets, service
drives and alleys be less than one hundred (100) feet.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 29
13.1.14 Intersections. The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions within the jurisdiction of the
City of Cloquet:
Subd. 1 At a street intersection, the street curb intersection shall be rounded by a radius of at least fifteen
(15) feet.
Subd. 2 Where, in the opinion of the Engineer, the center line profiles of streets presented as part of the
Preliminary Plat do not clearly indicate that adequate intersection design will be accomplished, the
Commission may request an intersection detail at a scale not to exceed one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet,
which detail will clearly represent the construction details for said intersection.
Subd. 3 Intersections shall be designed so as to avoid abrupt changes in longitudinal or transverse slope.
13.1.15 Lots. The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions within the jurisdiction of the City of
Cloquet:
Subd. 1 The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the proposed
subdivision and for the type of development contemplated. Lot dimensions shall conform to the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
Subd. 2 Excessive depth in relation to widths shall be avoided. A proportion of not more than three (3) to
one (1) normally shall be considered appropriate.
Subd. 3 Every lot shall abut on a street. Lots for residential purposes shall meet the size requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance and also the requirements relative to building setback and side yard requirements.
Subd. 4 Corner lots for residential use shall be platted at least ten (10) feet wider than interior lots in order
to permit conformance with the setback required by the Zoning Ordinance on the side streets.
Subd. 5 Residential lots fronting on arterial or collector streets should have extra depths to permit deep
setbacks for the buildings.
Subd. 6 Double frontage lots and reversed frontage lots shall not be platted except as hereinbefore
permitted under Section 13.1.10, et. Al.
Subd. 7 Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to the right-of-way line of the street on which
the lot fronts.
Subd. 8 Narrow, triangular lots, unusual shapes and lots not permitting at least a 26 foot width house with
side yards and driveway, rear yards and front yards are prohibited. No plat will be accepted that contains
lots undesirable for building, property subject to recurrent flooding, property at grades greater than 8
percent or other factors that may cause such properties to be marginal in building operations and cause such
property to be returned for property taxes.
Subd. 9 Lot Remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a larger
tract must be added to adjacent lots, or a plan shown as to future use rather than allowed to remain as
unusable parcels.
13.1.16 Utilities and Drainage. The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions within the
jurisdiction of these regulations:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 30
Subd. 1 Water Lines: Where approved public water supply is within reasonable access to the subdivision
as determined by the number of lots, distance from and capacity of existing mains, water lines shall be
placed within the right-of-way of each street. Water lines shall have a minimum diameter of eight inches
(8”). Fire hydrants shall be installed at intervals of not less than four hundred (400) feet. The minimum size
water main shall be eight inches (8”) in diameter and all water mains shall be looped so that water is
available from two directions to any point. Water main, fire hydrants, gate valves and appurtenances shall
be installed in accordance with acceptable engineering practice. In general, in new residential areas, water
main services with a shutoff shall be installed to appropriate public recreational areas in conjunction with
the water main construction.
Subd. 2 Sanitary Sewers: Sanitary sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the standards of the
City of Cloquet and each lot shall be provided with a connection to a sanitary sewer. The City may accept
an area for platting where such service cannot be provided when the lots are of sufficient size and the soil is
suitable for private disposal systems in accordance with City and State Health Department
recommendations. No such private disposal systems shall be interconnected or run to a common private or
public drain. The minimum size public sanitary sewer shall be eight (8) inches in diameter. Manholes shall
be installed at intervals of not more than every 400 feet. In general in new residential areas sanitary sewer
services shall be installed to appropriate public recreational areas in conjunction with the sewer
construction.
Sewage lift stations will be constructed if necessary to serve an area, provided a lift station will be
constructed on an assessment basis to serve an area only if at least 50 percent of the cost is immediately
assessable. The lift station cost beyond the 50 percent and the prorata immediately assessable will be held
for future assessment to the future area to be served.
Subd. 3 Storm Drainage: All necessary facilities including underground pipe, manholes, inlets, catch
basins and other appurtenances necessary to provide adequate drainage for the property or to maintain any
natural drainage course shall be the responsibility of the developer.
Open drainage ditches will not be allowed unless specifically directed by the City Engineer.
Platting of property is prohibited unless it is possible to drain the property by gravity drainage to the natural
drainage course for the area (Refer to Chapter 18: Stormwater Management Regulations to verify
compliance). As a minimum, no property plat will be accepted unless street grades are at least five feet
above lake level and lots are of such elevation as to drain into the streets. The meeting of this minimum
requirement does not obligate the City Council to accept the plat if there are substantial obstructions to the
drainage of the property contained therein, and the City Council may require that the subdivider install
pumping facilities for storm drainage prior to plat acceptance if such facilities are necessary.
Subd. 4 Extensions Not in Platted Area: In some cases the proposed area to be platted will not be served
at its borders by water mains or sanitary sewer. The City Council may require a petition for the creation of
an assessment district to extend the facilities to the platted area; or may require the subdivider to pay the
cost of such extension; or may accept the plat with a separate water or sewer system; or may pay the cost
thereof and hold the amount for future assessment; or may refuse acceptance of the plat.
Subd. 5 Building Permit: No building permit shall be issued in the platted area until sewer and water
mains are designed, approved and the contract for installation awarded with a satisfactory completion date.
No building shall be occupied in the platted area until provided with sanitary sewer and water service and
until the street is graveled and such graveling accepted as adequate by the City Engineer to serve the
building. The occupancy of a building in violation of this section shall not relieve the subdivider of any
responsibility for street improvement. The transfer of property in the plat from the original subdivider to
other parties shall not relieve the subdivider of his responsibility for initial street work as defined herein.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 31
Subd. 6 Design of Improvements: The City Engineer will design only the improvements to be installed
by the City. A subdivider desiring to contract and install his own improvements shall do so in accordance
with City specifications and practice. The City Engineer will approve or disapprove all plans, specifications
and installations in the public street and for improvements installed by the subdivider shall furnish a written
statement to the subdivider of City acceptance of the improvement prior to the City accepting maintenance
of the improvement or street as a part of the City system.
13.1.17 Other Requirements. The following requirements are applicable to all subdivisions within the jurisdiction
of these regulations:
Subd. 1 Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be constructed at a minimum on one side of all streets being
dedicated for public use, both sides if it is a collector street or higher classification. The sidewalks shall be
a minimum of five (5) feet wide, constructed of concrete pavement with a minimum thickness of four (4)
inches.
Subd. 2 Driveways: The subdivider shall install driveways, driveway approaches and curb returns for each
connection to the street
Subd. 3 Screen Planting: The installation of trees and shrubs to form a tight screen effective at all times
shall be required along the rear line of any lot in any subdivisions which back onto an arterial or collector
street.
Subd. 4 Street Names: All streets are to be named. A proposed street which is in alignment with and
which joins an existing and named street shall be given the name of the existing street. The name of a
proposed street shall not duplicate the name of an existing street to which it does not connect or with which
it is not in alignment.
Subd. 5 Street Name Signs: Reflectorized street name signs shall be provided at all street intersections or
where a change of direction of a street requires a change of street name. The signs shall be of the size and
type approved for use by the City of Cloquet. Normally, one sign will be required at each residential
intersection; however, more may be required dependent upon the character and/or width of the streets.
Subd. 6 Easements: The following standards and requirements shall apply for all plats where easements
are necessary:
A. An easement for utilities, at least ten (10) feet wide, shall be provided along each side of
a side line of lots and/or the rear line of lots where necessary to form a continuous rightof-
way, at least twenty (20) feet in width. Such easements are to be dedicated and provide
for utility service from street to street. The intent of such easements is to furnish overhead
wire utility service from the rear of the lots to buildings. If necessary for the extension of
main water or sewer lines, electrical transformer pads or similar utilities, easements of
greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots. A ten (10) foot wide
drainage and utility easement is also required adjacent to all front property lines.
B. Utility easements shall connect with easements established in adjoining properties. These
easements, when approved, shall not thereafter be changed without the approval of the
City Council, by Ordinance, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
C. Additional easements for pole guys should be provided at the outside of turns. Where
possible, lot lines shall be arranged to bisect the exterior angle so that pole guys will fall
along side lot lines.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 32
D. Where a subdivision is transversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or stream, a
storm water easement, drainage right-of-way or park dedication, whichever the Planning
Commission may deem the most adequate, conforming substantially with the lines of
such water course shall be provided, together with such further width or construction, or
both, as will be adequate for the storm water drainage of the area. The width of such
easements shall be determined by the Planning Commission.
E. Where a connection to a trail system is feasible, easements for a connection to the trail
system may be allowed in lieu of sidewalk requirements as stated in Subd. 1 of this
Section.
13.1.18 Public Utilities
Subd. 1 All new electric distribution lines (excluding main line feeders and high voltage transmission
lines), telephone service lines, Cable TV, and any other services constructed within the confines of and
providing service to customers in a newly platted residential area shall be buried underground; unless the
Council specifically shall find, after study and recommendation by the Planning Commission, that:
A. The placing of utilities underground would not be compatible with the development
planned;
B. The additional cost of burying such utilities would create an undue financial hardship; or
C. Topographical, soil, or any other conditions make the underground installation
unreasonable or impractical.
Subd. 2 All utility lines for telephone and electrical service shall be placed in rear line easements when
carried on overhead poles. The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City Council require, that
the type of overhead pole used be of a quality and durability aesthetically in conformance with the nature of
the residential development.
Subd. 3 Where telephone, electric and/or gas service lines are to be placed underground entirely, conduits
or cables shall be placed within easements or dedicated public ways, in such a manner so as not to conflict
with other underground services.
Subd. 4 All drainage and other underground utility installations which traverse privately owned property
shall be protected by easements.
Subd. 5 The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this Section, and shall
submit to the Planning Commission a written record from the utilities showing that the necessary
arrangements with the utility involved for the installation of said facilities have been made.
Subd. 6 All meters used to measure consumption of users must be attached or in close proximity (within
3 feet) of the principal structure.
13.1.19 Public Improvement Installation. Public improvements associated with the subdivision shall be installed
in accordance with one of the following methods.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 33
Subd. 1 Private Installation.
A. Prior to the installation of any required improvements by the applicant and prior to
approval of the final plat, the applicant shall enter into a development agreement in
writing with the City requiring the applicant/developer to furnish and construct said
improvements at their sole cost and in accordance with approved plans and specifications
and usual agreement conditions. This shall include provisions for inspection of the
construction of the public improvements by the City Engineer and other City staff.
B. The development agreement shall require the applicant to post a financial guarantee
consisting of an escrow deposit, irrevocable letter of credit, or a certified check with the
City, guaranteeing performance in accordance with the terms of the development
agreement. The type and conditions of the financial security must be reviewed and
approved by the City Attorney. The amount of the security is to be based on the project’s
estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be furnished under the agreement,
including but not limited to, sanitary sewer, water main, on-site storm sewer, streets,
grading, drainage, wetland mitigation, erosion control, street and traffic signs, street
lights, sidewalks, trails, monumentation, engineering, surveying, planning, City
administration and legal cost. The project cost must be reviewed by City staff. The
security amount shall equal one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the project
estimate.
C. If evidence is presented that the described work and improvements have been paid for,
the amount of the deposit or financial guarantee may be reduced in a sum equal to the
estimated cost of the improvements so completed prior to the acceptance of the plat.
D. The schedule for completion of the work described in the final plat and the development
agreement shall be determined by the City Council, upon recommendation of the
engineer after consultation with the applicant. It shall be reasonable with relation to the
work to be done, the seasons of the year, and proper coordination with construction
activities in the plat and subdivision.
E. Improvements shall be constructed only in platted real estate.
F. No applicant/developer shall be permitted to start work on any subdivision improvements
without entering into a development agreement and posting a City approved financial
security.
Subd. 2 City Installation.
A. Any person desiring to have utility and street improvements installed may request the
City to install them, if such request is accompanied by a petition of one hundred (100)
percent of the land owners and a waiver of assessment appeal, subject to the following
conditions to the approval and authorization thereof by the City Council and as
authorized by State law.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 34
B. If so approved by the City Council, the person requesting the installation of said utility
and street improvements shall supply a security approved by the city running to the city
guaranteeing payment for the installation of the improvements in an amount based on the
City Engineer’s estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be installed. The
security amount shall equal five (5) years special assessments held until fifty (50) percent
of the project special assessments have been paid. At such time, the City may reduce the
amount of security required of the developer in amounts equivalent to subsequent
assessments for which payment has been made.
C. Improvements shall be constructed only in platted real estate.
D. No applicant/developer shall be permitted to start work on any subdivision improvements
without entering into a development agreement and posting a City approved financial
security.
13.1.20 Development Agreement. Prior to installation of any required improvements and prior to or concurrently
with the approval of the final plat, the developer shall enter into a development agreement in writing with the city
requiring the developer to furnish and construct said improvements in accordance with plans and specifications and
usual agreement conditions and/or pay appropriate cost for improvements or other cost associated with the plat.
Further, the agreement shall provide for the development of any restrictions, covenants, easements, signage, park or
open space requirements, or other conditions of the approved preliminary plat and provide for the proper execution,
recording or other action required. In addition, the development agreement shall include such other terms and
conditions as required by the City. Approval of the development agreement shall be by City Council resolution.
A. The signed development agreement shall be recorded with the final plat and shall be
binding upon the developer, his or their heirs, personal representative, and assigns
stipulating:
1) All improvements called for in the plat, or in any supplementary agreements, to
be completed within the time specified by the City.
2) Unless approved by the City Council, no private construction shall be
constructed on any lots in the plat or filing of applications for building permits
for said construction on said lots, until all improvements required under the City
regulations for the proposed subdivision have been made or arranged in a
manner provided for in this section.
B. The development agreement shall include provisions for construction work inspected by
the City and assurance that the developer will conform with current testing requirements
and quality control procedures of the City of Cloquet. The developer shall provide
documentation from a qualified testing laboratory and/or registered professional engineer
that all improvements have been constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
approved plans and specifications.
C. The development agreement shall require the developer to provide a financial guarantee
to ensure payment of fees related to the subdivision and completion of all improvements
as required in this Ordinance.
D. A time schedule for completion of the work shall be determined by the City upon
recommendation of the City Engineer after consultation with the developer and shall be
reasonable in relation to the work to be done, the seasons of the year, and proper
coordination with construction activity in the subdivision.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 35
E. The development agreement shall include action remedies in the event of default
including:
1) The City may complete the improvements by contract or force and obtain
reimbursement of its cost from the posted security deposit.
2) The City reserves the right to withhold building permits for violation of any
terms of the development agreement.
13.1.21 Construction Plans. Construction plans for the required improvements shall conform in all respects with
all applicable ordinances and standards of the City. Construction documents shall be prepared, at the expense of the
developer, by a licensed professional who is registered in the State of Minnesota, and said plans shall contain his
certification. Such plans, together with the quantities of construction items, shall be submitted to the City Engineer
for his approval and for his estimate of the total cost of the required improvements. Upon approval, they shall
become a part of the development agreement. A minimum of four (4) copies of the construction plans shall be
furnished to the City for the City Engineer review and approval. Additional copies may be required by the City.
13.1.22 Maintenance of Improvements. The developer shall be required to maintain all improvements in the
subdivision or on the individual subdivided lots and provide for snow removal and maintenance of streets, if
required, until acceptance of said improvements by the City Council in coordination with the development
agreement.
13.1.23 Modifications and Exceptions
Subd. 1 Major Subdivisions: The general principle of design and minimum requirements for the layout of
subdivisions, set forth in Section 13.1.06, may be varied by the City Council in the case of a subdivision
large enough to constitute a more or less self-contained neighborhood which is to be developed in
accordance with a comprehensive plan safeguarded by the appropriate restrictions, and which, in the
judgment of the City Council, makes adequate provisions for all essential community requirements;
provided, however, that no modification shall be granted by the Council which would conflict with the
purposes of the official Map or with the other features of the Comprehensive Plan of Cloquet, or with the
intent and purposes of said general principle of design and minimum requirements.
Subd. 2 Unusual, Physical Conditions: In any particular case where the subdivider can show that, by
reason of exceptional topographic or other physical conditions, strict compliance with any requirement of
this ordinance would cause unusual difficulty or exceptional and undue hardship, the City Council may
relax such requirement to the extent deemed just and proper, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship,
provided that such relief may be granted without detriment to the public good and without impairing the
intent and purposes of these regulations or the desirable general development of the neighborhood and the
community in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cloquet.
Any modifications thus granted shall be entered in the minutes of the City Council setting forth the reasons
which, in the opinion of the Council, justified the modification.
13.1.24 Enforcement. If a subdivision, construction, reconstruction, or use occurs in violation of this Chapter, the
City Planner/Zoning Administrator may, in addition to other remedies, institute any proper criminal action or
proceedings in the name of the City of Cloquet, and hereby shall have the powers of a police officer to prevent such
unlawful subdivision, construction, reconstruction, or use, to restrain or correct such violations, to prevent the
occupancy of said property, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about said premises.
13.1.25 Penalty. Any person who violates a provision of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined and / or penalized not more than the maximum levels established by the State of
Minnesota for misdemeanor offenses.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 13.1 36
13.1.26 Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses. The schedule of fees shall be available at the City Offices and
may be altered or amended only by the City Council. No plat shall be reviewed until all fees have been paid in full.
13.1.27 Separability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held
to be unconstitutional or void, said division shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
13.1.28 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. All ordinances of the City of Cloquet, all amendments thereof or
supplementary thereto, and all other ordinances of the City inconsistent herewith and to the extent of such
inconsistency and no further, are hereby repealed.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14 - PUBLIC PROPERTY
Effective Date: March 7, 2006
Amendments: 01-02-08 347A /
Section 14.1: Excavation of Public Property
14.1.01 Definitions and Licensing.
(See Chapter 6 Licenses and Permits, Section 6.16)
14.1.02 Regulations for Public Safety.
Subd. 1. Traffic Control Requirements. Before commencing any excavation, the person to whom an
excavating permit for a project was issued shall set up an effective system to protect vehicular traffic and
pedestrians from the excavation, to safely guide vehicular traffic and pedestrians through the construction
area or detour them where necessary as determined by the City Superintendent and the Chief of Police, and
to provide for the public safety in general. For this purpose, the person to whom an excavating permit was
issued for the project shall utilize signs, flags, flashers, barricades, flag persons and such other methods or
devices as shall be deemed necessary by the City Superintendent and the Chief of Police to adequately
warn the public of the hazards involved, to allow adequate time for vehicle drivers to react and make the
necessary adjustment in speed or course, and to efficiently conduct traffic through or around the
construction area.
Subd. 2. Detours. Whenever possible, excavations shall be made in such a manner as to allow traffic to
pass through the construction area. If it is not practicable to allow traffic to pass, a suitable detour shall be
established on a route approved by the City Superintendent and the Chief of Police. Notice of any such
detour shall be given to the Chief of the Cloquet Fire Department, the City Superintendent and the Chief of
Police before the detour shall be established.
Subd. 3. Blasting. If blasting is to be performed in conjunction with any excavating or work performed
pursuant to an excavating permit issued pursuant to this section, the excavating permit shall state on the
face of the permit that the permit authorizes blasting provided other required permits have been obtained
from all other appropriate governmental units and agencies.
Subd. 4. Regulations for Protection of Existing Improvements.
A. Existing Improvements Defined. The person to whom an excavating permit for a
project was issued shall be responsible for the protection, repair or replacement of all
improvements which exist within the limits of the construction area. For the purposes of
this section, the term “improvements” shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following: water lines, sanitary and storm sewer lines, street lighting, traffic signal
systems, traffic signs, topsoil, sod, trees, public utility lines and systems and street
improvements, including subgrade, base, pavement or other surfacing, curbs, gutters,
medians, sidewalks and all of the various appurtenances of these improvements.
B. Permit Holder's Responsibility as to Improvements. Before commencing any
excavation, the person to whom an excavating permit was issued shall determine what
improvements exist within the limits of the construction area and shall make detailed
arrangements with the owners thereof for the protection or replacement of the
improvements.
C. Installation of Underground Pipes. Installation of pipes under any street shall be done
by jacking or boring. When installing pipes by jacking or boring, extreme care shall be
exercised to assure that the soil surrounding the pipe remains in place so as to prevent the
formation of a void which shall result in the settlement or cave-in of the material
surrounding the pipe
.
Section 14.1 Excavation of Public Property 1
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14 - PUBLIC PROPERTY
D. Protection of Improved Streets. Where an excavation shall be made in an improved
street, which shall be hereby defined as any bituminous-surfaced street with curbs or
curbs and gutters, any bituminous-surfaced street having three inches or more of
bituminous surfacing with or without curbs or gutters, or any street having a concrete
pavement with or without curbs or gutters, the excavation shall be cribbed with
continuous sheeting to the full depth of the excavation to a point at least five feet beyond
the curb or beyond the edge of the surfacing or pavement. Provided, however, that, in the
event it shall be determined to be impossible or unnecessary to utilize sheeting because of
unusual soil conditions, any alternate method of protecting the improvements shall meet
the approval of the City Engineer.
E. Protection of Non-excavated Roadway Surfaces. The excavation of materials from any
surfaced roadway shall be accomplished either by hand or by the use of equipment.
Where any piece of equipment is used, adequate provision shall be employed to assure
that those portions of the street surface which shall not be removed shall not be damaged.
This shall be accomplished with the use of protective planking, pads or other method
meeting the approval of the City Superintendent. In the event any portion is damaged as a
result of the operations of the person to whom the permit was issued for the project, the
person shall be responsible for the repair or replacement thereof in accordance with the
directions of the City Superintendent.
F. Excavated Materials. When making excavations, the various materials excavated shall
be piled separately. All concrete and bituminous materials, any soils which cannot be
properly compacted, and all other deleterious materials shall be removed from the
construction site.
G. Backfill; Generally. All materials used for backfilling shall be compatible so as to assure
stability of the backfilled area. No snow or ice shall be permitted in the backfill. No
frozen lumps and no stones exceeding three inches in greatest dimension shall be
permitted within 12 inches of any pipe, conduit or cable, or within 18 inches of the street
surfaces. No stones, frozen lumps and no items exceeding six inches in greatest
dimension shall be permitted in the backfill.
H. Backfill; Near Roadway Surface. All backfill material shall comply with all applicable
Minnesota Highway Department specifications and such other specifications as may be
determined by the City Engineer.
I. Backfill; Layers and Compacting. All backfill shall be placed in accordance with all
applicable Minnesota Highway Department specifications and such other specifications
as may be determined by the City Engineer.
14.1.03 Restoration of Right-of-Way.
Subd. 1. Restoration of Improvements. Following completion of the excavation and backfill operations,
the person to whom the excavating permit was issued for the project shall be responsible for restoring all
improvements which were damaged or destroyed by his or her operations to a condition equal to or better
than their original condition.
Subd. 2. Restoration of Road Surface or Shoulder, Unpaved. Any unpaved road surface or shoulder
shall be restored in accordance with all applicable Minnesota Highway Department specifications and such
other specifications as may be determined by the City Engineer.
Subd. 3. Restoration of Paved Surface, Curbs, Gutters, Sidewalks. All replacement concrete or
bituminous street surfacing, concrete curbs or curbs and gutters, sidewalks, and the like, shall be
constructed in accordance with the current standards for the construction as used by the City on its
construction projects and the special requirements established by the City Engineer.
Section 14.1 Excavation of Public Property 2
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14 - PUBLIC PROPERTY
Subd. 4. Restoration of Topsoil and Sod. All topsoil and sod removed by the person to whom the
excavating permit for the work was issued shall be replaced. The minimum depth of topsoil used on any
boulevard, shoulder, ditch or slope within the right-of-way shall be five inches. Where sod is required, it
shall be the contractor's responsibility to maintain the sod for a period of 60 days (that is, 60 “growing
days”) following placement thereof.
Subd. 5. Removal of Surplus Materials. All surplus materials or debris shall be removed from the rightof-
way immediately following completion of the work permitted by the excavating permit.
Subd. 6. Settlement of Excavation. If settlement occurs at the site of the excavation, or adjacent thereto, at
any time within one year from the date of final completion of the original restoration, the person to whom
the excavating permit for the work was issued shall be responsible for repairing the failure in accordance
with the directions of the City Superintendent. In addition, the person to whom the excavating permit for
the work was issued shall be responsible for reimbursing the City for any expenses incurred in the
placement of warning devices and barricades for the protection of traffic.
14.1.04 City to Have Right to Complete Work.
Subd. 1. Expeditious Completion of Work. All work covered under this section shall be accomplished
expeditiously until completion in order to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to traffic, to pedestrians, and
for the protection of other public interests.
Subd. 2. Estimate of Time to Complete Work. The person to whom an excavating permit was issued
shall state, in the person's application for permit, the time which the person estimates shall be required to
complete the work. Upon review of the application, the City Superintendent shall have the right to amend
the time requested and issue the permit so as to allow the minimum amount of time which he or she
determines shall reasonably be required for the work. The time within which the work authorized by the
excavating permit shall be stated on the face of the permit.
Subd. 3. Extension of Time for Completion. The time allowed for completion may be extended by the
City Superintendent as necessary if it shall be found that it is not reasonably possible to complete the work
within the time allowed.
Subd. 4. City Notice and Completion. In the event that the work is not being accomplished expeditiously,
or if work on an excavation is ceased or abandoned without due cause, the City Superintendent may, if this
failure creates a hazard to the public safety, without written notice to the person to whom the excavating
permit was issued for the work of the City's intention to do so, have the City correct the work, backfill the
excavation and effect all restoration as shall be required by this section. If the failure does not create a
hazard to the public safety, the City Superintendent may, after ten days written notice to the person to
whom the excavating permit was issued for the week, the Superintendent may have the city correct the
work, backfill the excavation and effect all restoration as shall be required by this section.
Subd. 5. City Restoration of Settlement. In the event settlement of an excavation occurs within one year
of the date of final restoration and the person to whom the excavating permit was issued for the work shall
be notified of the settlement, the person shall accomplish the required restoration or repair within a time
limit specified by the City Superintendent. Thereafter, if the work has not been accomplished, the City
Superintendent may have the City accomplish the work required.
Subd. 6. City Restoration; Costs. In the event the City accomplishes work in accordance with either
section 14.1.03 or 14.1.04, the entire cost of the work, including any materials used therefor, shall be the
liability of the person to whom the excavating permit was issued for the work. Thereafter, if payment
therefor is not made within 30 days of the billing date, no additional excavating permits shall be issued to
the person until payment has been made to the City by the person or by the person's bonding company.
Section 14.1 Excavation of Public Property 3
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14 - PUBLIC PROPERTY
14.1.05 Regulations Regarding Installation of Water and Sewer Services.
Subd. 1. Plumbing Code Applicable. All installations of water and/or sanitary sewer service connections
shall be accomplished in accordance with all applicable plumbing regulations regarding size, alignment,
depth, grade, and the like, of the service connections.
Subd. 2. Taps by City; Fees. All taps to water mains shall be made by the City. No tap to a City water
main shall be made until all of the requirements of this section and all other applicable code provisions,
ordinances, and regulations shall have been met. A schedule of charges for the making of the taps shall be
established by the Cloquet Utility Commission. Payment for the making of the taps shall be made by the
person to whom an excavating permit shall be issued at the time the person secures an excavating permit
unless payment therefor has already been made by the homeowner.
Subd. 3. Sanitary Sewer Service Connections. All sanitary sewer service connections shall be made to
existing ways, tees or risers where the connection points shall be available at a reasonably convenient
location. No connection to a City sewer main shall be made until all of the requirements of this section and
all other applicable code provisions, ordinances and regulations shall have been met and the City
Superintendent is present to observe the connection. Where no such connection points exist at a reasonably
convenient location, the person to whom an excavating permit is issued shall make the necessary tap
utilizing a mechanical tapping machine which saws the required opening in the main sewer pipe in such a
manner as to accomplish a smooth cut without cracking the pipe, and the person shall then make the service
connection utilizing a pipe saddle. The pipe saddle shall be designed for use with the size of main sewer
pipe which is being tapped and shall be of a design which shall prohibit any protrusion beyond the inside
wall of the main sewer. Pipe saddles used on vitrified clay pipe or polyvinyl chloride pipe sewers shall be
cemented to the main sewers utilizing an epoxy cement or other water-tight cementing agent approved by
the City Superintendent. Pipe saddles on types of sewer pipe shall be attached in a manner which
accomplishes a rigid and water-tight connection meeting the approval of the City Superintendent. The pipe
saddle used on any particular installation shall be designed specifically for use with the same type of
gaskets as are used on the balance of the sewer service pipe.
Subd. 4. Depth of Water and Sewer Connections. All water service and sewer service connections shall
be installed with a minimum of seven feet of earth cover within the street right-of-way, unless the depth of
the existing main lines shall make it impossible to install the service connections at such depth. Where it is
impossible to provide seven feet of cover at any point within the street right-of-way, the service
connections shall be protected by insulation in a manner approved by the City Superintendent.
Subd. 5. Inspection Before Excavation Covered. Installation of water and or sanitary sewer service lines
shall not be backfilled until the City Superintendent has inspected the installation and connections to the
City mains.
14.1.06 City Liability. This section shall not be construed as imposing upon the City or any official or employee of
the City of any liability or responsibility for damages to any person imposed by the performance of any work for
which an excavating permit shall be issued under this section; nor shall the City or any official or employee of the
City be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of any inspections authorized under
this section or the issuance of any licenses or permits under this section.
Section 14.1 Excavation of Public Property 4
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14 - PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section 14.2: City Cemetery
Section deleted per Ordinance No. 347A dated 1/2/08.
Section 14.2 City Cemetery 5
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14 - PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section 14.3: Parks and Recreation
14.3.01 Rules and Regulations Governing City Owned Property.
Subd. 1. The Council may, from time to time by Council action, establish prohibited activities, uses and
practices in or on any park, playground, recreation area or other City owned property.
Subd. 2. The prohibited activities, uses and practices shall be posted on any park, playground, recreation
area or other City owned property in such manner as the Council shall direct.
Subd. 3. Any activity, use or practice conducted or performed in or on any park, playground, recreation
area or other City owned property in violation of the prohibition placed thereon shall be a public nuisance.
14.3.02 Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
Subd. 1. “Park” shall mean any open or enclosed space, area or facility wherever located which is owned,
operated or controlled by the City or located within the City but owned, operated or controlled by any other
political or governmental subdivision which space is reserved, designated or used for or as a playground,
picnic area, school ground, beach, park, arena, concession, playing field or court, structure or building and
devoted, designated or intended for active or passive recreation including all parking lots, paths or
roadways appurtenant to or used therewith.
Subd. 2. “Person” shall mean any person, firm partnership, association, corporation, company, organization
of any kind.
Subd. 3. “Superintendent” shall mean a person immediately in charge of any park area and its activities,
and to whom all park attendants of each area are responsible.
Subd. 4. “Vehicle” shall mean any wheeled conveyance, whether motor powered, animal drawn or selfpropelled.
The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description and all snowmobiles.
Exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles in the service of the City parks.
14.3.03 Park Operation Policy.
Subd. 1. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to the public every day of the
year during designated hours. The opening and closing hours for each individual park may be posted
therein for public information.
Subd. 2. A permit shall be obtained from the appropriate Superintendent before participating in any of the
following activities: carnivals, community celebrations, gatherings of 25 or more persons including picnics
and political gatherings, activity contests including those requesting exclusive use of charging admission,
and exhibitions either as a stage production or otherwise.
Subd. 3. Except as provided in this section, no person shall enter or remain in any park or public recreation
area between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
14.3.04 General Prohibitions on Park Property. No person in any park shall:
Subd. 1. Disfiguration and Removal. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove any buildings, bridges, tables benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or
other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or
permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers or other structures or equipment, facilities
or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
Section 14.3 Parks and Recreation 6
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14 - PUBLIC PROPERTY
Subd. 2. Restrooms and Washrooms. Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat
and sanitary condition. No person over the age of four years shall use the restrooms and washrooms
designated for the opposite sex.
Subd. 3. Removal of Natural Resources. Dig or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or
any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down timber or other wood or materials, or make any
excavation by tool, equipment, blazing or other means or agency.
Subd. 4. Erection of Structures. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatsoever kind, whether
permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any
public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special written permit issued hereunder.
Subd. 5. Throwing. Throw or cast any stone or other missile carelessly or needlessly in disregard of the
rights or the safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property.
Subd. 6. Walking on Grass. Go on foot or otherwise upon the grass or turf of any park where any
prohibitory sign is posted.
Subd. 7. Injury and Removal. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the
bark, or pick the flowers or seed of any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass
areas or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
Subd. 8. Climbing Trees or Walks. Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases,
fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes.
Subd. 9. Hunting. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, shoot or throw missiles at any animal,
reptile or bird, nor shall he remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or
nest, or young of any reptile or bird; nor shall he collect, remove, have in his possession, give away, sell or
offer to sell, or buy or offer to buy, or accept as a gift, any specimen alive or dead.
Subd. 10. Feeding Animals. Give or offer, or attempt to give to any animal or bird any tobacco, alcohol or
other known noxious substances.
Subd. 11. Gambling, Drugs and Other Activities. Gambling, the use or possession of drugs, as defined
by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 152, as it may be amended from time to time, and successor statutes, the
possession of which is a violation of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 152, as it may be amended from time to
time, and successor statutes, and disorderly conduct is prohibited.
Subd. 12. Posting or Painting. No person shall post, paste, paint or affix any placard, bill, notice or sign
upon any structure or thing within any park or recreation area or upon any of the fences or enclosures
thereof.
Subd. 13. Noise. The use of electronic sound amplification devices of any kind within any of the parks or
recreation areas of the City or upon any of the roads within the parks or recreation areas shall be hereby
prohibited. Nothing contained in this section, however, shall be deemed to prohibit the use of electronic
sound amplification devices within parks or recreation areas of the City in connection with events licensed
by the City or approved by resolution of the City Council allowing the use of the electronic sound
amplification devices subject to rules and regulations established by resolution of the City Council.
14.3.05 Sanitation Regulations. No person in a park shall:
Subd. 1. Throw, discard or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake,
stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain
flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the
pollution of said waters.
Section 14.3 Parks and Recreation 7
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14 - PUBLIC PROPERTY
Subd. 2. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes,
cans, dirt rubbish, waste garbage or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any
waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof; but shall be placed in the
proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or
waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed
of elsewhere.
14.3.06 Traffic Regulations.
Subd. 1. State Laws Apply. No person in a park shall fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the
state motor vehicles traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles together with such
regulations as are contained in this chapter, code, and other ordinances.
Subd. 2. Enforcement. No person in a park shall fail to obey all traffic officers and park employees, such
persons being hereby authorized and instructed to direct traffic wherever and whenever needed in the parks
and on the highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with these regulations as
may be issued subsequently by the Superintendent.
Subd. 3. Traffic Signs. No person in a park shall fail to comply with all traffic signs indicating speed,
direction, caution, stopping or parking and all others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and
property.
Subd. 4. Speed of Vehicles. No person in a park shall ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding
ten miles per hour, except upon such roads as the Superintendent may designate by posted signs.
Subd. 5. Operation Confined to Roads. No person, except Park Department employees or authorized
agents of the City, shall drive or operate a motor vehicle in any park except on roads as designated parking
areas or such other areas as the Superintendent of Parks shall designate.
Subd. 6. Parking.
A. Designated Areas. No person in a park shall park a vehicle in other than established or
designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions
thereat and with the instruction of any attendant who may be present.
B. Night Parking. No person in a park shall leave a vehicle standing or parked at night
without lights clearly visible for at least 50 feet from both front and rear on any driveway
or roadway area except legally established parking areas.
C. Emergency Procedure. No person in a park shall fail to notify an attendant of an
emergency in the nature of a breakdown requiring the assistance of a tow truck, mechanic
or other person.
D. Muffler Required. No person in a park shall fail to use a muffler adequate to deaden the
sound of the engine in a motor vehicle.
Subd. 7. Bicycles.
A. Confined to Roads. No person in a park shall ride a bicycle on other than a paved
vehicular road or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel
or push a bicycle over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for
pedestrian use.
Section 14.3 Parks and Recreation 8
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14 - PUBLIC PROPERTY
B. Operation. No person in a park shall ride a bicycle upon a paved road or path other than
as near to the right side of the roadway or path as practicable, and bicycles shall be kept
in single file when two or more are operating as a group. Bicyclists shall at all times
operate their machines with reasonable regard to the safety of others, signal all turns, pass
to the right of any vehicle they are overtaking, and pass to the right of any vehicles they
may be meeting.
C. Rider Prohibited. No person shall operate a bicycle carrying more persons than the
number for which designated and equipped.
D. Designated Racks. No person shall leave a bicycle in a place other than a rack when
such is provided and there is a space available.
E. Immobile Bicycles. No person in a park shall leave a bicycle lying on the ground or
paving or set against trees, or in any place or position where other persons may trip over
or be injured by it.
F. Night Operation. No person shall ride a bicycle on any road between 30 minutes after
sunset to 30 minutes before sunrise without an attached lamp on the front which shall
emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red
reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Minnesota Department of Highways which
is visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
Subd. 8. Trucks. No trucks shall be operated upon any of the drives or roads of any park or recreation
area, except at the point of crossing or intersection with a public highway or thoroughfare.
14.3.07 Specific Recreational Activities Regulated.
Subd. 1. Hunting and Firearms. No person shall hunt, trap or pursue wild life at any time. No person
shall use, carry or possess firearms of any description, or air rifles, spring guns, bow and arrows, slings or
any other form of weapon potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or any instrument
that can be loaded with a fire blank cartridge, or any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas from
beyond park boundaries is forbidden.
Subd. 2. Horseback Riding and Domestic Animals. No person shall ride a horse or other animal except
on designated trails or paths or allow any animal to unattended or without physical restraint in a public
park. No domestic animals of any description shall be allowed within a recreational area unless on an
adequate leash and accompanied by a person capable of controlling such animal.
Subd. 3. Picnic Areas and Use.
A. Regulation. Picnic or lunch in places other than those designated for that purpose.
Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary
to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of
all. Visitors shall comply with all directions given to achieve this end.
B. Availability. Violation of the regulation of the use of individual fireplaces together with
tables and benches follows generally the rule of A “first come, first served”, except
shelter houses that are reserved by the Superintendent of Parks for group activities as set
out in subdivision 4 of this section.
Section 14.3 Parks and Recreation 9
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14 - PUBLIC PROPERTY
Subd. 4. Group Activities. To schedule group activities such as picnics, sporting activities, parties or
theatrical or entertainment performances, to be held in park facilities the representative of said group, the
association or organization shall first obtain a permit from the Superintendent of Parks for such purpose.
The City Council may adopt an application form to be used by the Superintendent of Parks and Recreation
for such situations or if said application is not adopted he shall prepare a form for such purpose. The
Superintendent of Parks and Recreation shall grant the application if it appears that the group, association
or organization will not interfere with the general use of the park or the individual members of the public
and if said group, association or organization meets all other conditions contained in the application. The
application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond to protect the City from any liability of any
kind or character and to protect City property from damage. The Superintendent shall require that group
activities requiring extra police protection or other special facilities or expense to the City shall be provided
at the sole expense of the group, association or organization requesting a permit and may require that the
indemnity bond cover such services.
Subd. 5. Skating and Warming House Rules. To do or engage in any of the following acts within skating
rinks on ice in any park, except in the course of winter sports or organized events held under the
supervision of the staff of the City or its delegates shall be prohibited: racing or playing any games which
interfere with the general use of the skating rink, the use of sleds, toboggans, hockey sticks and pucks. This
section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of hockey rinks by the City. No person shall smoke or
loiter on any skating rink or on the ice in any park, or within any warming house in any park.
Subd. 6. Ball Fields, Tennis Courts and Basketball Courts.
A. No person shall play any sport or game except softball or soccer on the City softball
fields.
B. No person shall play any sport or game except baseball or soccer on the City baseball
fields. No person shall play any sport or game except basketball on any City basketball
court.
C. In regard to softball and baseball fields, no bases shall be placed on the grass of the
outfield or infield, and may be placed only on the base paths as laid out by the Park
Department.
D. No person shall play any sport or game except tennis on the City tennis courts.
E. In regard to ball fields and tennis courts, no person shall drive or ride a motor vehicle or
bicycle upon the playing surface of any ball field or tennis court.
F. The usage of each tennis court shall be restricted to one hour per party.
14.3.08 Prohibited Behavior in Parks. No person in a park shall:
Subd. 1. Fireworks and Explosives. Have in his possession or set off or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn, any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets or other fireworks or explosives of inflammable
material, or discharge them or throw them into such area from land or highway adjacent thereto; this
includes any substance, compound, mixture or article that in conjunction with any other substance or
compound would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints;
Subd. 2. Reservation of Facilities. Occupy any seat or bench, or enter into or loiter or remain in any
pavilion or other park structure or section thereof which may be reserved and designated by the Board for
the use of the opposite sex; exception is made for children under four years of age;
Subd. 3. Soliciting. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private;
Section 14.3 Parks and Recreation 10
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14 - PUBLIC PROPERTY
Subd. 4. Fires. Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be
designated by the Superintendent; drop or throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or
cigars, tobacco paper, or other inflammable material, within any park area or on any highway, road or street
abutting or continuous therein;
Subd. 5. Closed Areas. Enter an area posted as “Closed to the Public” nor shall any person use, or abet the
use of any area in violation of posted notices;
Subd. 6. Loitering and Boisterousness. Engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or
indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace;
and/or
Subd. 7. Intoxicating Liquor. No person shall drink intoxicating liquor in or upon any park or recreation
area.
14.3.09 Merchandising Prohibited. No person in a park shall:
Subd. 1. Vending and Peddling. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing or station or place any stand,
cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing; exception is here made as
to any regularly licensed concessionaire action by and under the authority and regulation of the
Superintendent;
Subd. 2. Advertising. Announce, advertise or call the public attention to any article or service for sale or
hire; and/or
Subd. 3. Signs. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever
or erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a
park unless approved by the Superintendent.
14.3.10 Enforcement. In addition to any other persons or peace officers vested with the powers of enforcement and
arrest of any person for the violation of any provision of this section, all employees of the City whose duties are
being discharged in a public park shall have the power to enforce provisions of this section by arrest of any person
violating any provision thereof.
Section 14.3 Parks and Recreation 11
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 15
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
Effective Date: March 7, 2006
Amendments: 01-02-08 (Res 08-03) /
Section 15.1: Administrative Offenses
15.1.01. Purpose. The administrative offense procedures established pursuant to this section are intended to
provide the public and the City with an informal and cost effective alternative to the traditional criminal procedures
followed for charges for violations of certain city code or ordinance provisions. The procedures provided herein are
intended to provide the charged party with an election either to proceed pursuant to the voluntary administrative
process established herein or elect to proceed under the existing criminal scheme which affords of the charged party
with all of the rights afforded by the criminal process. At any time prior to the payment of a listed administrative
penalty, as is provided for hereafter, the individual may withdraw from participation in the administrative procedure
and require the City to bring criminal charges in accordance with its ordinance, code, and the law. Likewise the City,
in its discretion, may choose not to initiate an administrative offense and may bring criminal charges in the first
instance. In the event a party participates in the administrative offense procedures but does not pay the monetary
penalty imposed, the City retains the right to seek criminal charges and can proceed to collect the costs of the
administrative offense procedures incurred as part of a subsequent criminal sentence in the event the party is charged
and is adjudicated guilty of the criminal violation alleged.
15.1.02. Administrative Offense Defined. An administrative offense is a violation of the provisions cited by this
section and is subject to the administrative penalties set forth in the schedule of offenses and penalties referred to in
Subd. 9 herein.
15.1.03. Notice. Any Police Officer of the Cloquet Police Department or any other person employed by the City,
authorized in writing by the City Administrator as having authority to enforce this section, shall, upon determining
that there has been a violation, provide prompt written notice to the violating party of the offense cited. If the
violation involves a motor vehicle, notice should be attached to the vehicle involved in the violation. Said notice
shall set forth the nature, date and time of violation, the name of the official issuing the notice, and the amount of the
scheduled administrative penalty to be paid.
15.1.04. Payment. Once such notice is given, the alleged violator may, within seven (7) days of the time of
issuance of the notice, pay the amount set forth on the schedule of penalties for the violation, or request a hearing in
writing, as is provided for hereafter. The penalty may be paid in person or by mail, and payment shall be deemed to
be an admission of the violation.
15.1.05. Hearing. Any person contesting an administrative offense pursuant to this Chapter may, within seven (7)
days of the time of issuance of the notice of violation, request an administrative hearing to contest the fact that a
violation has occurred. The hearing officer shall have authority to dismiss the violation or reduce or waive the
penalty. If the violation is sustained by the hearing officer, the violator shall pay the penalty imposed. Failure to pay
the administrative penalty for the violation cited may result in the person being cited for a criminal violation.
15.1.06. Hearing Officer. A City employee designated in writing by the City Administrator shall be the hearing
officer for purposes of this section. The hearing officer is authorized to hear and determine any controversy relating
to the administrative offenses provided for in this section. This process is intended to replace any existing
administrative procedures previously established by ordinance with regard to violations enumerated herein.
15.1.07. Failure to Pay. In the event a party charged with an administrative offense fails to pay the penalty
provided by this section, a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor charge may be brought against the alleged violator in
accordance with applicable statutes, code, or ordinance. If the penalty is paid or if an individual is found not to have
committed the administrative offense by the hearing officer, no such criminal charge may be brought by the City for
the same violation.
15.1.08. Disposition of Penalties. All penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be paid to the City
Administrator's office and may be deposited in the City's general fund.
Section 15.1 Administrative Offenses 1
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 15
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
15.1.09. Offenses and Penalties. Offenses which may be charged as administrative offenses shall be designated by
the City Council and the penalties for such offenses may be established by resolution of the City Council from time
to time. Copies of such resolutions shall be maintained in the office of the City Administrator.
15.1.10. Subsequent Offenses. In the event a party is charged with a subsequent administrative offense within a
twelve (12) month period of paying an administrative penalty for the same or substantially similar offense, the
subsequent administrative penalty shall be increased by twenty-five percent (25%) above the then existing
administrative penalty for the same offense.
15.1.11. Administrative Penalties. Listed below are the administrative offenses covered by this section and the
corresponding administrative penalties for those offenses. The following administrative penalties will be assessed
according to the offenses listed. The offenses and the amounts can be changed by resolution of the City Council
from time to time.
Section 15.1 Administrative Offenses 2
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 15
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
OFFENSE ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY
Alcohol and Tobacco Sales Violations
Purchase, Possession by Underage Person $ 25.00
Lending I.D. to Underage Person to Purchase $ 100.00
Alteration of Land Violations $ 500.00
Animals
Vicious Animal $ 200.00
All Other Animal Violations $ 50.00
Building Code Violations $ 100.00 to $ 700.00
Curfew Violations $ 25.00
Disorderly Conduct Violations $ 50.00 to $ 200.00
Failure to Apply for License Violations $ 100.00
Fire, Sign and Obstruction in Street Violations $ 50.00
Fires
No Open Fires $ 25.00
Fire Code Violations $ 100.00 to $ 500.00
Fireworks Violations
Use, Possession, Sale Prohibited $ 25.00
Garage/Rummage Sale Violations
First offense within one year $ 150.00
Second offense within one year $ 250.00
Third offense within one year $ 500.00
Grass and Weed Violations $ 25.00
Ice and Snow Violations $ 25.00
Junk cars, Household Furnishings and Appliances on Private Property
Violations
$ 100.00
Lane Use and Zoning Code Violations $ 200.00
Licenses and Permits not Occurring Elsewhere $ 50.00
Section 15.1 Administrative Offenses 3
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 15
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
OFFENSE ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY
Miscellaneous Violations
Illegal Dumping $ 50.00
Consuming Alcohol in Unauthorized Places $ 25.00
Trespassing $ 50.00 to $ 100.00
Skateboarding and Rollerblading $ 25.00
Municipal Utility Violations $ 200.00 to $ 500.00
Parking Violations
Handicap Zone $ 150.00
Fire Lane $ 25.00
Snowbird $ 25.00
Blocking Fire Hydrant $ 25.00
Car on Street During Snow Emergency $ 25.00
All Other Illegal Parking $ 25.00
Parks
Park Ordinance Violations $ 50.00
Public Nuisance Violations $ 50.00 to $ 100.00
Regulated Business $ 100.00
Signs $ 50.00
Smoke-Free Ordinance Violation $ 25.00
Snowmobiles $ 25.00
Storage of Wood, Deposit and Disposal of Refuse $ 50.00
Traffic Offenses
Exhibition Driving $ 50.00
Inattentive Driving $ 100.00
Weapons
Discharge or Display of Pallet/BB/Splat Guns $ 50.00
Section 15.1 Administrative Offenses 4
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 15
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
Section 15.2: Administrative Hearing Process
15.2.01 Purpose. The City Council has determined that there is a need for a standard method of addressing
administrative appeals and an alternative method of enforcing certain violations of City Code or Ordinances which
provide for the imposition of administrative penalties and fees instead of criminal penalties. Accordingly, the City
Council finds that the use of administrative citations and the imposition of civil penalties is a legitimate and
necessary alternative method of enforcement with regard to certain types of Code or Ordinance violations. This
method of enforcement shall be in addition to any other legal remedy which may be pursued by the City for City
Code and Ordinance violations.
15.2.02 Amending Existing Administrative Hearing Processes. Presently, City Code sections 6.4 and 6.6
provide for administrative hearings which extend due process to those individuals or merchants that are alleged to
have bartered or sold tobacco products and/or alcoholic products to individuals that are under legal age. Provisions
contained in sections 6.4 and 6.6 presently provide for civil penalties which involve the payment of administrative
fees and license suspension with regard to violations. At the time those sections were adopted the system of
conducting administrative hearings was untested. Given the experience that has been gained by enforcing those
sections, and in the interest of consistency and fairness, it is the express intent of this section to provide for a
consistent administrative hearing process for all hearings conducted pursuant to those sections and any other
ordinances that the City Council may hereinafter adopt which provide for the imposition of administrative fees and
penalties.
15.2.03. Administrative Citations. Hereafter, all administrative citations issued with regard to violations of City
Code or Ordinances will be issued by a City Police Officer or another City Official authorized by the City to issue a
citation regarding the prohibited conduct. All such citations must be issued in person or must be sent by mail to the
person or entity responsible for the violation or must be attached to the motor vehicle involved in the violation in the
case of a vehicular offense. The citation must state the date, time, and nature of the offense, the name of the issuing
officer or authorized individual, the amount of the scheduled administrative penalty, and the manner for paying the
administrative penalty or for appealing the citation. The person responsible for the violation must either pay the
scheduled administrative fee as provided for in the section for which they are cited or request a hearing within twenty
(20) days of the receipt or mailing of the written notice of violation.
15.2.04. Administrative Hearing Process. The City Council hereby ordains that all administrative hearings will
be conducted before a hearing officer who is either licensed to practice law in the State of Minnesota, is a retired
Judge, a hearing officer, or is a trained arbitrator or mediator. The City Administrator is hereby authorized to select
a hearing officer to hear and determine matters for which a hearing is requested provided that the person selected as
a hearing officer is not a City employee and is not a person that would have a personal interest in the outcome. The
cited individual in any given instance shall have the right to ask that the hearing officer assigned to the case be
removed from the case, for cause, as long as a written request is filed with the City Administrator within five (5) days
after the cited individual or person has been notified as to the identity of hearing officer chosen. If denied, any
subsequent requests must be directed to the assigned hearing officer directly and must also be based upon cause.
The assigned hearing officer will then decide whether or not he or she can fairly and objectively review the case. If
the hearing officer assigned determines that cause exists for
removal, that officer shall remove himself or herself from the case and the City Administrator shall assign another
hearing officer. A hearing officer is not a judicial officer but is a public officer as defined by Minnesota Statute
§609.415.
Section 15.2 Administrative Hearing Process 5
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 15
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
(A) Notice of Hearing. Notice of a prospective administrative hearing must be served in person or by
mail on the person or the entity alleged to be responsible for the violation at least seven (7) days in
advance of the proposed hearing unless a shorter time is agreed to by all parties. At the hearing,
the City will be required to proceed first to present testimony and question any witnesses that the
City believes supports the alleged administrative fee or citation sought to be enforced. The strict
rules of evidence will not apply and the hearing officer shall receive and give weight to evidence,
including hearsay evidence, which possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonable
and prudent people in the conduct of their personal affairs. Either party is entitled to be
represented by an attorney at their own cost and the hearing will not be transcribed by a court
reporter unless a transcript is requested and paid for by the person or entity requesting the hearing.
Any person requesting that the hearing be transcribed agrees to provide the City with a copy of the
transcript at no cost to the City.
(B) Hearing Officer's Authority. The hearing officer chosen herein is authorized by the City
Council to determine whether or not a violation has occurred, whether it is proper to impose the
scheduled administrative penalty, or whether or not it is proper to reduce, stay, or waive a
scheduled penalty.
1. Subpoena Authority. Upon the hearing officer's own initiative or upon written request
of an interested party demonstrating the need, the hearing officer may issue an
administrative subpoena requiring the attendance of witnesses or the production of
books, papers, records, or other documents that are material to the matter being
considered. The party requesting the subpoena shall be responsible for serving the
subpoena in a manner provided for civil actions and for paying the fees and expenses and
mileage of any witnesses required to attend. A person served with an administrative
subpoena pursuant to these provisions may file an objection with the hearing officer
promptly but not later than the time specified in the subpoena for compliance. The officer
may cancel the subpoena, the hearing, or modify the subpoena if it is unreasonable or
oppressive or if the proposed witnesses provide adequate grounds for modification of the
subpoena's requirements. However, any person who fails to file an objection, or, without
just cause, fails to or refuses to attend and testify or to produce the required documents in
obedience to an administrative subpoena issued herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Alternatively, the party requesting the subpoena may seek a continuance of the hearing
and an Order from the District Court directing compliance with the subpoena issued
pursuant to this section.
2. Decision. The hearing officer's decision and supporting reasons must be stated in writing
and must be completed within ten (10) days of the date of the hearing. That decision will
be produced in writing and provided to the City Administrator and the parties involved
within ten (10) days from the date of the hearing. If mailed, the hearing officer will be
given an additional three (3) days to provide for mailing.
(C) Judicial Review. Any person that maintains that they are aggrieved by an administrative decision
consistent with this provision may have that decision reviewed in the district court consistent with
Minnesota Statute §462.361.
15.2.05. Recovery of Civil Penalties or Administrative Fees. If a civil penalty or administrative fee assessed
pursuant to code or ordinance or determined after an administrative hearing requested herein is not paid within the
time specified, it shall constitute a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred if the property or
improvements on the property was the subject of the violation and the property owner was found responsible for the
violation, and/or, be a personal obligation of the violator in all other situations.
Section 15.2 Administrative Hearing Process 6
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 15
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
1. A lien assessed herein may be assessed against the property and collected in the same
manner as taxes.
2. A personal obligation may be collected by any appropriate legal means.
3. Failure to pay fine or administrative fee assessed herein is grounds for suspending or
revoking a license associated with the violation.
4. During the time that any civil penalty administrative fee remains unpaid, the City will be
entitled to assess interest based upon the prevailing judgment interest rate and provided
by law by the State District Courts.
15.2.06. Additional Criminal Penalties. The following are misdemeanors, punishable in accordance with state
law:
(A) Failure without good cause to pay a fine or final determination made by the hearing officer as
provided herein.
(B) Failure to appear at an administrative hearing requested and scheduled pursuant to this section or
for failure to comply with an administrative subpoena without filing a timely objection as provided
herein.
(C) Failure to pay a fine imposed by the hearing officer within sixty (60) days of the date of citation or
no later than thirty (30) days after the date of any written decision to determine that a violation has
occurred and all appeals therefrom.
Section 15.2 Administrative Hearing Process 7
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 16 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Effective Date: March 7, 2006
Amendments: 01-05-10 369A / 03-05-13 421A /
Section 16.1: Abandoned
16.1.01 Abandoned Motor Vehicles.
(See Chapter 5 - Traffic and Vehicles - Section 5.6)
16.1.02 Other Abandoned Property.
Subd. 1 Procedure. All other property lawfully coming into the possession of the City shall be disposed
of as provided in this Section.
Subd. 2 Storage. The department of the City acquiring possession of the property deemed abandoned
shall arrange for its storage. If City facilities for storage are unavailable or inadequate, the department may
arrange for storage at privately owned facilities.
Subd. 3 Claim by Owner. The owner may claim property deemed abandoned by exhibiting satisfactory
proof of ownership within ninety (90) days of seizure and paying the City any storage or maintenance costs
incurred by it. A receipt for the property shall be obtained upon release to the owner.
Subd. 4 Sale. If the property remains unclaimed in the possession of the City for Sixty (60) days, the
property shall be sold to the highest bidder at a public auction conducted by the chief of police of the City
after two (2) weeks published notice setting forth the time and place of the sale and the property to be sold.
Subd. 5 Disposition of Proceeds. The proceeds of any sale under this section shall be placed in the
general fund of the City. If the former owner makes application and furnishes satisfactory proof of
ownership within ninety (90) days of the sale, he or she shall be paid the proceeds of the sale of his or her
property less the costs of storage and the proportionate part of the cost of published notice and other costs
of the sale.
Section 16.1 Abandoned 1
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 16 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 16.2: (Reserved)
Section 16.2 Reserved 2
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 16 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 16.3: Sale of Toxic Substances
16.3.01 Definition. For purposes of this section, “toxic substance” shall mean:
Subd. 1. Glue, cement or aerosol paint containing toluene, benzene, xylene, amyl nitrate, butyl nitrate,
nitrous oxide or containing other aromatic hydrocarbon solvents, but does not include glue, cement or paint
contained in a packaged kit for the construction of a model automobile, airplane or similar item;
Subd. 2. Butane or a butane lighter; or
Subd. 3. Any substance declared to be toxic to the central nervous system and to have a potential for abuse,
by the State Commissioner of Health.
16.3.02 Use for Intoxication Prohibited. No person shall use or possess, or intentionally aid another to use or
possess, any toxic substance with the intent of inducing intoxication, excitement or stupefaction of the central
nervous system, except under the direction and supervision of a medical doctor.
Section 16.3 Sale of Toxic Substances 3
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 16 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 16.4: Wrecker Services
16.4.01 Purpose and Intent. The City desires to establish a procedure for selecting one or more tow truck
operator(s) when these are needed by the City.
16.4.02 Authority to Contract for Tow Services. The City may enter into a contract on behalf of the City with any
person, firm, entity or corporation who will obtain or provide adequate facilities within the City to handle the tow
and storage of vehicles requested by the City. This contract shall set forth the fees, which fees shall not be exceeded
in any case involving a tow or storage requested by the City.
16.4.03 Bond. Every towing operator to whom a contract is awarded for towing and storage shall, upon the
execution of the contract, file with the City Administrator a bond in form and substance acceptable to the City
Attorney in such amount as may be determined by the contract. This bond shall be conditioned that the principal will
indemnify any and all persons, firms or corporations, including the City and St. Louis County or other government
agencies of the state, for any loss sustained by any unlawful or unauthorized damage to a vehicle which it tows at
the request of the City or stores pursuant to the provisions of this section and any contract entered into where the
City is a party thereof.
16.4.04 Statements. The towing operator who has entered into a contract pursuant to this section shall forward to
the Chief of Police of the City a copy of each bill or statement prepared for each owner of a vehicle towed or stored
at the request of the City.
16.4.05 Exclusion. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit, limit or restrict equipment, storage
facilities or the use or operation of towing services by the City, Carlton County, Cloquet School District or any other
governmental entity.
16.4.06 Request for Proposals. Each two years, the City, by and through its purchasing agent, shall solicit
proposals for a contract for towing services to be provided pursuant to this section. One or more companies may be
awarded a contract for towing services. The proposals will be awarded based upon satisfaction of the following
criteria:
Subd. 1. Police requests within the City must be a priority and must receive an immediate response.
Subd. 2. Wrecker availability is the responsibility of the service provider 24 hours per day 365 days per
year. Additional wreckers or related equipment that are needed to provide the requested services are the
responsibility of the approved wrecker service.
Subd. 3. Should the City experience a severe snowstorm or other natural disaster, wreckers must be made
available to the City in the event abandoned vehicles have to be removed from debris or snow removal.
Subd. 4. A secured storage/impoundment location must be made available within close proximity to the
City Hall, preferably within the City limits.
Subd. 5. An insurance certificate demonstrating liability coverage with a combined single limit in the
amount of at least the then applicable liability limits established by the applicable Minnesota law in a
statutory cite of this state.
Subd. 6. Police authorization must be required to release all vehicles. A tow slip must be required to be
presented by the owner of any towed vehicle.
Subd. 7. Rates and proposals are required as follows:
A. The wrecker service must identify customer towing rates:
1. For police requested tow of private vehicles (paid by owner); and
2. For requested tow of City owned vehicles (paid by City).
Section 16.4 Wrecker Services 4
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 16 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
B. The Chief of Police, Purchasing Agent and City Administrator shall review the proposals
and submit a report and recommendation to the City Council with regard to them.
C. The Council is the authority on contract for towing services.
16.4.07 Exemption to Fees. No emergency wrecker service summoned by the Chief of Police shall charge or
receive any fee from any person or from the City where service is not actually provided.
16.4.08 Driving Wrecker to the Scene of an Accident. No person shall drive a wrecker, licensed or unlicensed, to
the scene of an accident or collision on the streets of the City, unless that person has been called to the scene by the
Chief of Police or his designee or has been requested by the owner or operator of a disabled vehicle or his agent.
16.4.09 Soliciting Wrecker Business at the Scene of Accident Prohibited; Presence Is Evidence of Violation.
No person shall solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the streets of the City the business of towing any
vehicle which is disabled on the street regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of soliciting the
business of towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading or purchasing the vehicle. Proof of the presence
of any person engaged in providing wrecker service or the presence of any wrecker or motor vehicle owned or
operated by any person engaged in providing wrecker service business, either as owner, operator, employee or
agent, on any street in the City at or near the scene of an accident within an hour after the happening of the accident
which has not been called to the scene by the Chief of Police or the owner or operator of a disabled vehicle or his or
her agent shall be prima facie evidence of a solicitation in violation of this subsection.
Section 16.4 Wrecker Services 5
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 16 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 16.5
(Section Deleted per Ordinance No. 421A passed by City Council on 3/5/13)
Section 16.5 Deleted 6
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 16 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 16.6: Flood Hazard Prevention
16.6.01 Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
Subd. 1. “Administrative authority” shall mean a state certified building official designated by the
appointing authority.
Subd. 2. “Appointing authority” shall mean the City Council.
Subd. 3. “Building Department” shall mean the Building Inspection Department of the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 4. “Corporation counsel” shall mean the attorney for the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 5. “Flood hazard area” shall mean the special areas as indicated on the flood hazard boundary map,
prepared by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 6. “Jurisdiction” shall mean the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 7. “UBC” shall mean the latest Uniform Building Code adopted by reference by the Minnesota State
Building Code.
16.6.02 Enforcement. The Cloquet Building Code shall be enforced and administered by the City of Cloquet within
its corporate limits. The City Council of the City of Cloquet shall annually appoint a building official to enforce and
administer the Cloquet Building Code. The administrative chapters of the UBC, Chapters 1, 2 and 3, as amended by
the Minnesota State Building Code, shall govern the application of this Code.
16.6.03 Flood proofing Permit.
Subd. 1. Permit Required. In addition to the permits required by Chapter 3 of the UBC, as it may be
amended from time to time, a separate Flood proofing permit shall be obtained from the Building Official
or his or her authorized representative prior to the commencement of any improvement to any land,
building or structure within any flood hazard area.
Subd. 2. Application for Flood proofing Permit. To obtain a Flood proofing permit, the applicant shall
provide the following information to the Building Official:
A. A list of all spaces affected by the Flood proofing regulations adopted by reference by
this section giving Flood proofing class, elevation, regulatory flood datum (RFD), floor
elevations, proposed uses and contents and references to drawings and specifications
which explain the Flood proofing measures that apply to each space;
B. All plans and specifications for the permit shall be noted with the proposed Flood
proofing class of each space below the regulatory flood datum (RFD) including detailed
drawings of walls and wall openings; and
C. Two copies of the owner's contingency plan, which shall describe in detail all procedures
for temporary placement and removal or contingent protection proposed for items in
spaces affected by the above mentioned Flood proofing regulations including:
1. Plans and schedules for items to be removed and locations of places above the
regulatory flood datum to which they shall be removed if these contents violate
restrictions associated with the Flood proofing class of the space in which they
are placed temporarily, including specific organizational responsibilities for
accomplishing this removal.
Section 16.6 Flood Hazard Prevention 7
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 16 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
2. Procedures, materials and equipment for protecting items required to have
protection by their Flood proofing class but for which this protection shall be
proposed to be provided contingently, including specific organizational
responsibilities for accomplishing this protection.
Subd. 3. Action on Permit Application.
A. Applications for Flood proofing permits, together with all accompanying documents
required under this section, shall be checked by the Building Official or his or her
designated representative.
B. The applications and accompanying documents shall be reviewed as necessary by other
departments of the City to check compliance with the laws, codes, and ordinances under
their jurisdiction.
C. In connection with applications for a Flood proofing permit, the Building Official or his
or her designated representative shall determine that the regulatory flood datum elevation
noted in the application shall be correct and that all requirements for the Flood proofing
classes selected by the applicant shall be met.
D. Administration. The provisions of Section 303 of Chapter 3 of the UBC, as it may be
amended from time to time, shall, to the extent applicable, govern the issuance of Flood
proofing permits.
E. Posting of Permit. Any Flood proofing permit that is issued shall be posted at the site of
operations in a conspicuous place open to public inspection during the entire time of
performance of the work and until completion of the same.
16.6.04 Miscellaneous Provisions Relating to Permits.
Subd. 1. Posting of Permit. Any building permit that is issued shall be posted at the site of operations in a
conspicuous place open to public inspection during the entire time of performance of the work and until
completion of the same.
Subd. 2. Limitation on Permit. No permit to erect, repair or alter any building or structure shall authorize
the use of any part of any public thoroughfare or other public ground or easement.
Subd. 3. Administration. The provisions of Section 303 of Chapter 3 of the UBC, as it may be amended
from time to time, shall, to the extent applicable, govern the issuance of Flood proofing.
Subd. 4. Special Permits. Special permits shall be obtained from the Building Official prior to engaging in
any of the following activities:
A. Moving any building or structure;
B. Razing or demolishing any building;
C. Fencing permits;
D. In-ground pool and spa permits; and/or
E. Any other construction or accessories to a building or structure the use of which shall be
regulated by the provisions of the Cloquet Building Code and which for any reason is not
included in the permit for general construction.
Section 16.6 Flood Hazard Prevention 8
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 16 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Subd. 4. Review by Other Departments. All commercial, industrial and multi-residential development
plans shall be reviewed and approved by the appropriate commission(s) of the City and the Fire Inspector
of the City before any permit provided for under this section shall be issued.
Subd. 5. Compliance with Other Conditions. The Building Official shall not issue any permit under this
section until all conditions and requirements placed on the development by other departments of the City
have been satisfied, such as, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Fire Inspector of the City. Any
permit issued by the Building Official in violation of this requirement shall be void.
16.6.05 Fees.
Subd. 1. Building Permit Fees. A fee for each building permit shall be paid to the City through the
Building Inspection Department. The City Council shall from time to time by resolution, establish a
schedule of fees for building permits. No building permit may be issued by the Building Inspection
Department of the City until the building permit fee for the building permit has been paid in full.
Subd. 2. Flood proofing Permit Fee; Inspection Fee. A fee for each Flood proofing permit shall be paid
to the City prior to the issuance of the permit by the Building Official. The Flood proofing permit fee shall
be equal to one-fourth of the building permit fee. A fee which shall be established by resolution as adopted
from time to time by the City Council for each inspection made pursuant to this section shall be paid by the
owner of such property at the time of such inspection.
Subd. 3. Special Permit Fees. A fee which shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to time
by the City Council for each special permit shall be paid to the Building Inspector prior to the issuance of
the permit by the Building Inspector.
Subd. 4. Plan Checking Fees. A plan checking fee shall be paid to the City at the time of submitting plans
and specifications for checking whenever plans are required to be submitted for checking under this
section. The plan checking fee shall be equal to 65% of the building permit fee. An additional fee which
shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to time by the City Council shall be paid to the City
for all plan checks and inspection work relating to fire sprinkler systems.
Subd. 5. Surcharge.
A. In addition to the fees required in the preceding provisions, the applicant shall pay to the
Building Official a surcharge of .0005 times the value of the improvement, or $.50
whichever shall be greater, up to $1,000,000. For improvements valued at $1,000,000,
but less than $10,000,000, the surcharge shall be $1,000. For improvements valued at
$10,000,000, but less than $20,000,000, the surcharge shall be $1,500. For improvements
valued at $20,000,000 or greater, the surcharge shall be $2,000.
B. The surcharges collected by the Building Official shall be remitted quarterly to the
Minnesota Department of Administration.
Subd. 6. Valuation. The determination of value or valuation under any provisions of the Cloquet Building
Code shall be made by the Building Official. The valuation to be used in computing the permit and plan
checking fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued to be
determined in accordance with Section 304 of the Uniform Building Code, as it may be amended from time
to time.
Subd. 7. Work Commenced Before Permit Issued. Where work for which a permit is required by the
Cloquet Building Code is started prior to obtaining the permit, the fees specified in this section shall be
doubled, provided, however, that the payment of the double fee shall not relieve any person from full
compliance of the requirement of the Cloquet Building Code in the execution of the work nor from any
other penalties prescribed by law.
Section 16.6 Flood Hazard Prevention 9
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 16 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Subd. 8. Other Permits. The payment of a fee in this section shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the
permit from the necessity of obtaining additional permits and the payment of other fees that may be
prescribed by law, code, or ordinance, for the temporary occupation of public property, for inspection of
sewer connections, water connections, gas connections or other privileges or requirements.
16.6.06 Flood proofing Inspections. Buildings or structures (and parts thereof) that contain or utilize contingent or
emergency (temporary) type flood- proofing element or devices shall be subject to inspection by the Building
Official at intervals of three years or less. The owner, or his or her agent, shall be notified at least ten (10) days in
advance of inspection date and shall be present at the inspection. The owner or his or her agent shall be responsible
for demonstrating the availability, installment and proper functioning, anchorage and support of all closure
assemblies and other contingent or emergency (temporary) Flood proofing items. All necessary corrections of
deficiencies shall be performed within 90 calendar days of the inspection date and at the owner's expense.
Note: Failure to perform the required remedial work within the prescribed time shall be a violation of the Cloquet
Building Code.
16.6.07 Nonconforming Use. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage
or amendment of this section but which is not in conformity with the provisions of these regulations may be
continued subject to the following conditions:
Subd. 1. No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way which increases its
nonconformity.
Subd. 2. No structural alteration, addition or repair to any conforming structure over the life of the
structure shall exceed 25% of its value at the time of its becoming a nonconforming use, unless the
structure shall be permanently changed to a conforming use.
Subd. 3. If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future use of the building premises
shall conform to this section. The assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses which have been discontinued for a period of six months.
Subd. 4. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including floods, to an extent of
50% or more of its value, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformance with the provisions of these
regulations.
Subd. 5. Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as
nonconforming uses.
Subd. 6. Any alteration, addition or repair to any nonconforming structure which would result in
substantially increasing its flood damage or flood hazard potential shall be protected as required by these
regulations.
Subd. 7. The Building Official shall maintain a list of nonconforming uses including the date of becoming
nonconforming, assessed value at the time of its becoming a nonconforming use, and the nature and extent
of nonconformity. This list shall be brought up-to-date annually.
Subd. 8. The Building Official shall prepare a list of those nonconforming uses which have been flood
proofed or otherwise protected in conformance with these regulations. He or she shall present the list to the
Building Official who may issue a certificate to the owner stating that such uses, as a result of these
corrective measures, shall be in conformance with these regulations.
16.6.08 Building Code Appeals. Any person affected by any decision of the Building Official may appeal
therefrom pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 15 - Administrative Hearing Process.
Section 16.6 Flood Hazard Prevention 10
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 16 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
16.6.09 Limitation on Liability. The City, the Building Official and/or any employee charged with the enforcement
of the Cloquet Building Code, shall not be liable for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of
any act required of the Building Official or any employee herein or by reason of any act or omission of the Building
Official or any such employee.
Section 16.6 Flood Hazard Prevention 11
City of Cloquet, Minnesota
ZONING ORDINANCE
Adopted by the City Council: May 1, 2016
Revised May 26, 2016 Ord. 456A
Revised July 19, 2016 Ord. 457A
Revised May 4, 2017 Ord 464A
Revised May 25, 2017 Ord 466A
Revised Dec. 4, 2018 Ord 475A
Revised Dec. 4, 2018 Ord 476A
Revised Dec. 4, 2018 Ord 477A
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
i
CHAPTER 17: ZONING
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section Title Page
17.1 General Provisions
17.1.01 Applicability................................................................................................................. 1
Subd. 1 Preamble ................................................................................................... 1
Subd. 2 Title........................................................................................................... 1
17.1.02 Intent and Purpose........................................................................................................ 1
17.1.03 Scope of Ordinance: Qualification ............................................................................... 2
Subd. 1 Jurisdiction................................................................................................ 2
Subd. 2 Interpretation............................................................................................. 2
Subd. 3 Compliance ............................................................................................... 2
Subd. 4 Severability............................................................................................... 2
17.1.04 Word Usage.................................................................................................................. 2
17.1.05 Definitions.................................................................................................................... 3
17.2 Application, Review and Approval Procedures..................................................... 18
17.2.01 General Provisions ..................................................................................................... 18
Subd. 1 Intent ....................................................................................................... 18
Subd. 2 General types of Development ............................................................... 18
Subd. 3 General Types of Development Reviews and Approvals ....................... 20
Subd. 4 General Development Review Elements and Procedures....................... 20
Subd. 5 General Review and Approval Criteria................................................... 24
Subd. 6 General Procedure for Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements ....... 24
Subd. 7 General Procedures Associated with Informational Meetings and Notices
................................................................................................................ 25
Subd. 8 General Procedures Associated with Administrative Review and
Approval ................................................................................................. 27
17.2.02 Comprehensive Plan Amendment .............................................................................. 27
Subd. 1 Applicability ........................................................................................... 27
Subd. 2 Review Process....................................................................................... 28
Subd. 3 Approval Criteria .................................................................................... 29
17.2.03 Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) ........................................................................ 29
Subd. 1 Applicability ........................................................................................... 29
Subd. 2 Review Process....................................................................................... 30
Subd. 3 Approval Criteria for a Zoning Map Amendment .................................. 31
17.2.04 Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment.......................................................................... 32
Subd. 1 Applicability ........................................................................................... 32
Subd. 2 Review Process....................................................................................... 32
Subd. 3 Approval Criteria .................................................................................... 33
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
ii
17.2.05 Creation of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District ............................ 33
Subd. 1 Applicability ........................................................................................... 33
Subd. 2 General Review Process ......................................................................... 34
Subd. 3 PUD- General Development Plan Review Process................................. 34
Subd. 4 PUD- Specific Implementation Plan Review Process ............................ 37
Subd. 5 Approval Criteria .................................................................................... 38
Subd. 6 Conditions that may be attached to a PUD............................................. 39
Subd. 7 Effect of the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan Approval ................ 40
Subd. 8 Building Permit Restrictions................................................................... 40
Subd. 9 Expiration ............................................................................................... 40
17.2.06 Conditional Use Permit .............................................................................................. 40
Subd. 1 Applicability ........................................................................................... 40
Subd. 2 Review Process....................................................................................... 41
Subd. 3 Approval Criteria .................................................................................... 42
Subd. 4 Conditions that may be attached to a Conditional Use Permit ............... 43
Subd. 5 Additional Information ........................................................................... 44
17.2.07 Variance ................................................................................................................ 44
Subd. 1 Applicability ........................................................................................... 44
Subd. 2 Review Process....................................................................................... 44
Subd. 3 Approval Criteria .................................................................................... 45
Subd. 4 Appeal..................................................................................................... 46
17.2.08 Appeal of an Administrative Decision ....................................................................... 46
Subd. 1 Applicability ........................................................................................... 46
Subd. 2 Review Process....................................................................................... 46
Subd. 3 Approval Criteria .................................................................................... 47
17.2.09 Discontinuous or Vacation of a Public Way .............................................................. 47
17.2.10 Site Plan Approval...................................................................................................... 47
Subd. 1 Applicability ........................................................................................... 47
Subd. 2 Review Process....................................................................................... 47
Subd. 3 Site Plan Review Requirements.............................................................. 49
Subd. 4 Criteria for Approval .............................................................................. 51
Subd. 5 Application for Site Plan Review and Approval..................................... 51
Subd. 6 Site Plan Review Requirements and Performance Standards................. 52
17.3 Review and Approval Authorities........................................................................... 54
17.3.01 General Provision....................................................................................................... 54
Subd. 1 Intent ....................................................................................................... 54
Subd. 2 Conformity with Development Regulations ........................................... 54
Subd. 3 Other Review and Approval Authorities and Powers and Duties........... 54
17.3.02 City Planner/Zoning Administrator............................................................................ 54
Subd. 1 Establishment of Office .......................................................................... 54
Subd. 2 Powers and Duties of the Zoning Administrator or Other Authorized Agent
................................................................................................................ 54
17.3.03 Building Official......................................................................................................... 55
Subd. 1 Establishment of Office .......................................................................... 55
Subd. 2 Powers and Duties .................................................................................. 55
17.3.04 Planning Commission................................................................................................. 56
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
iii
17.3.05 City Council ............................................................................................................... 56
17.4 General Standards.................................................................................................... 57
17.4.01 General Standards....................................................................................................... 57
Subd. 1 Compliance ............................................................................................. 57
Subd. 2 Area Requirements ................................................................................. 57
Subd. 3 Minimum Requirements ......................................................................... 57
Subd. 4 Dwelling on Any Lot of Record ............................................................. 57
Subd. 5 Height Limitations Not Applicable......................................................... 57
Subd. 6 Yards and Frontage Limitations Not Applicable .................................... 58
Subd. 7 Yard Space, General ............................................................................... 58
Subd. 8 Placement of Single- and Two- Family Residential Structures on Large Lots
................................................................................................................ 58
Subd. 9 Yard Space Encroachments – Projections into Yards............................. 59
Subd. 10 Yard Space Exception, Steep Slopes ...................................................... 59
Subd. 11 Erection of More than One Principal Structure on a Lot ........................ 59
Subd. 12 Animals other than Domestic (House) Pets............................................ 60
Subd. 13 Controls Applicable to the Moving of Buildings – All Districts ............ 60
Subd. 14 Controls Applicable to the Storage of Firewood, Lumber, and Wood Products
Used in Construction – All Residential Districts except FR – Farm Residential
District ................................................................................................... 60
17.4.02 Performance Standards............................................................................................... 61
Subd. 1 Compliance Required ............................................................................. 61
Subd. 2 Points of Measurement ........................................................................... 62
Subd. 3 Performance Standard Regulations......................................................... 62
Subd. 4 State Standards........................................................................................ 63
Subd. 5 Compliance ............................................................................................. 63
17.4.03 Outside Storage / Display – All Districts ................................................................... 64
Subd. 1 Outside Storage....................................................................................... 64
Subd. 2 Residential Zoning Districts ................................................................... 64
Subd. 3 Commercial, Public / Institutional and Industrial Zoning Districts ........ 65
17.4.04 Non-Conformities....................................................................................................... 65
Subd. 1 Intent ....................................................................................................... 65
Subd. 2 Non-Conformities ................................................................................... 66
17.4.05 Violations and Penalty................................................................................................ 68
Subd. 1 Complaints Regarding Violations........................................................... 68
Subd. 2 Violation and Penalty.............................................................................. 69
17.5 Special Provision....................................................................................................... 70
17.5.01 Accessory Buildings................................................................................................... 70
Subd. 1 Requirements .......................................................................................... 70
17.5.02 Required Yard and Open Space ................................................................................. 72
Subd. 1 Yards and Open Space............................................................................ 72
Subd. 2 Encroachments........................................................................................ 72
Subd. 3 Patio, Deck, Terrace, and Similar Uses .................................................. 72
Subd. 4 Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar uses...................................... 72
17.5.03 Screening ................................................................................................................ 73
Subd. 1 Residential Districts................................................................................ 73
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
iv
Subd. 2 Commercial and Industrial Districts ....................................................... 73
Subd. 3 All Districts............................................................................................. 74
17.5.04 Landscaping Requirements ........................................................................................ 74
Subd. 1 Intent ....................................................................................................... 74
Subd. 2 Landscape Plan Required........................................................................ 74
Subd. 3 General Requirements, All Districts....................................................... 75
Subd. 4 Requirements for One- and Two- Family Lots and Subdivisions .......... 76
Subd. 5 Requirements for Commercial, Industrial, Public and Multiple Family. 76
17.5.05 Fences ................................................................................................................ 77
Subd. 1 Residential Districts................................................................................ 77
Subd. 2 Commercial, Public, Public / Institutional and Industrial Districts ........ 78
Subd. 3 Finishes................................................................................................... 78
Subd. 4 Review .................................................................................................... 78
Subd. 5 Fence Maintenance ................................................................................. 79
17.5.06 Outdoor Wood-Fired Furnace .................................................................................... 79
Subd. 1 Burning Requirements ............................................................................ 79
17.5.07 Mobile Storage Structures .......................................................................................... 80
Subd. 1 Procedure ................................................................................................ 80
Subd. 2 Special Requirements ............................................................................. 80
17.5.08 Home Occupations ..................................................................................................... 80
Subd. 1 Intent ....................................................................................................... 80
Subd. 2 Permitted Home Occupation / Criteria and Standards............................ 81
Subd. 3 Particular Home Occupations Prohibited................................................ 82
Subd. 4 Enforcement............................................................................................ 82
17.5.09 Bed and Breakfast Homes .......................................................................................... 82
Subd. 1 Intent ....................................................................................................... 82
Subd. 2 Definitions .............................................................................................. 82
Subd. 3 Permits .................................................................................................... 83
Subd. 4 Minimum Requirements for Bed and Breakfast Homes......................... 83
17.5.10 Swimming Pools......................................................................................................... 84
Subd. 1 Intent ....................................................................................................... 84
Subd. 2 Required Permits..................................................................................... 84
Subd. 3 Required Plans ........................................................................................ 84
Subd. 4 Setbacks .................................................................................................. 84
Subd. 5 In-Ground Pools...................................................................................... 85
Subd. 6 Back Flush Water or Pool Drainage Water............................................. 85
Subd. 7 Mechanical Equipment ........................................................................... 85
Subd. 8 Swimming Pool Barrier .......................................................................... 85
17.5.11 Off-Street Parking and Loading ................................................................................. 85
Subd. 1 Intent ....................................................................................................... 85
Subd. 2 General Provision ................................................................................... 85
Subd. 3 Design, Construction and Maintenance .................................................. 87
Subd. 4 Parking Provisions in Residential Districts............................................. 89
Subd. 5 Driveways – All Districts ....................................................................... 90
Subd. 6 Table: Schedule of Parking Requirements.............................................. 91
17.5.12 Lighting ................................................................................................................ 93
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
v
Subd. 1 Intent ....................................................................................................... 93
Subd. 2 Exemptions ............................................................................................. 93
Subd. 3 Nonconforming Uses .............................................................................. 93
Subd. 4 Method of Measuring Light Intensity..................................................... 94
Subd. 5 Performance Standards ........................................................................... 94
Subd. 6 Prohibitions............................................................................................. 95
Subd. 7 Submission of Plans................................................................................ 95
17.5.13 Signs ................................................................................................................ 96
Subd. 1 Intent ....................................................................................................... 96
Subd. 2 Definitions .............................................................................................. 96
Subd. 3 General Requirements........................................................................... 100
Subd. 4 Design Characteristics .......................................................................... 100
Subd. 5 Sign Requirements by Type.................................................................. 101
Subd. 6 Maintenance.......................................................................................... 103
Subd. 7 Signs Allowed Without a Permit .......................................................... 104
Subd. 8 Signs Requiring a Permit ...................................................................... 107
Subd. 9 Prohibited Signs.................................................................................... 113
Subd. 10 Signage Plan ......................................................................................... 114
Subd. 11 Performance Standards ......................................................................... 115
Subd. 12 Sign Administration.............................................................................. 116
Subd. 13 Table: Temporary Sign Sizes................................................................ 117
Subd. 14 Table: Signs Requiring Permits ............................................................ 118
Subd. 15 Table: Setback and Height.................................................................... 119
17.5.14 Design Standards for the West End and Downtown Business Districts................... 120
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 120
Subd. 2 District Boundaries ............................................................................... 120
Subd. 3 General Provision ................................................................................. 120
Subd. 4 Dimensional Standards ......................................................................... 121
Subd. 5 Parking Standards ................................................................................. 122
Subd. 6 Architectural Standards......................................................................... 123
Subd. 7 Landscaping and Lighting Standards.................................................... 126
Subd. 8 Review Procedure................................................................................. 128
17.5.15 Design Standards for the Highway 33 Corridor ....................................................... 128
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 128
Subd. 2 District Boundaries ............................................................................... 129
Subd. 3 General Provisions................................................................................ 129
Subd. 4 Dimensional Standards ......................................................................... 130
Subd. 5 Parking Standards ................................................................................. 130
Subd. 6 Architectural Standards......................................................................... 131
Subd. 7 Landscaping and Lighting Standards.................................................... 133
Subd. 8 Review Procedures ............................................................................... 135
Subd. 9 Table: Examples of Acceptable Plantings ............................................ 136
17.5.16 Wireless Communication Facilities.......................................................................... 137
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 137
Subd. 2 Definitions ............................................................................................ 137
Subd. 3 Applicability ......................................................................................... 138
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
vi
Subd. 4 General Requirements........................................................................... 138
Subd. 5 Prohibitions........................................................................................... 139
Subd. 6 Performance Standards ......................................................................... 139
Subd. 7 Conditional Use Permit Applications ................................................... 142
17.5.17 Sewage and Wastewater Treatment Systems ........................................................... 143
17.5.18 Floodplain Regulations............................................................................................. 143
Subd. 1 Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact and Purpose........................ 143
Subd. 2 General Provisions................................................................................ 144
Subd. 3 Conflict with Pre-Existing Zoning Regulations and General Compliance
.............................................................................................................. 145
Subd. 4 Permitted Uses, Standards and Floodplain Evaluation Criteria............ 146
Subd. 5 Utilities, Railroads, Roads and Bridges in the Floodplain District....... 148
Subd. 6 Subdivision ........................................................................................... 148
Subd. 7 Administration ...................................................................................... 149
Subd. 8 Variances .............................................................................................. 149
Subd. 9 Nonconformities ................................................................................... 150
Subd. 10 Penalties for Violations......................................................................... 150
Subd. 11 Amendments ......................................................................................... 151
Subd. 12 Travel Trailers and Travel Vehicles ..................................................... 152
17.5.19 Wetland Conservation Ordinance............................................................................. 153
Subd. 1 Purpose ................................................................................................. 153
Subd. 2 Incorporation by Reference .................................................................. 153
Subd. 3 Scope..................................................................................................... 153
Subd. 4 Procedures............................................................................................. 153
Subd. 5 High Priority Areas............................................................................... 154
Subd. 6 Delegation............................................................................................. 154
Subd. 7 Violations, Penalties and Enforcement................................................. 154
Subd. 8 Fees....................................................................................................... 154
17.6 Zoning Districts ...................................................................................................... 155
17.6.01 Zoning District Regulations ..................................................................................... 155
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 155
Subd. 2 Relationship of Zoning Districts to the Comprehensive Plan............... 155
Subd. 3 Establishment of Zoning Districts ........................................................ 155
Subd. 4 Zoning Map .......................................................................................... 156
17.6.02 FM- Farm Management and Research District ........................................................ 157
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 157
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 157
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 158
Subd 4 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 158
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 158
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions.................................................................... 159
17.6.03 FR – Farm Residential District................................................................................. 159
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 159
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 159
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 160
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 160
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
vii
Subd 5 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 161
Subd. 6 Special District Provision ..................................................................... 162
17.6.04 SR- Suburban Residential District............................................................................ 162
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 162
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 162
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 163
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 163
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 163
17.6.05 R-1 – Single-Family Residence District................................................................... 164
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 164
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 164
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 165
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 165
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations – Lots Served by Both Municipal Sewer and Water
.............................................................................................................. 165
17.6.06 R-2 – One- to Two-Family Residence Districts ....................................................... 166
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 166
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 166
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 167
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 167
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 168
17.6.07 R-3 – Multiple-Family Residence District ............................................................... 169
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 169
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 169
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 169
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 170
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 170
Subd. 6 Special District Provision ..................................................................... 171
17.6.08 MHC – Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home Park) District................. 172
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 172
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 172
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 172
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 172
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 173
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions.................................................................... 173
17.6.9 MRC – Mixed Residential / Commercial District.................................................... 174
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 174
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 174
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 175
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 176
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 176
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions.................................................................... 176
17.6.10 NC- Neighborhood Commercial District ................................................................. 178
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 178
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 178
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 178
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
viii
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 179
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 179
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions.................................................................... 180
17.6.11 RC- Regional Commercial District .......................................................................... 180
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 180
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 180
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 181
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 182
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 182
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions.................................................................... 183
17.6.12 HC – Historic Commercial District.......................................................................... 184
Subd. 1 Purpose ................................................................................................. 184
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 184
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 184
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 185
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 185
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions.................................................................... 186
17.6.13 CC- City Center District........................................................................................... 186
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 186
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 186
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 189
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 189
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 190
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions.................................................................... 190
17.6.14 LI- Light Industry District........................................................................................ 194
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 194
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 194
Subd. 3 Prohibited Uses..................................................................................... 194
Subd. 4 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 195
Subd. 5 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 195
Subd. 6 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 196
Subd. 7 Special District Provisions.................................................................... 197
17.6.15 HI- Heavy Industry District...................................................................................... 198
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 198
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 198
Subd. 3 Prohibited Uses..................................................................................... 198
Subd. 4 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 198
Subd. 5 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 199
Subd. 6 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 199
Subd. 7 Special District Provision ..................................................................... 200
17.6.16 OM – Office/Manufacturing District........................................................................ 201
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 201
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 201
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 202
Subd. 4 Prohibited Uses..................................................................................... 202
Subd. 5 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 203
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
ix
Subd. 6 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 203
Subd. 7 Special District Provisions.................................................................... 204
17.6.17 PI- Public / Institutional District............................................................................... 206
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 206
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 206
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 206
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 207
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 207
17.6.18 PP- Public Parks District .......................................................................................... 208
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 208
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 208
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 208
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 209
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 209
17.6.19 AIR- Airport District ................................................................................................ 210
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 210
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 210
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 210
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses..................................................................................... 211
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations...................................................................... 211
17.6.20 SG- Sand and Gravel Overlay District ..................................................................... 212
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 212
Subd. 2 Definitions ............................................................................................ 212
Subd. 3 Criteria for Overlay Zoning District Approval ..................................... 214
Subd. 4 Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 215
Subd. 5 Conditional Uses................................................................................... 215
Subd. 6 Notification Process.............................................................................. 216
Subd. 7 Performance Standards ......................................................................... 216
Subd. 8 Excavation Permit................................................................................. 221
Subd. 9 Reclamation, Restoration, Rehabilitation ............................................. 225
Subd. 10 Existing Operations............................................................................... 226
Subd. 11 Penalty .................................................................................................. 226
17.6.21 PUD – Planned Unit Development Overlay District................................................ 227
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 227
Subd. 2 Applicability ......................................................................................... 227
Subd. 3 Administration ...................................................................................... 228
17.6.22 C- Conservation Subdivision Overlay District......................................................... 228
Subd. 1 Intent ..................................................................................................... 228
Subd. 2 Applicability ......................................................................................... 228
Subd. 3 Permitted Uses and Density.................................................................. 229
Subd. 4 Design Standards and Guidelines ......................................................... 229
17.6.23 Tabulation of Dimensional and Special Requirements for Zoning Districts ........... 233
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 1
CHAPTER 17: ZONING
17.1 General Provisions
17.1.01 Applicability.
Subd. 1 Preamble. A Chapter establishing municipal regulatory powers to the end that
adequate light, pure air, and safety from fire and other dangers may be secured; that the
taxable value of land and buildings throughout the municipality may be conserved; that
congestion in the public streets may be lessened or avoided; and that the public health, safety,
comfort, morals, and welfare may otherwise be promoted; and to ensure and facilitate the
appropriate location for the use of structures and facilities in accord with the comprehensive
land use plan for the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 2 Title. This Chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the “Cloquet Zoning
Ordinance”. When used herein, the words “this Chapter” shall be deemed to mean and refer
to the Cloquet Zoning Ordinance.
17.1.02 Intent and Purpose.
Subd. 1 Intent and Purpose. The intent and purpose of this Chapter shall be:
A. To regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter to be erected;
B. To establish, regulate and limit the building or setback lines on or along any street,
traffic-way, drive or parkway;
C. To regulate and limit the intensity of use of lot areas and to regulate and determine
the area of open spaces within and surrounding buildings hereafter to be erected;
D. To classify, regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries and the location
of buildings designed for specified industrial, business, residential, and other uses;
E. To divide the entire municipality into districts of such number, shape and area, and of
such different classes according to use of land and buildings, height and bulk of
buildings, intensity of use of lot areas, area of open spaces, and other classifications,
as may be deemed best suited to regulate development;
F. To fix standards to which buildings or structures therein shall conform;
G. To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of
established districts;
H. To prevent additions to and alteration or remodeling of existing buildings or
structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations lawfully imposed;
I. To classify, regulate and restrict the use of property on the basis of land use
relationship;
J. To provide for variances from such regulations, standards, restrictions and
limitations;
K. To provide for conditional uses, including planned development, within the
established districts;
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 2
L. To provide administrative bodies and procedures as shall be necessary to the
implementation and enforcement of the various provisions of this Chapter;
M. To provide for the orderly amendment of this Chapter; and
N. To provide regulations pertaining to pre-existing lots, structures and uses which do
not conform to the regulations, standards, restrictions and limitations established by
this Chapter.
17.1.03 Scope of Ordinance: Qualification.
Subd. 1 Jurisdiction. This Chapter shall apply to all the area inside the corporate limits of
the City of Cloquet, Minnesota.
Subd. 2 Interpretation. In their interpretations and application, the provisions of this
Chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, morals and general welfare. Where the provisions of this Chapter impose
greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinances or regulations, the provisions
of this Chapter shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinances or
regulations impose greater restrictions than this Chapter, the provisions of such statute, other
ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
Subd. 3 Compliance. All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings
established hereafter, all structures alteration or relocation of existing buildings occurring
hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be
subject to all regulations of this Chapter which are applicable to the zoning districts in which
such buildings, uses or land shall be located.
However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance
with law prior to the effective date of this Chapter, which has not by its terms expired prior to
such effective date and provided that construction is begun before the permit’s expiration and
within one year of its effective date and diligently pursued to completion, said building or
structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the
building permit was issued; and further, may upon completion be occupied under a certificate
of zoning compliance by the use for which originally designated, subject thereafter to the
provisions of this Chapter relating to non-conformities.
Subd. 4 Severability. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the City of Cloquet that the
several provisions of this Chapter are separable in accordance with the following rules:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Chapter to
be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Chapter.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any
provision of this Chapter to a particular property, building or structure, such judgment
shall not affect the application of the said provision to any other property, building or
structure.
17.1.04 Word Usage. Within this Chapter, words used in the present tense shall include the future;
the singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the masculine shall include the
feminine and the feminine the masculine. The word ‘shall’ is mandatory and not discretionary; the
word ‘may’ is permissive.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 3
17.1.05 Definitions. When used in this Chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:
Subd. 1 Authorized Agent. One who is authorized to act for or in the place of another: as a
representative, emissary, or official of a government.
Subd. 2 Accessory Building. A building in which is conducted an accessory use to a
principal use on the parcel on which the principal use is situated.
Subd. 3 Accessory Use or Structure. A use or structure subordinate to the principal use of a
building or to the principal use of land and is located on the same parcel and serving a
purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building or land use. Accessory
uses or structures to residential principal uses include: garages, carports, other parking
spaces, swimming pools, tennis courts, tool sheds and the like.
Subd. 4 Administrative Review. Administrative Review is a review of an application by the
head of each City Department and / or other Division of the City as determined by the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator and does not require review and / or approval by the Planning
Commission or City Council.
Subd. 5 Affected Property Owner. Any individual or legal entity owning property affected
within the jurisdiction of the Zoning regulations in this Chapter.
Subd. 6 Alley. A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of
access to abutting property.
Subd. 7 Antenna. Equipment used for transmitting or receiving radio frequency signals,
which is attached to a tower, building, or other structure, usually consisting of a series of
directional panels, microwave or satellite dishes, or omni-directional ‘whip’ antennae.
Subd. 8 Apartment. A room or suite of rooms in a multi-family or multi-use building
arranged and intended as a place of residence for a single family or a group of individuals
living together as a single housekeeping unit.
Subd. 9 Apartment Building. Any building or portion thereof which is designed, built,
rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or
residence of three of more families living independently of each other and doing their
own cooking in the said building, and shall include flats and apartments.
Subd. 10 Area, Gross Land. The total area of land including the area of perimeter street
right-of-ways to the center line of the street.
Subd. 11 Area, Net Land. The area of land excluding street right-of-ways and other
publicly dedicated improvements such as parks, open space, and storm water
management facilities.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 4
Subd. 12 Automobile Repair Operation. The maintenance, service, repair, and/or
painting of new or used motor vehicles or trailers as a business, service or industry, or
any such maintenance, service, etc. which occurs on a periodic, frequent, regular,
continuous or on-going basis. Any building or premises, or portion thereof, which is used
for such maintenance, service, repair or painting. The owner of lessee of the premises
may repair his personal vehicle upon the premises, but repair of other than the owned or
personal vehicle or trailer shall be considered to be an automobile repair operation under
the terms of this definition and Chapter.
Subd. 13 Automobile Service Station. Any building or premises, or portion thereof,
used or intended to be used for the retail dispensing or sales of automobile fuels, which
activity may be accompanied by accessory uses such as sales of lubricants, tires,
accessories or supplies, or minor repairing of automobiles.
Subd. 14 Automobile or Trailer Sales Lot. An open area other than a street used for the
display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in operable condition and
where no repair work is done.
Subd. 15 Automobile Wash (Car Wash). Any building or premises, or portion thereof,
the use of which is devoted to the business of washing automobiles for a fee whether by
automated cleaning devices or otherwise.
Subd. 16 Automobile Wrecking, Salvage Yard. The dismantling or disassembling of
used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially
dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
Subd. 17 Basement. A portion of a building located partly underground but having less
than half its clear floor to ceiling height below grade (See Cellar).
Subd. 18 Boarding House. A dwelling where meals or lodging, or both, are provided for
compensation to three or more persons, who are not transients, by pre-arrangement for
definite periods, in contradistinction to hotels and motels as herein defined.
Subd. 18.2 Brew Pub. Means a brewer who also holds one or more retail on-sale
license(s) and who manufactures fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year, at any
one licensed premises, the entire production of which is solely for consumption on tap on
any licensed premises owned by the brewer, or for off-sale from those licensed premises
as permitted in Minn. Stat. 340A.24.
Subd. 18.4 Brewer. Means a person who manufactures malt liquor for sale and who
holds a Brewers License issued by the State of Minnesota.
Subd. 18.6 Brewery Taproom (also known as a microbrewery). Means a facility on
the premises of or adjacent to the premises owned by a brewer, licensed under Minn. Stat.
340A.301, intended for the on-sale consumption and limited off-sale of beer produced on
site by the brewer as authorized by Minn. Stat. 340A.26.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 5
Subd. 19 Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and
intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals or property.
Subd. 20 Cellar. A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and
having half or more than half its clean floor to ceiling height below grade.
Subd. 21 Cemetery. A parcel or tract of land used or intended to be used for the burial of
the dead including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when
operated within the boundaries of such cemetery.
Subd. 22 Clinic. An establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are
admitted for examination and treatment by one or more of a group of physicians, medical
specialists or dentists, or a combination thereof, practicing together.
Subd. 22.2 Cocktail Room. Means a facility on or adjacent to the premises of a micro
distillery licensed under Minn. Stat. 340A.22, which has been issued a cocktail room
license for the on-sale of distilled liquor by the distiller for consumption on the premises
of or adjacent to one distillery location by the distiller.
Subd. 23 Commercial Vehicle. A motor vehicle is a commercial vehicle if:
1) The vehicle is a dumptruck, a step van, a tow truck, a semitractor or trailer, a
tank truck, a tractor, a bus, a cargo truck, a construction vehicle or equipment,
an earth-moving vehicle or equipment, a van or pickup with a manufacturer's
nominal rated carrying capacity of more than one ton, or any other vehicle
which is used in connection with commercial activities;
2) Commercial equipment has been added to the vehicle such as winches or snow
plows;
3) Commercial racks have been added to the vehicle for the purpose of holding
equipment or materials;
4) The vehicle is a pickup with a nonstandard pickup box; or
5) The vehicle is a trailer loaded with another commercial vehicle or commercial
equipment.
Subd. 24 Condominium. An apartment building as defined herein in which the units are
owned separately by the individual or family which occupies them, and not by a
corporation or cooperative. The term refers to the building as a whole or any apartment
unit within such building.
Subd. 25 Day Care Facility. Any state licensed facility, public or private, which for gain
or otherwise regularly provides one or more persons with care, training, supervision,
habitation, rehabilitation, or developmental guidance on a regular basis, for periods of
less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. Day care facilities include, but are not limited
to: family day care homes, group family day care homes, day care centers, day nurseries,
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 6
nursery schools, daytime activity centers, day treatment programs, and day services as
defined by Minnesota Statute 245.782.
Subd. 26 Day Care Facility, In-Home. Any state licensed facility where childcare is
provided to twelve (12) children or less in the principal residence.
Subd. 27 Day Care Center. Include but are not limited to: family day care homes, group
family day care homes, day care centers, day nurseries, day time activity centers, day
treatment programs and day services, nursery and preschools, and Montessori schools, as
defined by Minnesota State Statutes.
Subd. 28 Deck. An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or walls, but has a
permeable floor that allows the infiltration of precipitation. For the purpose of this
Chapter a deck shall be at least eighteen (18) inches off the ground, otherwise it shall be
considered a patio.
Subd. 29 District. A section or sections of the City of Cloquet for which the provisions
of this Chapter are uniform.
Subd. 30 Domestic House Pet /Animal. Include those animals customarily kept for
pleasure by the residents of a household, such as a dog or cat, but shall exclude animals
of a size or quantity that require special housing outside of the principal use (e.g. stable,
cage, put, pen).
Subd. 31 Drive-In Establishment. An establishment which by design of physical
facilities or by service or packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to
receive a service or obtain a product which may be purchased, used or consumed in a
motor vehicle on the premises.
Subd. 32 Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof which is designed or used for
residential purposes.
Subd. 33 Dwelling, Single Family. A detached building designed for and occupied as
living quarters by not more than one family, as herein defined.
Subd. 34 Dwelling, Two-Family (Duplex). A structure containing two independent
residential units (dwellings) which is designed for or occupied by two families, and
which units are separated by a common wall or floor.
Subd. 35 Dwelling, Multiple-Family. A building designed for or occupied by more than
two families.
Subd. 36 Dwelling Cluster or Group. A group of two or more detached dwellings
located on a parcel of land in one (1) ownership and having any yard or court in common.
(See also, Townhouse)
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 7
Subd. 37 Essential Services. Overhead or underground electrical, telephone, gas, steam
or water transmission or distribution systems and structures, or collection,
communication, supply or disposal systems and structures, operated by public and quasipublic
utilities or governmental departments or commissions or as are required for
protection of the public health, safety or general welfare, including towers, poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, and
accessories in connection therewith, but not including buildings. For the purpose of this
Chapter, the work “building” does not include “structures” for essential services.
Subd. 38 Essential Service Building. A structure used to house equipment for
communication, supply or disposal systems used by public utilities or governmental
departments or commissions or as required for the protection of public health, safety or
general welfare.
Subd. 39 Family. An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage
or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling; or a group of not
more than four persons who need not be related by blood, marriage or adoption, living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, or a functional family living
together in a dwelling unit and sharing common cooking facilities.
Subd. 40 Family, Functional. A group of no more than six (6) people plus their
offspring, having a relationship which is functionally equivalent to a family. The
relationship must be of a permanent and distinct character with a demonstrable and
recognizable bond characteristic of a cohesive unit. Functional family does not
include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, organization or
group of students or other individuals where the common living arrangement or basis
for the establishment of the housekeeping unit is temporary.
Subd. 41 Family Day Care. A day care for no more than ten (10) children at one
time of which no more than six (6) are under school age, per MN Rules 9502.0315,
Subd. 11. The licensed capacity must include all children of any caregiver when the
children are present in the residence.
Subd. 42 Floor Area. The floor area of a building is the sum of the gross horizontal
areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings. The floor area of a
building shall include basement floor area but shall not include cellar floor area.
Subd. 43 Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The floor area ratio of the building on any lot or site
area is the gross floor area of the building or buildings on that lot or site area divided by
the area of such lot. When used in this Chapter, the floor area ratio multiplied by the lot
or site area in question produces the maximum amount of floor that may be constructed
on such lot or site area.
Subd. 44 Foot Candle. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which
are one foot from a uniform point source of one candle.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 8
Subd. 45 Foster Family Home. A licensed residential facility serving ten (10) or fewer
persons.
Subd. 46 Frontage. All the property fronting on one side of a street, measured along
such street, between an intersecting or intercepting street and another intersecting or
intercepting street, a right-of-way, waterway, end of a dead-end street, or a municipal
boundary.
Subd. 47 Game Room Establishment. Any establishment which maintains or keeps
upon any part of its premises machines or other apparatus used by the public for
entertainment, recreation and/or amusement and which establishment required a game
room license.
Subd. 48 Garage, Private. A detached accessory building, or one attached to or part of a
principal building, used primarily for the parking and storage of motor vehicles,
recreational vehicles and other equipment owned, operated and used by the residents of
dwellings located on the same lot therewith, and having a capacity as regulated in Section
17.5.01 of this Chapter.
Subd. 49 Garage, Public. Any premises used for the storage or care of motor-driven
vehicles, or premises where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or
kept for remuneration, for hire or for sale.
Subd. 50 Garage, Repair. Any facilities equipped for the repair or maintenance of motor
vehicles, but not including factory assembly of such vehicles, auto wrecking
establishments or junk yards.
Subd. 51 Grade, Finished.
A. For buildings more than five feet from any street line, the average level of the
finished surface adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
B. For buildings having one or more exterior walls within five feet of a street line or
lines, the average of the elevations of the sidewalk or sidewalks, or their
equivalent established ground surface, adjacent to such street line or lines.
Subd. 52 Half-Story. That portion of a building under a sloping gable, hip or gambrel
roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite
exterior walls are not more than three feet above the floor
of such story. No such half-story shall be used for
occupancy except in conjunction with and by the
occupants of the floor immediately below it.
Subd. 53 Height of Building. The vertical distance
between the highest adjoining ground level within five (5)
feet of the building or ten (10) feet above the lowest
ground level within five (5) feet of the building, whichever
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 9
is lower and the highest point of a flat or mansard roof or the average height of the
highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.
Subd. 54 Home Occupation. Any occupation which is clearly incidental to the principal
use of the premises, is conducted by a resident occupant, and does not change the
character of the principal use. The definition shall be extended to include the
clarification, characteristics and requirements noted in Section 17.5.08.
Subd. 55 Hospital. An institution providing health services and medical or surgical care,
primarily for in-patients, to three or more non-related individuals suffering from illness,
disease, injury, deformity, or other abnormal physical or mental condition, and including
as an integral part of the institution related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient
facilities or training facilities.
Subd. 56 Hotel. A building in which lodging is provided and usually meals,
entertainment, and various personal services offered to the public for compensation and
which is open to transient guests, excluding a boarding house as herein defined.
Subd. 57 Impervious Coverage or Impervious Surface. An area that releases as runoff,
all or a large portion of, the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Roofs,
sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, and streets are examples of area that are typically
impervious. Pervious pavers and pervious pavement are not considered impervious.
Subd. 58 Improvement. Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object
constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment,
including streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, lighting fixtures, signs, and the like.
Subd. 59 Irrigation system. A water system used to maintain landscaping material
which is generally operated on a timer and a mechanical system inside the building.
Subd. 60 Kennel, Commercial. Any place where the business of keeping, raising,
selling, boarding, breeding or showing more than five dogs or cats is conducted.
Subd. 61 Kennel, Private. Any premises, regardless of how zoned or used, within the
City Limits of the City, where four or five dogs or cats in combination, six months or
older, are kept, maintained or harbored as pets or for some other purposes, but not for
purposes of selling, boarding, breeding, showing, treating or grooming, or other
commercial purposes. A private kennel license is required per Chapter 8 of the City
Code.
Subd. 62 Landscaping. Plantings intended to enhance the aesthetic and / or
environmental qualities of a parcel.
Subd. 63 Laundromat. An establishment providing washing and/or drying machines on
the premises for rental use to the general public for family laundering purposes.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 10
Subd. 64 Laboratory. A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and
analyzing materials, not including manufacturing or packaging of such materials, except
incidentally.
Subd. 65 Lighting.
A. Cutoff Angle. The angle formed by a line
drawn from the direction of light rays at
the light source and a line perpendicular to
the ground from the light source above
which no light is emitted.
B. Cutoff. The point at which all light rays
emitted by a lamp, light source or
luminaire are completely eliminated at a
specific angle above the ground.
C. Cutoff Type Luminaire. A luminaire with elements such as shields, reflectors, or
refractor panels which direct and cut off the light at a cutoff angle that is less than
ninety (90) degrees.
D. Flashing Light. A light source which is not constant in intensity or color at all
times while in use.
E. Footcandle. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are
one foot from a uniform point source of one candle.
F. Luminaire. A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary
mechanical, electrical and decorative parts.
G. Security Lighting. Outdoor lighting fixtures installed exclusively as a measure to
reduce the possible occurrence of a crime on the property.
H. Shieldings. A technique or method of construction permanently covering the top
and sides of a light source by a material which restricts the light emitted to be
projected below an imaginary horizontal plane passing the light fixture.
I. Source. A single artificial point source of luminescence that emits measurable
radiant energy in or near the visible spectrum.
J. Spillage. Any reflection, glare or other.
artificial light emission onto any adjoining property or right-of-way above a defined
maximum illumination.
K. Uplighting. Lighting that is directed in such a manner as to shine light rays above
the horizontal plane.
Subd. 66 Livable Floor Area. The square footage of floor area of a dwelling measured
from the inside of the exterior walls, but not including attics, cellars, unfinished
basements, open porches, breezeways and garages. Only that floor area having a ceiling
height of seven feet or more shall be considered as livable floor area. An unfinished floor
may be included as livable floor area provided plans are submitted to the Zoning
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 11
Administrator indicating in detail the layout of the rooms and, provide further, rough
plumbing, heating ducts and electric circuits are installed during construction of the
building.
Subd. 67 Livestock. Any domesticated animal (not a house pet) by nature including but
not limited to poultry, cattle, goats, horses, pigs and other similar animals. It does not
include exotic or regulated animals.
Subd. 68 Loading Space. An open, hard surfaced area, other than street or public rightof-
way, the principal use of which is for the standing, loading, and unloading of trucks
and trailers. A minimum area of 780 sq. ft., excluding access drives, is required.
Subd. 69 Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a
principal use and its accessory buildings, together with such
open spaces as are required under this Chapter and having
its required frontage upon a street or right-of-way or
easement shown on a plat of survey which has been
submitted, approved and officially recorded in the manner
required by the Subdivision Regulations of the City of
Cloquet, Minnesota.
Subd. 70 Lot, Area. The area of a horizontal plane within the
lot lines.
Subd. 71 Lot, Buildable. A lot which meets or exceeds all
requirements of this Chapter without the necessity of
variances.
Subd. 72 Lot Coverage. The area of a lot occupied by the
principal and accessory buildings.
Subd. 73 Lot, Corner. A lot abutting upon two or more
streets at their intersection or junction, or a lot bounded on
two sides by a curving street where it is possible to draw two
intersection chords, one each commencing at each of the two
points of intersection of the lot lines and street line, which
intersect with each other to form an interior angle of less than
120 degrees.
Subd. 74 Lot, Depth of. The maximum horizontal distance
between the rear lot line and the frontage right-of-way. On a
corner lot, the side with the largest frontage is its depth, and
the side with the lesser frontage is its width.
Subd. 75 Lot, Double Frontage (Through Lot). Any lot
other than a corner lot which abuts more than one (1) street
or street right-of-way. On a through lot, all property lines
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 12
abutting the street right-of-way shall be considered the front lines.
Subd. 76 Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot including through lots.
Subd. 77 Lot Lines. A lot line is the property line bounding a lot, except that where any
portion of a lot extends into a public right-of-way or a proposed public right-of-way, the
line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot
line for applying this Chapter.
Subd. 78 Lot, Lines Related.
A. Front Lot Line: That boundary of a lot
which abuts an existing or dedicated
public street or a private road. In the case
of a corner lot, it shall be the shortest
dimension of a public street. If the
dimensions of a corner lot are equal, the
front lot line shall be designated by the
owner and filed with the City. In the case
of a corner lot in a non-residential area,
the lot shall be deemed to have frontage
on both streets.
B. Rear Lot Line: That
boundary of a lot which is
opposite to the front lot line.
If the rear lot line is less
than ten (10) feet in length,
or if the lot forms a point at
the rear, the rear lot line
shall be a line ten (10) feet
in length within the lot,
parallel to, and at the
maximum distance from the
front lot line.
C. Side Lot Line: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
Subd. 79 Lot, Width. The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines or a
lot measured at the minimum required front setback line.
Subd. 80 Lot of Record. A parcel of land that is recorded as a lot in a subdivision that
has been recorded in the official public records of the Recorder of Deeds or Registrar of
Titles of Carlton County, Minnesota.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 13
Subd. 81 Manufactured Home, Class “A”. Manufactured housing of modular design
which requires more than one (1) module to form an integral single family dwelling unit
and which complies with the following minimum criteria:
A. the minimum width of the main body of the home as assembled on site shall not
be less than twenty (20) feet as measured across the narrowest portion;
B. the pitch of the main roof shall be not less than one (1) foot for each three (3) feet
of horizontal run, 4:12 pitch. In general, any roofing material may be used that is
generally acceptable for housing built on the site, if applied in such a manner as to
be similar in appearance, provided however, that flat, sheet-metal type panels
shall not be considered acceptable for Class “A” manufactured houses;
C. any materials that are generally acceptable for housing built on the site may be
used for exterior finish if applied in such a manner as to be similar in appearance,
provided however, that reflection from such exterior shall not be greater than
from siding coated with clean, white, gloss exterior enamel; and
D. the home shall be placed upon a permanent foundation complying with the
minimum standards of the Minnesota State Building Code.
Subd. 82 Manufactured Home, Class “B”. Manufactured transportable housing built in
conformance with Sections 327.31 to 327.35 of Minnesota Statutes and intended for
occupancy as a complete year round single family dwelling unit upon arrival and
placement on a site with or without a permanent foundation designed to support such
transportable unit. For the purposes of this Chapter, the term shall include all such
transportable housing over twenty-nine (29) feet in length, less than twenty (20) feet in
width, and 5,000 or more pounds in weight, containing the same waste water supply,
waste disposal, and electrical conveniences as immobile housing, but shall exclude
housing of modular design where more than one (1) module is required to form an
integral single family dwelling unit. The term “mobile home” shall be synonymous and
interchangeable with the term “Class B Manufactured Home” whenever either term shall
be used elsewhere in this Chapter.
Subd. 82.2 Micro Distillery. Means a distillery operated within the State producing
premium, distilled spirits in total quantity not to exceed 40,000 proof gallons in a
calendar year and licensed under Minn. Stat.340.A.22.
Subd. 83 Motel. A series of sleeping or living units, for the lodging of transient guests,
offered to the public for compensation, and with convenient access to off-street parking
spaces for the exclusive use of the guests or occupants.
Subd. 84 Non-Conforming Building or Structure. Any
building or structure lawfully existing at the time of the
approval of this Chapter or any amendment to it, rendering
such non-conforming, which:
A. does not comply with all of the regulations of this
Chapter, or any amendment hereto, governing
building height and yard requirements for the
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 14
zoning district in which such building or structure is located; or
B. is designed or intended for a use neither permitted nor conditionally permitted in
the zoning district in which it is located.
Subd. 85 Non-Conforming Lot of Record. An unimproved lot which was legally
recorded on or before the effective date of this Chapter which does not comply with the
lot size requirements for any permitted use in the district in which it is located. Such lot is
considered buildable only as stipulated in Section 17.4.04.
Subd. 86 Non-Conforming Use. Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the
time of the approval of this Chapter, or any amendment hereto, governing use for the
zoning district in which such use is located.
Subd. 87 Nursing Home, Assisted Living and Memory Care. An establishment which
provides full-time convalescent or chronic care, or both, for three or more individuals
who are not related by blood or marriage to the operator and who, by reason of advanced
age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. No care for the acutely
ill, or surgical or obstetrical services shall be provided in such an establishment; a
hospital shall not be construed to be included in this definition.
Subd. 88 Odorous Matter. Any material that produces an olfactory response among
human beings.
Subd. 89 Odor Threshold. The lowest concentration of odorous matter in air that will
produce an olfactory response in a human being.
Subd. 90 Opacity. The quality or state of a body that obstructs the transmission of light.
Subd. 91 Parking Lot. A parcel of land containing one or more unenclosed parking
spaces whose use is principal to the lot as differentiated from an accessory use, as on a
residential lot.
Subd. 92 Parking Space. An improved surface area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient
in size to store on (1) motor vehicle, together with a street or alley and permitting ingress
and egress of such motor vehicle. A minimum of 170 sq. ft. excluding access drives, is
required.
Subd. 93 Parking Structure. A deck or building, or part thereof, used or intended to be
used for the parking and storage of motor vehicles at one or more levels, together with
the attendant interior or exterior ramps necessary for ingress and egress of such motor
vehicles.
Subd. 94 Particulate Matter. Material other than water which is suspended or
discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 15
Subd. 95 Planned Unit Development. (See Section 17.6.21) A tract of land developed
as an integral unit rather than as individual, unrelated development efforts, wherein two
or more buildings may be located in relation to each other rather than to lot lines and lot
standards stipulated in this Chapter.
Subd. 96 Principal Use. The purpose, for which land or a building or structure thereon is
designed, arranged, intended or maintained, or for which it is or may be used or occupied.
Subd. 97 Principal Building. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the
lot on which it is situated.
Subd. 98 Private Club or Lodge. A building and related facilities owned or operated by
a corporation, association or group of persons for social education or recreational
purposes of members regularly paying dues, but not primarily for profit or to render a
service which is customarily carried on as a business.
Subd. 99 Recreational Vehicle. Includes, but is not limited to, travel trailers, chassis
mounted campers, motor homes, tent trailers, slip-in campers, converted buses,
snowmobiles and trailers, all-terrain vehicles and motorcycles.
Subd. 100 Residential Facility, Group Home. Any State licensed facility, public or
private, which for gain or otherwise regularly provides one or more persons with a
twenty-four (24) hour per day substitute for care, food, lodging, training, education,
supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation, or treatment they need, but which for any reason
cannot be furnished in the person’s own home, in contradistinction to boarding houses,
hotels, motels, and similar types of housing.
Subd. 101 Restaurant. An establishment where food is available for consumption on the
premises.
Subd. 102 Restaurant, Carry Out. An establishment which by design of physical
facilities or by service or packaging procedures permits or encourages the purchase of
prepared, ready-to-eat foods intended to be consumed off the premises.
Subd. 103 Right-of-Way, Public. An area owned
and maintained by a government jurisdiction, for
public use.
Subd. 104 Satellite Dish / Antenna. An antenna,
usually parabolic or spherical in shape, capable of
receiving television or radio signals from orbiting
satellites.
Subd. 105 School - Primary, Secondary, College or University. Any accredited school
having regular sessions with regularly employed instructors teaching subjects which are
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 16
fundamental and essential for a general academic education, under the supervision of, or
in accordance with, the applicable statutes of the State of Minnesota.
Subd. 106 Setback. The minimum horizontal distance
between a structure and street right-of-way, lot line or
other reference point as provided by this Chapter.
Distances are to be measured perpendicularly from the
property line to the building wall.
Subd. 107 Sign. A name, identification, description,
display or illustration which is affixed to, or painted, or
represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure
or piece of land and which directs attention to an object,
product, place, activity, institution, organization, idea or business. See Section 17.5.13.
Subd. 107.2 Special Event. Means a unique or unforeseen event of limited duration
occurring within the City of Cloquet Area or within 30 miles of the primary site of the
special event site which is within the City of Cloquet, and is of such significance as to
allow for the relaxation of zoning requirements and the implementation of special
provisions when provided in any permit, variance, or other zoning document.
The Zoning Administrator shall make the final determination as to whether the
significance of a special event 7 days or less in duration rises to the level of a Special
Event. The Planning Commission shall be the approval authority of all special events in
excess of 7 days. A special event may be extended by the approval authorities noted
above.
Subd. 108 Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there be no floor above, then the space
between the floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement designed or used for dwelling
purposes for other than a janitor, maintenance man or watchman, or for commercial
purposes other than storage, shall be counted as one-half story. A cellar used for
commercial purposes other than storage shall be counted as one-half story. No other
basement or cellar shall be counted as a story. Any level or deck used exclusively for
parking purposes shall be counted as one-half story.
Subd. 109 Street. A public thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to
abutting property.
Subd. 110 Street Wall. The main wall nearest to and facing on a street, including sunparlors
and bays but not including bay windows.
Subd. 111 Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or
less permanent location on the ground.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.1 General Provisions 17
Subd. 112 Structural Alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial changes
in the roof.
Subd. 113 Terrace. A level plan or surfaced patio, directly adjacent to the principal
building on the surface of the land or on the roof of a building.
Subd. 114 Townhouse. A group of attached single family dwelling units on a common
lot.
Subd. 115 Tree Farm. Any timber harvest activity carried on a tract of private land five
acres or more in area, that is operated under a managed planting and cutting program,
whether for commercial or experimental purposes.
Subd. 116 Yard. An open space between the
building wall and any lot line which is open to the
sky unobstructed by any permanent or temporary uses
or structures.
Subd. 117 Yard, Front. A yard extending across the
entire front of the lot and measured between the front
line of the lot and the front line of the building wall.
Subd. 118 Yard, Open. A yard in addition to front,
side, and rear setbacks, in which no structure, driveway, or parking space shall be
located.
Subd. 119 Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the entire rear of a lot and measured
between the rear lot line and the rear of the building wall. On both corner lots and
interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front
yard.
Subd. 120 Yard, Side. A yard between the building wall and the side line of the lot
extending from the front yard to the rear yard and measured between the sideline of the
lot and the side of the building wall.
Subd. 121 Zoning Administrator. The official designated by the City of Cloquet to
administer and enforce this Chapter.
Subd. 122 Zoning District. An area or areas for which the regulations and requirements
governing land use are uniform.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 18
17.2 Application, Review and Approval Procedures
17.2.01 General Provisions.
Subd. 1 Intent. The intent of this Section of this Chapter is to establish application
procedures, internal review procedures, public notice and hearing procedures, and
approval criteria for the processing of applications and actions that affect the
development and use of property subject to the jurisdictions of the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 2 General Types of Development.
A. Development Permit Requirements. All development within the City of Cloquet,
except as hereinafter specified, shall be undertaken in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter and only after a development permit is issued, if
required by this Chapter. All development shall be categorized as one of the
following types of development:
(1) General Development. Development for which a development permit or
building permit will be granted as a right on compliance with the terms of
this Chapter hereinafter called General Development.
(2) Conditional Development. Development for which a development permit
will be granted only after exercise of discretion in accordance with the
criteria of this Chapter, hereinafter called Conditional Development or
Conditional Use.
(3) Exempt Development. Development that is exempt from the regulations of
this Chapter, as specified in 17.2.01, Subd. 2, C. Exempt Activities.
B. Development Defined. Except where the context otherwise requires, and in
absence of a more limiting provision in this Chapter, development means the
performance of any building or mining operations, or the making of any material
change in the use or appearance of any structure or land. The following activities
or uses shall be taken to involve development unless expressly excluded by this
Chapter:
(1) A change in type of use of a structure or land, or a change from one use
group to a use in another group designated in this Chapter;
(2) A reconstruction or alteration of the size, or material change in the
external appearance, or a structure on land;
(3) A material increase in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in
the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices, or
dwelling units in a structure on land;
(4) Commencement of mining or excavation on a parcel of land;
(5) Demolition or moving of a structure or removal of trees required by this
Chapter;
(6) Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, junk, or fill on a parcel of land;
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 19
(7) In the connection with the use of land, the making of any material change
in noise levels, thermal conditions, emissions of waste material, or other
objectionable element;
(8) Commencement or change in the location of street graphics or use of
land, and the commencement or change in the location of advertising on
the external part of a structure;
(9) Alteration of a shore, bank, floodplain of a stream, lake, pond, or
artificial body of water;
(10) Reestablishment of a nonconforming or conditional use that has not been
used for one (1) year;
(11) Departure from the normal use for which development permission has
been granted, or failure to comply with the conditions of this Chapter,
granting the development permission under which the development was
commenced or is continued; or
(12) Earth fill or other filling activities for the purpose of raising the elevation
of a lot or site for the purpose of future development.
C. Exempt Activities. The following operations or uses do not constitute
development for the purposes of this Chapter:
(1) The maintenance or improvement of a public road or railroad track not
involving substantial engineering redesign if the work is carried out on
land within the boundaries of the right-of-way;
(2) Work by any utility not involving substantial engineering redesign for the
purpose of inspection, repair, renewal, or construction on an established
right-of-way of any sewers, mains, pipes, cables, utility tunnels, power
lines, towers, poles, tracks, or the like;
(3) Work for the maintenance, renewal, improvement, alteration of any
structure, if the work affects only the interior of the color of the structure
or decorations of the exterior of the structure, but does not otherwise
materially affect the external appearance of the structure;
(4) The use of any structure or land devoted to dwelling uses for any purposes
customarily incidental to enjoyment of the dwelling;
(5) The use of any land for the purpose of growing plants, crops, trees, and
other agricultural or forestry products of for other agricultural purposes,
except the growing or storage of livestock;
(6) A change in the use of land or structure from a use within a use group
specified in this Chapter to another use in the same use group; or
(7) Official public information street graphics, installed by or at the discretion
of the City of Cloquet, Carlton County, or the State of Minnesota.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 20
Subd. 3 General Types of Development Reviews and Approvals. There shall be the
following three (3) types of reviews and approvals associated with development in the
City of Cloquet:
A. Public Hearing. Development or actions that require special opportunities for
broad public input require a public hearing pursuant to Subd. 6: General
Procedures Associated with Public Hearings.
B. Informational Meeting. Development that requires action by an elected or
appointed body, but does not require a public hearing, shall require an information
meeting pursuant to Subd. 7: General Procedures Associated with Informational
Meetings.
C. Administrative Review and Approval. Development or action that does not
require public review, but is administratively reviewed and approved pursuant to
Subd. 8: General Procedures Associated with Administrative Reviews and
Approvals.
Subd. 4 General Development Review Elements and Procedures.
A. Pre-Application Meeting. Prior to the submission of an application as required by
this Chapter, a pre-application meeting may be required by this Chapter or
encouraged by the Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent as follows:
(1) Purpose of the meeting. A pre-application meeting is a meeting between a
potential applicant and the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other
Authorized Agent(s) of the City. Where beneficial / appropriate review
bodies may also be included in a pre-application meeting. The meeting is
an opportunity for the applicant to describe what application is being
considered, and for the City Planner/Zoning Administrator, review body,
or other Authorized Agent, to indicate which application is appropriate
and what criteria will be used to determine whether the application should
be approved.
(2) Meeting format. Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, there is no
required format for a pre-application meeting.
(3) Combined meetings. Pre-application meetings may be combined when an
applicant anticipates making simultaneous applications for the same
project.
(4) No approval action. Participation in a pre-application meeting does not
imply or assume subsequent approval, approval with conditions, or denial
of an application.
B. Application Forms and Fees. The following provisions shall apply to all required
applications pursuant to this Chapter.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 21
(1) Forms. Applications shall be submitted on forms, with any requested
information and attachments, and in such numbers as required by the City,
including any checklists for submittals. The City Planner/Zoning
Administrator or other Authorized Agent of the City shall have the
authority to request any other pertinent information required to ensure
compliance with this Chapter. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator or
other Authorized Agent shall make the required forms available to all
applicants.
(2) Application fees. Fees for those applications required by this Chapter
shall be in accordance with the City’s current fee schedule, which the City
Council may update from time to time. The fees are intended to cover the
City’s actual costs in processing the application and are not refundable.
Such costs may include, but are not limited to, filing the application,
publishing notices, and mailing notices regarding the application.
C. Reimbursement for City Review Costs. The following provisions shall apply to all
required applications pursuant to this Chapter.
(1) Review costs. In addition to the costs incurred by the City in processing an
application, the City may incur costs to review an application. The cost for
all such reviews shall be borne by the applicant. The City reserves the
right to require an escrow account be established to provide funds for
anticipated review costs.
(2) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a procedure to
reimburse the city for its cost of review, analysis, and evaluation of
development proposals, conditional use permits, comprehensive plan
amendments, zoning amendments, and enforcement of the ordinance from
which this chapter is derived in cases where, due to the level of
complexity of the application under consideration, excessive costs beyond
those normally incurred by the city as a result of the administration of the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived are incurred. The excess
costs result from problems presented in review, analysis, and evaluation
which necessitate intensive investigation and research. The intent of this
section is to ensure an adequate level of review of these cases and to
ensure that the adverse effects of development on the city are minimized
and in compliance with goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan
and this chapter are obtained.
(3) Conditions where reimbursement is authorized. The city may, in its sole
discretion, require reimbursement of city costs under the following
conditions:
(a) When the City Administrator finds multiple Planning Commission
and City Council meetings are required to review a particular item
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 22
and additional staff time is expended on that item subsequent to the
initial meeting.
(b) When the City Administrator finds it necessary to retain consultants
and experts to review requests and advise its staff of specific impacts
of a proposal, including but not limited to impacts on traffic, utilities,
engineering, and aesthetics or environmental characteristics of the
community.
(c) When it is necessary for the City Administrator to review a proposal.
(d) When the City Administrator finds that other extraordinary costs are
incurred by the city as a result of the administration of this chapter.
(4) Procedure. The following provisions shall apply to all required
applications pursuant to this Chapter.
(a) The city hall notify the applicant that the city will incur additional
costs at the earliest possible time and, if possible, provide the
applicant with an estimate of the expected additional cost.
(b) The applicant shall pay the estimated additional cost to the city by
certified check, bank money order, or credit card. If the amount paid
to the city initially is insufficient to cover all city costs, the additional
amount shall be billed to the applicant. Any money which has not
been used to pay additional costs after the applicant’s request has been
processed shall be refunded to the applicant.
(c) No certificate of occupancy for any project subject to this section
shall be issued until all money owed to the city has been received.
(d) All costs billed under this section shall be based on the actual cost
to the city of staff time, overhead, material costs, and actual
billings from consultants, experts and attorneys.
D. Application Deadline. All applications shall be completed and submitted to the
City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent in accordance with
a schedule established annually by the City. An application shall not be
considered submitted until it has been determined to be complete pursuant to the
provisions of this Section.
E. Application Completeness.
(1) Completeness requirements. An application shall be considered submitted
only after the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized
Agent has determined it is complete, it is in the required form, it includes
all mandatory information (including all exhibits), and it is accompanied
by the applicable fee.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 23
(2) Completeness review period. A determination of application completeness
shall be made by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other
Authorized Agent within fifteen (15) working days of the City’s receipt of
the application. If the application is not complete then the applicant must
be notified in writing of the deficiencies within 15 days.
(3) Incomplete application. If the application is determined to be incomplete,
the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent shall
provide written notice to the applicant along with an explanation of the
application’s deficiencies. No further processing of the application shall
occur until the deficiencies are corrected.
F. Limit of Time Relating to Final Action. Upon the receipt of a complete
application, the City and the applicable review authorities shall review the
application and take final action on the application in a timely manner consistent
with Minnesota Statutes. Final action means providing the applicant with an
approval or a denial within 60 days of receipt of the complete application, unless
a statutory exception applies. A denial, in general, is only valid if provided to the
applicant in writing (including written reasons for the denial) within the 60 day
time period. Failure to properly deny an application is approval of the application
by operation of law (see Minnesota Statutes § 15.99 Time Deadline for Agency
Action). The time allowed for final action may be extended by Minn. Stat.§
15.99.
G. Limit of Time to Commence Work After Approvals. Approvals made by the
applicable approval authorities shall be void after six (6) months from the date of
such approval if work on the related project has not commenced.
H. Limit on Reapplication. If any application is denied by the approval authority as
specified in this Chapter, another application or petition for the same permit,
approval, or amendment for the same property (or any portion thereof) may not be
filed within a period of ninety (90) days from the date of final denial, unless
allowed by the appropriate approval body and based on the demonstration of any
of the following conditions:
(1) Change in circumstances. There is substantial change in circumstances
relevant to the issues and / or facts considered during the review of the
application that might reasonably affect the approval body’s application of
the relevant standards to the development proposed in the application; or
(2) New information. New or additional information is available that was not
available at the time of the review that might reasonably affect the
approval body’s application of the relevant review standards to the
development proposed; or
(3) Significant difference. A new application is proposed to be submitted that
is significantly different from the prior application; or
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 24
(4) Mistake made. The final decision on the application was based on a
mistake of fact.
Subd. 5 General Review and Approval Criteria. In reviewing and taking final action
on an application or required permit, the review and approval authorities shall consider
all approval criteria as specified in this Chapter and shall consider all pertinent facts,
public comments, and consistency with all applicable laws.
Subd. 6 General Procedures for Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements. The
procedures for holding a public hearing whenever such is required under the provisions
of this Chapter shall be as follows:
A. Setting of Hearings. For all requests brought before the Planning Commission for
which a public hearing is required by this Chapter, the Planning Commission shall
select a reasonable time and place for the public hearing on the request.
B. Notice of Hearings. Notice of public hearings shall be given not more than 30
days and not less than 10 days before the hearing by publication at least once in
the official newspaper of the City of Cloquet. Such notice shall include the time
and place of the hearing, a description of the contents of the request to be heard,
and the address or location of the property to which the request applies.
In addition to the general notice to the public, separate notice by letter shall be
required for all property owners residing within the area, and for a distance of
three hundred fifty (350) feet from the boundaries of such area, where a request
concerning amendments to the zoning district boundaries for areas of five acres or
less, will be the subject of the hearing. Such notices shall be sent by the Office of
the City Planner/Zoning Administrator, and addresses taken from current City
records shall be deemed sufficient for such notification.
A copy of the list of owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be
attested to by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator, and shall be made a part of
the records of the proceedings. The failure to give written notice shall not
invalidate the proceedings, provided a bonafide attempt to comply with this
requirement has been made.
C. Conduct of Hearings. Any person may appear and testify at a public hearing,
either in person or by a duly authorized agent or attorney. Applicants for
Variances or Conditional Uses and the owner or owners of the property in or
within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the property under consideration for a
rezoning action by amendment to this Chapter, shall have the following rights in
addition to any others they possess by law:
(1) The right to have subpoenas issued for persons to appear at the hearings
and for examination of documents by the person requesting the subpoena
either before or during the hearing. Such subpoenas shall be issued by the
body in charge of the hearing. Such subpoenas shall be enforceable against
persons or for documents which have a substantial evidentiary connection
with:
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 25
a. The property to which the request applies;
b. Facts which would support or negate the legal standards for
granting the request;
c. Facts which support or negate the conclusion that property within
three hundred fifty (350) feet, excluding all public streets, alleys or
other public rights-of-way, will be substantially affected by the
decision on the request being heard.
(2) The right to cross-examine all witnesses testifying.
(3) The right to present witnesses on their own behalf.
(4) The right to be granted, upon request, one continuance for the purpose of
presenting evidence to rebut testimony given by another party.
D. Administrative Procedures and Recordings at Public Hearings. The body
responsible for the hearing shall designate one from among the membership or exofficial
membership to record all pertinent data and comments at the hearing for
later preparation as a written public record. Such written record shall be filed with
the City Clerk within a reasonable period of time, but in no event later than thirty
(30) days from the date of the hearing.
The hearing shall be conducted in an orderly manner according to rules of
procedure established or accepted by the City. The Chairperson or acting
Chairperson of the responsible body shall conduct the hearing and shall require
that all participants furnish name, address and position of interest prior to
comment on the subject under consideration during such hearing.
E. Continuance; Determination. The responsible body may close the hearing or
schedule a date, time and place for a continuance of the same, subject to the
requirements of the matter under consideration. Following closure, the
responsible body shall meet to make the appropriate determination which shall be
prepared and filed as written public record in the office of the City Clerk.
Subd. 7 General Procedures Associated with Informational Meetings and Notices.
A. Required Informational Meetings. Whenever this Chapter requires that an
informational meeting be held, the informational meeting shall be conducted in
accordance with the Minnesota open meeting law as specified in Sections 471.705
of the Minnesota Statues and the provisions of this Chapter.
B. General Noticing Requirements. Informational meeting notices shall be as
follows:
(1) Published notice. Published notice in the local newspaper designated by
the City Council shall not be required, but should generally occur when
feasible. The notice should be published at least twenty – four (24) hours,
but preferably at least seven (7) days, in advance of the informational
meeting.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 26
(2) Mailed notice. A mailed notice shall not be required, but should generally
occur when feasible. The notice should be mailed to the owners of record
of real property within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the property under
consideration. The notice may be served by its deposit in the municipality,
property addressed with postage paid, in U.S. mail at least ten (10) days
prior to the date set for the informational meeting, if feasible.
(3) Posted notice on property. Posted notice on the property shall not be
required, but may occur at the discretion of the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator or other Authorized Agent of the City.
(4) Posted notice in public place. At least twenty – four (24) hours, but
preferably at least seven (7) days, prior to the date set for the informational
meeting.
(5) Content of Notice. Published or mailed notices shall contain at least the
following information:
a. The legal description of street address of the property that is the
subject of the application;
b. The substance of the application, including the type of proposed
development and the current zoning district (if applicable);
c. The time, date, and place of the informational meeting with a
statement that interested parties may appear at the informational
meeting; and
d. A phone number to contact the City.
(6) Constructive Notice. Minor defects in notice shall not impair the notice or
invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt has
been made to comply with applicable notice requirements.
C. Conduct of Informational Meetings.
(1) Modification of an application at an informational meeting.
a. The applicant may agree to modify the application, including the
plans and specifications submitted, in response to questions or
comments by persons appearing at the informational meeting or to
suggestions or recommendations by the body holding the
informational meeting.
b. Unless such modifications are so substantial that the approval body
cannot reasonably be expected to perceive the nature and impact of
the proposed changes without revised application materials before
it, or unless such modifications are so substantial that a new
informational meeting must be noticed and held, the approval body
may approve the application with the stipulations that the final
approval will not be effective until materials reflecting the agreed
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 27
upon changes are submitted to the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator or other Authorized Agent of the City.
(2) Continuing the informational meeting. An informational meeting may be
continued without additional mailed or published notice, provided that the
motion to continue the informational meeting is made in open session
specifies the date and time when the meeting will continue, and notice is
provided consistent with Section 13D of the Minnesota Statutes, dealing
with Minnesota open meeting law.
(3) Evidence. All findings and conclusions shall be based on reliable evidence
as reasonably available.
(4) Record. A record shall be made of all informational meetings. All
documentary evidence presented at informational meetings shall be made
part of the record.
Subd. 8 General Procedures Associated with Administrative Review and Approval.
A. Required Administrative Review and Approval. Wherever this Chapter requires
administrative review and approval, the review and approval process shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
B. General Noticing Requirements. There shall be no required noticing associated
with administrative review and approval. However, at their discretion,
administrative staff may notify adjacent property owners of pending development.
C. Conduct of Administrative Review and Approval. Administrative staff shall have
the opportunity to consult with other staff and government agencies in reviewing
and processing an application. The applicant shall have the opportunity to refine
the application submittal as necessary to ensure that the application is consistent
with this Chapter.
17.2.02 Comprehensive Plan Amendment.
Subd. 1 Applicability. Adoption and amendments to the Comprehensive Plan are
allowed by MN Statute 462.355. Amendments to the City’s Comprehensive Plan may be
made from time to time to help guide the City in establishing and maintaining sound,
stable, and desirable development within the city. Amendments may also be made to
correct errors in the text or maps of the Comprehensive Plan or to address changed or
changing conditions in a specific area or in the city generally.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 28
Subd. 2 Review Process. The review process shall be consistent with Section 473.859 of
the Minnesota Statutes, Comprehensive Planning and as
follows:
A. Pre-Application Meeting. If a proposed development
requires a Comprehensive Plan Amendment, the
property owner or their designated agent is
encouraged to request a pre-application meeting
pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 4, A, Preapplication
Meeting.
B. Initiation. A Comprehensive Plan Amendment may be
initiated by any of the following:
(1) The Planning Commission;
(2) The City Council;
(3) The Zoning Administrator or other
Authorized Agent; or
(4) The property owner or their designated agent.
C. Application Submittal. A complete application shall
be submitted to the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator or other Authorized Agent pursuant to
Section 17.2.01, Subd. 4, B) Application Forms and
Fees and Section 17.2.01, Subd. 4, C, Application
Deadline.
D. Staff Review. The City Planner/Zoning
Administrator or other Authorized Agent shall
complete the following review tasks:
(1) Determine if the application is complete
pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 4, D.:
Application Completeness;
(2) Notice a public hearing pursuant to Section
17.2.01, Subd 6: Public Hearing and Noticing
Requirements; and
(3) Review the application, considering the
approval criteria, and prepare a report to the Planning Commission with a
recommendation for final action.
(4) Be sure the review and approval process time frame complies with MN
Statute 15.99 Time Deadline for Agency Action.
E. Planning Commission Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall complete
the following tasks:
(1) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing pursuant to Section
17.2.01, Subd. 6: Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 29
(2) The Planning Commission (considering the approval criteria) shall make a
recommendation of approval or denial of the proposed amendment to the
City Council.
F. City Council Action.
(1) After reviewing the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the
City Council may order a second public hearing before the City Council
pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 6: Public Hearing and Noticing
Requirements.
(2) The City Council (considering the approval criteria and the Planning
Commission recommendation) shall deny the request or adopt a
Resolution that amends the Comprehensive Plan.
(3) Adoption of a Resolution shall require a 2/3 vote of the entire City
Council.
G. Distribution of Approved Amendment. One copy of the adopted Comprehensive
Plan Amendment shall be sent to all of the following:
(1) Every governmental body that is located in whole or part within the
boundaries of the City;
(2) The clerk of every local governmental unit that is adjacent to the City;
(3) The Cloquet Public Library.
Subd. 3 Approval Criteria. In determining whether to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a Comprehensive Plan Amendment, the following approval criteria
shall be considered:
A. Criteria.
(1) The Comprehensive Plan Amendment helps guide and accomplish
coordinated development that is harmonious with existing development in
the City of Cloquet, which will be in accordance with existing and future
needs, best promote public health, safety, morals, and the general welfare,
as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development;
(2) The Comprehensive Plan Amendment review process has provided
adequate opportunity for public review and comment;
17.2.03 Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning).
Subd. 1 Applicability.
A. General Applicability. The Zoning Map may be amended whenever the public
necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice require.
Amendments may also be made to correct errors in the Zoning Map or to address
changed or changing conditions in a specific area or within the city generally. All
Zoning Map Amendments must be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and
the provisions of this Section, except as modified by the special Zoning Map
Amendment procedures specified in this Section.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 30
B. Special Zoning Map Amendment Procedures. Due to the
special requirements of specific zoning districts, Zoning
Map Amendments relating to the following shall comply
with the provisions specified below:
C. Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District. The
creation of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay
District shall be pursuant to Section 17.2.09: Creation of a
Planned Unit Development Overlay District.
Subd. 2 Review Process.
A. Pre-application Meeting. If a proposed development
requires a Zoning Map Amendment (rezoning), the
property owner or their designated agent is encouraged to
request a pre-application meeting pursuant to Section
17.2.01, Subd. 4, A: Pre-application Meeting.
B. Initiation. A Zoning Map Amendment may be initiated by
any of the following:
(1) The property owner or their designated agent;
(2) The Planning Commission;
(3) The City Council; or
(4) The City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other
Authorized Agent.
C. Application Submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or
other Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd.
4, B: Application Forms and Fees and Section 17.2.01,
Subd. 4, C: Application Deadline.
D. Staff Review. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator or
other Authorized Agent shall complete the following
review tasks:
(1) Determine if the application is complete pursuant
to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 4, D: Application
Completeness;
(2) Notice a public hearing pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 6: Public
Hearing and Noticing Requirements;
(3) Review the application, considering the approval criteria and prepare a
report to the Planning Commission with a recommendation for final
action.
(4) Be sure the review and approval process time frame complies with MN
Statute 15.99 Time Deadline for Agency Action.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 31
E. Planning Commission Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall
complete the following tasks:
(1) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing pursuant to Section
17.2.01, Subd. 6: Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
(2) The Planning Commission (considering the approval criteria) shall make a
recommendation of approval or denial of the proposed amendment to the
City Council.
F. City Council Final Action.
(1) After reviewing the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the
City Council may order a second public hearing before the City Council
pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 6: Public Hearing and Noticing
Requirements;
(2) The City Council (considering the approval criteria) shall approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the requested Ordinance amending the
Zoning Map.
(3) Approval, or approval with conditions, shall
require a majority vote and sometimes a 2/3 vote
of the entire City Council as determined by MN
Statute.
Subd. 3 Approval Criteria for a Zoning Map Amendment.
In determining whether to approve with conditions, or deny an
application for a Zoning Map Amendment (rezoning), the
following criteria shall be considered:
A. Criteria.
(1) The Zoning Map Amendment is consistent with
the Comprehensive Plan;
(2) The Zoning Map Amendment promotes public
health, safety, morals, and the general welfare, as
well as efficiency and economy in the process of
development;
(3) The Zoning Map Amendment is compatible with
the present zoning and conforming uses of
nearby property and with the character of the
neighborhood;
(4) The property to be amended (rezoned) is suitable
for the uses permitted by the Zoning District that
would be applied by the proposed Zoning Map
Amendment.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 32
17.2.04 Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment.
Subd. 1 Applicability. The text of the Zoning Ordinance may be amended whenever the
public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice require.
Amendments may also be made to correct errors in the text of the Zoning Ordinance or to
address changed or changing conditions affecting the City. All text amendments must be
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
Subd. 2 Review Process.
A. Pre-Application Meeting. If a proposed development requires a text amendment
to the Zoning Ordinance, the property owner or their designated agent is
encouraged to request a pre-application meeting pursuant to Section 17.2.01,
Subd. A.: Pre-application Meeting.
B. Initiation. A text amendment may be initiated by any of the following:
(1) The Planning Commission;
(2) The City Council;
(3) The City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent; or
(4) The property owner or their Authorized Agent.
C. Application Submittal. A complete application shall be submitted to the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent pursuant to Section
17.2.01, Subd. 4, D: Application Deadline, and include the following:
(1) The Applicant’s name and address;
(2) The precise working of any proposed amendment to the text of this
Chapter; and
(3) In the event that the proposed amendment would change the zoning
classification of any property:
a. A legal description and street address of the property proposed to
be re-classified,
b. The name and address of the owner or owners of the said property;
c. The present zoning classification and existing uses of the property
proposed to be reclassified,
d. The area of the property proposed to be reclassified, stated in
square feet or acres, or fraction thereof, and
e. A map, drawn to scale, clearly showing the property proposed to
be reclassified and its present zoning classification and existing
uses.
D. Staff Review. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent
shall complete the following review tasks:
(1) Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd.
4, D: Application Completeness;
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 33
(2) Notice a public hearing pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 6: Public
Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
(3) Review the application, considering the approval criteria, and prepare a
report to the Planning Commission with a recommendation for final
action.
(4) Be sure the review and approval process time frame complies with MN
Statute 15.99 Time Deadline for Agency Action.
E. Planning Commission Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall
complete the following tasks:
(1) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing pursuant to Section
17.2.01, Subd. 6: Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
(2) The Planning Commission (considering the approval criteria) shall make a
recommendation of approval or denial of the proposed amendment to the
City Council.
F. City Council Final Action.
(1) After reviewing the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the
City Council may order a second public hearing before the City Council
pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 6.: Public Hearing and Noticing
Requirements.
(2) The City Council (considering the approval criteria) shall approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the requested Ordinance amending the
Zoning Map.
(3) Approval, or approval with conditions, shall require a majority vote of the
entire City Council.
Subd. 3 Approval Criteria. In determining whether to approve with conditions, or deny
an application for a text amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, the following criteria shall
be considered:
A. Criteria.
(1) The text amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;
(2) The text amendment promotes public health, safety, morals, and the
general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of
development;
(3) The text amendment is compatible with the present zoning and
conforming use of the property and the character of the neighborhoods.
17.2.05 Creation of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District.
Subd. 1 Applicability. A tract of land proposed to be developed as a Planned Unit
Development (PUD) shall be under the control of a single owner, partnership, or
corporation, where each owner agrees in advance to be bound by the conditions and
regulations that will be effective within the district and to record such covenants,
easements, and other provisions with the County.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 34
The provisions of this Section are generally intended for application to larger and / or
unique sites where a flexible approach to zoning regulations would facilitate more
efficient use of the site and protection of natural resources achieved through clustering
development and other innovative site planning and design techniques.
Subd. 2 General Review Process. The creation of a PUD Overlay District requires a
Zoning Map Amendment pursuant to Section 17.2.05: Zoning Map Amendment
(Rezoning). In addition, the review process for the creation of a PUD Overlay District
involves two phases: review of a PUD – Preliminary Plan (PUD-PP) and review of a
PUD- Final Plan (PUD-FP). The following describes each review
phase. An applicant has the option to submit an application for a
PUD- Final Plan at the same time as an application for a PUDPreliminary
Plan.
Subd. 3 PUD- Preliminary Plan Review Process.
A. Pre-application Meeting. The property owner of a
proposed development that is intended to proceed as a
PUD is encouraged to request a pre-application meeting
pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 4, A: Pre-application
Meeting.
B. Initiation. Application for a PUD-Preliminary Plan (PUDPP)
shall be initiated by the property owner or their
designated agent. The application shall have control of all
property in the proposed PUD. An application for a
Preliminary Plat shall be submitted in conjunction with the
Preliminary Plan.
C. Application Submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or
other Authorized Agent for approval of a PUDPreliminary
Plan pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 4, B:
Application Forms and Fees and Section 17.2.01, Subd. 4,
C: Application Deadline. The application shall contain the
following information and the information required for a
Preliminary Plat per Chapter 13, Subdivision Code:
(1) Legal description of the tract of land;
(2) Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control
over the tract to effectuate the proposed plan,
including a statement of all the ownership and
beneficial interests in the tract of land and the
proposed development;
(3) Evidence of the financial capability of the applicant
to complete the proposed development;
(4) Plans drawn to convenient scale, showing the current zoning classification
and existing land use of the tract, and those tracts directly adjacent to it,
and any significant topographical or physical features of the tract;
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 35
(5) Three copies of preliminary plans, drawn to a convenient scale, showing
the following information:
a. Land use and development densities;
b. The size, arrangement, and location of parcels;
c. The proposed general location of buildings or groups of buildings;
d. The location or public and private streets;
e. The location of recreational areas and open space, and description
about who will own and maintain;
f. A general landscaping plan;
g. A general grading plan, indicating onsite storm water management
facilities and indicating the amount and location of off-site
drainage;
h. Identification of mature vegetation on the site and a proposal to
preserve such vegetation worthy of protection;
i. Identification and / or delineation of wetlands and floodplains
within the site and a proposal to protect such areas from
encroachment or degradation;
j. Statistical data on the size of the development, density / intensity
of various sub-areas, and expected phasing or staging.
k. A description of the intended organizational structure for a
property owner’s association, if any; and
l. A description of the deed restrictions or restrictive covenants, if
any.
m. A subdivision preliminary plat application.
(6) When the proposed development includes provisions for common open
space or recreational facilities, a statement must be submitted, describing
the provisions that are to be made for the care and maintenance of such
open space or recreational facilities. If it is proposed that such open space
be owned and / or maintained by any entity other than a governmental
authority, copies of the proposed articles of incorporation and by – laws of
such entity shall be submitted;
(7) Copies of restrictive covenants that are to be recorded with respect to
property included in the proposed development.
(8) When the development is to be constructed in stages of units, a schedule
for the development of such stages or units shall be submitted stating the
approximate beginning and completion date for each such stage or unit.
When a development provides for common open space, the total area of
common open space provided at any stage of development shall, at a
minimum, bear the same relationship to the total open space to be
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 36
provided in the entire development as the stages or units completed or
under development bear to the entire development.
(9) When it deems it to be necessary, the Planning Commission may require
a traffic survey setting out and analyzing the effect that the development
will have upon traffic in the streets and thoroughfares adjacent to and in
the proposed development;
(10) A statement showing the relationship of the proposed development to the
Comprehensive Plan and future land use plan of the City;
(11) A statement as to why the proposed development will not cause
substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood; and
(12) A statement as to how the proposed development is to be designed,
arranged and operated in order to permit the development and use of
neighboring property in accordance with the applicable district
regulations.
(13) Context map. A map of the project including its relationship to the
surrounding properties, topography, or other prominent site features;
(14) Statement. A statement as to why the Planned Unit Development (PUD)
zoning is proposed. The statement shall identify reasons why Planned Unit
Development (PUD) zoning is preferable to development under standard
zoning districts.
(15) Additional plans. The Planning Commission or City Council may require
other special studies, plans, or additional information that would aid in
consideration of the proposed development.
D. Staff Review. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent
shall complete the following tasks:
(1) Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd.
4, D: Application Completeness;
(2) Notice the public hearing pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 6.: Public
Hearing and Noticing Requirements;
(3) Review the application, considering the approval criteria, and prepare a
report to the Planning Commission with a recommendation for final
action; and
(4) Be sure the review and approval process time frame complies with MN
Statute 15.99 Time Deadline for Agency Action.
E. Planning Commission Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall complete
the following tasks:
(1) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing pursuant to Section
17.2.01, Subd. 6: Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 37
(2) The Planning Commission (considering the approval criteria) shall make a
recommendation of approval, approval with conditions or denial to the
City Council.
F. City Council Final Action.
(1) After reviewing the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the
City Council may order a second public hearing before the City Council
pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 6.: Public Hearing and Noticing
Requirements.
(2) The City Council (considering the approval criteria) shall approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the requested ordinance amending the
Zoning Map and the PUD- Preliminary Plan. The ordinance associated
with the PUD- Preliminary Plan is an interim zoning classification that
does not enable any development until the PUD- Final Plan is approved.
(3) Approval, or approval with conditions of the PUD- Preliminary Plan shall
require a majority vote of the entire City Council.
Subd. 4 PUD – Specific Implementation Plan Review Process.
A. Initiation. Application for PUD- Final Plan (PUD – FP) shall be initiated by a
property owner or their designated agent. The Applicant shall have control of all
property in the proposed PUD. An Application for a Final Plat shall be submitted
with the Final Plan application.
B. Application Submittal.
(1) A complete application shall be submitted to the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator or other Authorized Agent for approval of a PUD- Final
Plan pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 4, B.: Application Forms and Fees
and Section 17.2.01, Subd. 4, C: Application Deadline. The application
shall contain all the information required for the Preliminary Plan review
specified in this Section, except that the information shall be in final and
detailed form. In addition, the applicant shall submit all other required
plans for review and action this will include a subdivision final plat
application as required in Chapter 13, Subdivision Code.
(2) The application shall be submitted within twelve (12) months of approval
of the PUD- Preliminary Plan. Failure to provide the PUD- Final Plan
within twelve (12) months of approval of the PUD- Preliminary Plan shall
result in the automatic repeal of the previously approved PUD –
Preliminary Plan.
C. Staff Review. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent
shall complete the following tasks:
(1) Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd.
4, D: Application Completeness; and
(2) Review the PUD – Final Plan. If the PUD- Final Plan is consistent with
the PUD – Preliminary Plan, then the City Planner/Zoning Administrator
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 38
or other Authorized Agent shall prepare a report and a recommendation to
the Planning Commission that directs the Planning Commission to hold an
informational meeting to take their final action on the plan.
(3) If the PUD – Final Plan is not consistent with the PUD – Preliminary Plan,
then the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent
shall prepare a report to the Planning Commission that identifies the
discrepancies and directs the Planning Commission to hold a public
hearing pursuant to the public hearing requirements for the PUD –
Preliminary Plan.
(4) Be sure the review and approval process time frame complies with MN
Statute 15.99 Time Deadline for Agency Review.
D. Planning Commission Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall
complete the following tasks:
(1) If the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent’s
report identifies that the PUD – Final Plan is substantially consistent with
the approved PUD- Preliminary Plan, then the Planning Commission
(considering the approval criteria) shall hold an informational meeting and
make a recommendation to the City Council to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the PUD- Final Plan.
(2) If the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent’s
report identifies that the PUD – Final Plan is substantially inconsistent
with the approved PUD – Preliminary Plan, then the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing pursuant to the public hearing
requirements for the PUD – Preliminary Plan. Following the public
hearing, the Planning Commission (considering the approval criteria) shall
make a recommendation to the City Council to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the PUD – Final Plan.
E. City Council Final Action.
(1)After reviewing the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City
Council may order another public hearing before the City Council pursuant
to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 6: Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements.
(2)The City Council (considering the approval criteria) shall approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the requested ordinance amending the Zoning Map
and approving the PUD – Final Plan. The ordinance associated with the
PUD – Final Plan shall incorporate the Specific Implementation Plan,
including any conditions or restrictions that may be imposed by the City
Council.
(3)Approval, or approval with conditions, shall require a majority vote of the
entire City Council.
Subd. 5 Approval Criteria. In determining whether to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a PUD- Preliminary Plan or a PUD- Final Plan, the Planning
Commission and City Council shall consider the approval criteria for a Zoning Map
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 39
Amendment as specified in Section 17.2.05 as well as the following approval criteria with
special consideration given to whether the plan would or would not be in the public
interest:
A. Criteria.
(1) Comprehensive Plan. Consistency with the City of Cloquet
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Consistency with this Chapter. The extent to which the plan departs from
the provisions of this Chapter otherwise applicable to the subject property,
including, but not limited to, density, bulk, and use, and the reasons why
such departures are or are not deemed to be in the public interest.
(3) Provisions for services. The manner in which the plan does or does not
make adequate provisions for public services / utilities, traffic, and
recreational amenities.
(4) Open space. The nature and extent of open space, the reliability and
sufficiency of the proposal for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space, and the adequacy of the amount and function of the
open space in terms of the densities proposed in the plan.
(5) Effect on the neighborhood. The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the
Planned Unit Development project upon the neighborhood in which it is
proposed to be established.
(6) Phasing. In the case of a plan that proposes development over a period of
years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions proposed to protect and
maintain the integrity of the plan.
(7) Relationship to existing structures. In developed areas, the suitability of
the proposed structures in relation to existing structures to remain and
anticipated future development of the area.
Subd. 6 Conditions that may be attached to a PUD. The City Council may attach any
conditions to the approval of a PUD – Preliminary Plan and / or the approval of a PUDFinal
Plan that it deems necessary to address any of the following conditions or other
applicable conditions not herein listed:
A. Conditions.
(1) Minimize any adverse impact of the development upon other land,
including the hours of use and operation and the type and intensity of
activities that may be conducted;
(2) Control and sequence of development, including when it must be
commenced and completed;
(3) Control the duration of the use of development and the time within which
any structures must be removed;
(4) Ensure that development is maintained properly in the future;
(5) Designate the exact location and nature of development; and
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 40
(6) Establish more detailed records by submission of drawings, maps, plats, or
specifications.
Subd. 7 Effect of the PUD – Final Plan Approval. The approved PUD – Final Plan,
together with the conditions and restrictions imposed by the City Council, shall constitute
the final zoning for the subject property. The zoning provisions applicable to the
underlying zoning districts shall continue to be applicable where consistent with the PUD
– Final Plan.
Subd. 8 Building Permit Restrictions. Development permits and building permits for a
Planned Unit Development shall not be issued until the PUD – Final Plan is approved by
the City Council. No building permit shall be issued for any structure within the PUD –
Final Plan until the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent
certifies that it conforms to the provisions of the PUD – Final Plan and all other
applicable provisions of this Chapter. Any change of the PUD – Preliminary Plan or the
PUD – Final Plan prior to approval of the PUD – Final Plan shall be submitted to the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent. If the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator or other Authorized Agent determines that the change constitutes a
substantial modification, the applicant or developer will be required to amend the PUD –
Final Plan, and if necessary, the PUD – Preliminary Plan, following the review
procedures set forth in this section. If in the opinion of the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator or other Authorized Agent, such changes do not constitute a substantial
alteration of either of the PUD- Preliminary Plan or the PUD – Final Plan, the change
may be accomplished by approval of the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other
Authorized Agent. Such approved changes or modification shall be documented and
recorded in the official file of the City on the Planned Unit Development.
Subd. 9 Expiration. If substantial development progress has not occurred within twelve
(12) months of a PUD – Final Plan approval, the City Council, following a Planning
Commission recommendation, may revoke the PUD- Preliminary Plan and the PUD –
Final Plan approval and revert the site zoning to its previous zoning district classification.
17.2.06 Conditional Use Permit.
Subd. 1 Applicability. A conditional use permit is required for development that would
generally not be appropriate within a district, but might be allowed within certain
locations within the district if specific requirements are met. The compatibility must be
judged on the basis of the particular circumstances and may require the imposing of
conditions before development or occupancy is permitted. The intent is to allow a
reasonable degree of discretion in determining the suitability of a particular development
at a specific location.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 41
Subd. 2 Review Process.
A. Pre-Application Meeting. If a proposed development
requires the issuance of a conditional use permit, the
property owner or their designated agent is encouraged to
request a pre-application meeting pursuant to Section
17.2.01, Subd. 4, A: Pre-application Meeting.
B. Preliminary Appearance. Prior to filing a formal
application for a conditional use permit as hereinafter
provided, a prospective applicant may, by letter to the
Chairman of the Planning Commission, request a
preliminary appearance before the Planning Commission
at one of its regular public meetings to generally acquaint
the Planning Commission with the proposed request for a
conditional use and to obtain the preliminary views of the
Commission prior to the expenditure of funds necessary to
prepare the complete documentation required for a formal
application.
At such preliminary appearance, the prospective applicant
shall present such information and plans as he shall deem
necessary to generally acquaint the Planning Commission
with his proposal.
At such preliminary hearing, the members of the Planning
Commission may make such inquiries and express such
views concerning the proposal as they shall deem
appropriate. The Planning Commission may, by written
order, excuse the prospective applicant from submitting
any specific item of information or document required,
which it may find to be unnecessary to the consideration of
the application to be filed.
C. Initiation. Initiation of a conditional use permit may be
made upon application of the property owner or their
designated agent.
D. Application Submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent pursuant to
Section 17.2.01, Subd. 4, B: Application Forms and Fees and Section 17.2.01,
Subd. 4, C: Application Deadline.
Except as specifically excused by a written order of the Planning Commission, a
copy of which order shall be attached to the application, the application shall
contain the following information and be accompanied by the following
submissions, as well as such additional information and submissions as may be
prescribed by rule of the Planning Commission:
(1) Legal description of the tract of land;
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 42
(2) A statement showing the relationship of the proposed development to the
Comprehensive Plan and future land use plan of the City;
(3) A statement as to why the proposed development will not cause
substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood; and
(4) A statement as to how the proposed development is to be designed,
arranged and operated in order to permit the development and use of
neighboring property in accordance with the applicable district
regulations.
E. Staff Review. The Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent shall
complete the following tasks:
(1) Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd.
4, D: Application Completeness;
(2) Notice a public hearing pursuant to Section17.2.01, Subd. 6: Public
Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
(3) Review the application, considering the approval criteria, and prepare a
report to the Planning Commission with a recommendation for final
action.
(4) Be sure the review and approval process time frame complies with MN
Statute 15.99 Time Deadline for Agency Action.
F. Planning Commission Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall
complete the following tasks:
(1) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing pursuant to Section
17.2.01, Subd. 6: Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
(2) The Planning Commission (considering the approval criteria) shall make a
recommendation of approval, approval with conditions, or denial to the
City Council.
G. City Council Final Action.
(1) After reviewing the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the
City Council may order a second public hearing before the City Council
pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 6: Public Hearing and Noticing
Requirements;
(2) The City Council shall review the request, the Planning Commission’s
recommendation, and the approval criteria and take action to approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the request.
(3) A Conditional Use Permit may be approved by an affirmative vote of a
simple majority of the City Council.
Subd. 3 Approval Criteria. In determining whether to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a request for issuance of a conditional use permit, the Planning
Commission and the City Council shall consider all relevant factors specified in other
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 43
applicable sections of this Chapter, including standards for specific requirements for
certain land uses and activities. In addition, the following approval criteria shall apply:
A. Criteria.
(1) Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. The relationship of the
proposed use to the goals, objectives, and policies of the City of Cloquet
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Compatibility. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed use and
within five hundred (500) feet along the same street and development
anticipated in the foreseeable future within the neighborhood and
conditions that would make the use more compatible.
(3) Importance of services to the community. The importance of the services
provided by the proposed facility to the community, if any, and the
requirements of the facility for certain locations, if any, and without undue
inconvenience to the developer, and the availability of alternative
locations equally suitable.
(4) Neighborhood protections. The sufficiency of terms and conditions
proposed to protect and maintain the uses in the surrounding
neighborhood.
(5) Conformance with other requirements of this Chapter. The conformance
of the proposed development with all provisions of this Chapter.
(6) Other factors. Other factors pertinent to the proposed use, site conditions,
or surrounding area considerations that the Planning Commission or the
City Council feels are necessary for review in order to make an informed
and just decision.
Subd. 4 Conditions that may be attached to a Conditional Use Permit. The Planning
Commission may recommend and the City Council may attach any conditions to the
approval of a conditional use permit that deems necessary to address any of the following
conditions or other applicable conditions not herein listed:
A. Conditions.
(1) Minimize any adverse impact of the development upon other land,
including the hours of use and operation and the type of intensity of
activities that may be conducted;
(2) Control the sequence of development, including when it must be
commenced and completed;
(3) Control the duration of use of development and the time within which any
structures must be removed;
(4) Ensure that development is maintained properly in the future;
(5) Designate the exact location and nature of development; and
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 44
(6) Establish more detailed records by submission of drawings, maps, plats, or
specifications.
Subd. 5 Additional Information.
A. A conditional use permit shall be valid for a period of one year (except when
issued specifically for a Planned Development, in which case the period of
validity shall extend to eighteen (18) months), after which the same shall be
revoked in the event that any proposed construction, alteration or operation has
not been started in accordance with the terms of such permit.
B. A conditional use permit, once issued, shall be transferable in the event of change
of property ownership or control providing, however, that those conditions
attached to the original permit shall be applicable to the responsible agent
following such change. It shall be the duty of the original permit holder to advise
the party assuming control regarding the conditions of such permit.
C. Any decision of the City Council shall be final subject to appeal recourse to
District Court in accordance with State Law. Such appeal must be filed within
sixty (60) days of the date of said decision. Failure to file an appeal within such
time period shall render the appeal void.
D. No reapplication of any case denied by the City Council may be made within one
(1) year of the date of such denial.
E. A conditional use permit which has been validly acted upon within the time
period allowed above by establishment of the conditional use, shall be deemed to
authorize only one particular conditional use and shall expire if the conditional
use shall cease for more than one year for any reason, and without further action
required by the City.
17.2.07 Variance.
Subd. 1 Applicability. The Planning Commission, acting as the
Board of Adjustments and Appeals, may authorize variances from
the provisions of this Chapter which are based on amended Mn.
Stat. 2010 Sec. 394.27, Subd. 7 and Mn. Stat. 462.357, Subd. 6.
Subd. 2 Review Process.
A. Pre-application Meeting. If a proposed development requires
the approval of a variance, then the property owner or their
designated agent is encouraged to request a pre-application
meeting with the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or
other Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd.
4, A: Pre-application Meeting.
B. Initiation. Initiation of a variance may be made upon
application of the property owner or their designated agent.
C. Application Submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other
Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 4, B:
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 45
Application Forms and Fees and Section 17.2.01, Subd. 4, C: Application
Deadline.
D. Staff Review. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent
shall complete the following review tasks:
(1) Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd.
4, D: Application Completeness;
(2) Notice a public hearing pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd. 6: Public
Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
(3) Review the application, considering the approval criteria, and prepare a
report to the Planning Commission, acting as the Board of Adjustments
and Appeals, with a recommendation for final action.
(4) Be sure the review and approval process time frame complies with MN
Statute 15.99 Time Deadline for Agency Action.
E. Planning Commissions Final Action. The Planning Commission, acting as the
Board of Adjustments and Appeals, shall complete the following tasks:
(1) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing pursuant to Section
17.2.01, Subd 6: Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
(2) The Planning Commission, acting as the Board of Adjustments and
Appeals, shall take action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
variance request based on the approval criteria specified in this Section. In
granting any provision under this Section, the Planning Commission shall
designate such conditions that will secure substantially the objectives of
the regulations or provisions in the application of which the variance is
granted as to light, access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems, air,
character of the neighborhood, conformity to the Comprehensive Plan,
and, generally, the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and
general welfare.
(3) Approval, or approval with conditions, shall require a majority vote of
four (4) or more of the members of the Planning Commission.
Subd. 3 Approval Criteria. Variances may be granted when they are in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of the ordinance, are consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan, and when the applicant for the variance establishes that there are practical
difficulties in complying with the official control. Economic considerations alone do not
constitute practical difficulties. No variance may be granted that would allow any use
that is not allowed in the zoning district in which the subject property is located. The
board of adjustments may impose conditions in the granting of variances; those
conditions must be directly related to and must bear a rough proportionality to the impact
created by the variance. No variance may be granted unless all of the following
conditions exist:
A. Practical Difficulties.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 46
(1) The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner
not permitted by an official control;
(2) The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the
property not created by the landowner; and
(3) The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the
locality.
Subd. 4 Appeals.
Any decision of the Planning Commission shall be final subject to appeal recourse to District
Court in accordance with State Law. Such appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days of the
date of decision. Failure to file an appeal within such time period shall render the appeal void.
17.2.08 Appeal of an Administrative Decision.
Subd. 1 Applicability. The Planning Commission, acting as the Board of Adjustments
and Appeals, shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other
Authorized Agent in the enforcement of this Chapter, where it is alleged that there is an
error.
Subd. 2 Review Process.
A. Initiation. Any appeal may be taken to the Planning Commission by any person or
by any officer, department, board or commission of the City affected by a
decision of the City Planner/Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken
within fourteen (14) days of the action complained of by filing with the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent,
and with the City Administrator a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. A nonrefundable filing fee,
established from time to time by the City Council to cover
administrative costs and costs of the hearing, shall
accompany the notice of appeal filed with the City
Administrator. The Administrative Officer shall forthwith
transmit to the Planning Commission all of the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken.
B. Application Submittal. A request for an appeal of an
administrative decision shall be made in writing to the
City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized
Agent. The request shall provide sufficient information for
the Planning Commission to make an informed and just
decision.
C. Staff Review. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator or
other Authorized Agent shall complete the following
tasks:
(1) Within seven (7) days of receipt of a request for an
appeal of an administrative decision, the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 47
Agent shall review the evidence and make a report of the facts to the
Planning Commission.
(2) Be sure the review and approval process time frame complies with MN
Statute 15.99 Time Deadline for Agency Action.
D. Planning Commission Final Action. The Planning Commission shall complete the
following tasks:
(1) Conduct a public meeting.
(2) Following the close of the public meeting, the Planning Commission shall
render a decision on the appeal.
(3) Any decision of the Planning Commission in accordance with this Section
may be appealed to District Court within thirty (30) days of the date of
said decision in accordance with applicable state law. Failure to file an
appeal within such time period shall render the appeal void.
(4) No reapplication of any case denied by the Planning Commission may be
made within one (1) year of the date of such denial.
Subd. 3 Approval Criteria. In determining whether an administrative official’s actions
were appropriate, the Planning Commission, acting as the Board of Adjustments and
Appeals, shall consider the details of the case presented by the Applicant and the
administrative officials, and the Commission shall consider the requirements of this
Chapter. All findings and conclusions shall be based on reliable evidence.
17.2.09 Discontinuance or Vacation of a Public Right of Way.
The process for Discontinuance or Vacation of a Public Way is pursuant to Minnesota Statute
412.851 as may be amended from time to time.
17.2.10 Site Plan Approval.
Subd. 1 Applicability. Site Plans conforming to the following requirements shall be
required whenever any person proposes to place any structure for which a building permit
is required under any other Section of this code, on any tract or parcel of land with the
exception of one and two-family dwellings and their associated accessory buildings. Site
Plans for one- and two- family dwellings and associated accessory buildings shall be
reviewed by City Staff only to assure compliance with applicable zoning requirements.
Subd. 2 Review Process.
A. Sketch Plan. Applicants may present a sketch plan to the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator prior to filing a formal application. The plan shall be conceptual
but shall be drawn to scale with topography of a contour interval not greater than
two (2) feet and may include the following, as determined by the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator:
(1) The proposed site with reference to existing development on adjacent
properties, at least to within two hundred (200) feet;
(2) General location of existing and proposed structures;
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 48
(3) Tentative street arrangements; both public and private;
(4) Amenities to be provided such as recreational areas, open space,
walkways, etc;
(5) General location of parking areas;
(6) Existing and proposed public sanitary sewer, water and storm drainage;
(7) A statement showing the proposed density of the project with the method
of calculating said density also shown.
The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to refer the sketch
plan to the Planning Commission and / or City Council for discussion, review,
and informal comment. Any opinions or comments provided to the applicant by
the City Planner/Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, and / or City
Council shall be considered advisory only and shall not constitute a binding
decision on the request.
B. Minor Projects. The following shall be considered
minor projects and subject to review procedures as
indicated:
(1) Zoning Staff Review Only.
a. Building projects that comprise less than
10% building footprint expansion.
(2) Administrative Review per Section 17.2.01.
a. Building projects that comprise a 10%-
30% building footprint expansion.
b. Plantings / landscaping. (Example: the
planting of trees, shrubs, sod and the
like).
(3) Procedure: Administrative Review approval of
eligible site plans shall be subject to the
following procedural requirements:
a. Plan review will be a coordinated review
by other City departments and divisions
as determined by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator;
b. Site Plans involving properties within approved Planned Unit
Developments shall be subject to applicable evaluation in this
Section.
c. Any variance proposal will automatically require the entire
application to be processed in accordance with the Planning
Commission review and approval provisions of Section 17.2.11:
Variance.
d. Administrative approval including all applicable conditions and
requirements shall be made in writing by the City Planner/Zoning
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 49
Administrator. The applicant, in addition to all other applicable
requirements, shall submit a written acknowledgement of that
approval prior to the commencement of any development and prior
to the issuance of any permit.
e. Any unresolved dispute as to administrative interpretation of City
Code, Ordinance, or policy requirements may be formally appealed
pursuant to this Chapter.
C. Major Projects. A major project is defined as one or both of the following and
subject to review as prescribed in this Section require review and approval by the
Planning Commission and City Council.
(1) Construction on an existing parcel of new structures that may or may not
be in conjunction with site improvements or redevelopment site of vacant
undeveloped lands, and / or;
(2) Building projects that comprise more than a 30% building footprint
expansion;
Subd. 3 Site Plan Review Requirements for Major Projects Only.
A. Requirements.
(1) Certificate of Survey;
(2) Request for site plan approval, as provided within this Section, shall be
filed with the City Planner/Zoning Administrator on an official application
form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as determined by the
City Council. Such application shall be accompanied by detailed written
and graphic materials, the number and size as prescribed by the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator, fully explaining the proposed change,
development, or use and a list of property owners within three hundred
fifty (350) feet of the subject property in a format prescribed by the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator if adjacent to residentially zoned property.
A notice shall be mailed out to those property owners a minimum of 10
days prior to the Planning Commissions public meeting, this is not a
public hearing. The request shall be considered as being officially
submitted and complete when the applicant has complied with all the
specified information requirements.
(3) Proof of Ownership or Authorization. The applicant shall supply proof of
ownership of the property for when the site plan approval is requested or
supply written authorization from the owner (s) of the property in question
to proceed with the requested site plan approval.
(4) The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall coordinate the review of the
site plan, and provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation
on the action to the Planning Commission and the City Council.
(5) The Planning Commission and City staff have the authority to request
additional information from the applicant concerning operational factors.
Said information is to be declared necessary to evaluate the request and /
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 50
or to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent Sections
of this Chapter. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary
supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.
(6) The applicant or a representative thereof may appear before the Planning
Commission in order to present information and answer questions
concerning the proposed request.
(7) The Planning Commission shall recommend such actions or conditions
relating to the request as they deem necessary to carry out the intent and
purpose of this Section. The Planning Commission shall forward its
recommendation to the City Council. The Planning Commission may
recommend approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the site
plan. In the event of a recommendation for denial, the Planning
Commission shall provide the reasons for its decision.
(8) Upon receiving the report and recommendations of the Planning
Commission the City Administrator shall schedule the application for
consideration by the City Council. Such reports and recommendations
shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the
City Council meeting.
(9) The applicant or a representative thereof may appear before the City
Council in order to present information and answer questions concerning
the proposed request. The City Council may hold one or more additional
informational meetings prior to the approval or denial of the site plan.
The City Council may require modifications to the site plan as a
condition of approval provided such modifications are consistent with the
provisions of this Chapter.
(10) Approval of the site plan shall require passage by a majority vote of the
City Council.
(11) Denial. If an application for site plan approval is denied by the City
Council, the denial shall be accompanied by written findings setting forth
the reasons for the denial in terms of the ways in which the proposed use
fails to meet the standards and intent of this Chapter.
(12) Expiration of Approval. Approval of a site plan shall remain valid for
one (1) year. Failure to commence development in accord with an
approved site plan within one (1) year after the date of approval shall
result in revocation of approval. An extension of site plan approval for up
to twelve (12) months may be granted by the City Council.
(13) Site Plan Amendment. Any approved site plan may be amended in
accordance with the standards and procedures established herein,
including payment of fees; provided that the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator may waive such procedures for those minor changes listed
in this Section. Such minor changes shall not be made unless the prior
written approval for such change is obtained from the City
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 51
Planner/Zoning Administrator. No fees shall be required for such minor
changes as follows:
a. Moving building walls within the confines of the smallest
rectangle that would have enclosed such original approved
building(s). Relocation of building entrances or exits, shortening of
building canopies;
b. Changing to a more restrictive commercial or industrial use,
provided there is no reduction in the amount of off-street parking
as originally approved;
c. Substituting plant species, provided a nursery or landscape
architect certifies the substitute species is similar in nature and
screening effect;
d. Changing type and design of exterior lighting fixtures, provided a
certified engineer or architect certifies there will be no change in
the intensity of light at the property boundary;
e. Increasing peripheral yards;
f. Other acceptable changes / modifications as approved by the
Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent.
Subd. 4 Criteria for Approval. The City Council shall approve the site plan if it finds
that the plan meets the following standards:
A. Criteria.
(1) Consistency with the City’s adopted Comprehensive Plan;
(2) Compliance with all applicable Ordinances including, but not limited to
provisions for parking, landscaping and screening.
(3) Reasonable accommodation of unique geologic, geographic or historically
significant characteristics;
(4) Consideration of adjacent and neighboring properties through adequate
design and provision for such matters as surface water drainage, building
location and orientation, parking and access drives, lighting, and trash
storage;
(5) Reasonable consideration for the safety and convenience of both vehicular
and pedestrian traffic both within the site and in relation to access streets.
Subd. 5 Application for Site Plan Review and Approval. Application for Site Plan
review and approval shall include the following information:
A. Application.
(1) Existing conditions: topography at 2-foot contours, significant woodlands,
wetlands and water bodies, existing structures and easements;
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 52
(2) Contextual setting: identification of existing land uses, zoning, and street
systems within three hundred (300) feet of the site perimeter and
identification of existing structures on all adjacent parcels;
(3) Proposed grading and drainage;
(4) Proposed location and dimensions of all proposed structures, public and
private streets or drives, and exterior parking and drives areas and
walkways;
(5) A staging plan and proposed schedule if the project is to be developed
incrementally over time;
(6) Proposed landscaping plan as per Section 17.5.04;
(7) Proposed screening as per Section 17.5.03 with site cross sections to show
the effectiveness of screening;
(8) Calculations of total gross site acreage, net developable acres, percentage
of lot coverage, percentage of impervious surface coverage, usable open
space and proposed density in terms of lot area / unit and units /
developable acre ( for multi-family development), required and provided
parking;
(9) Proposed building elevations and materials for proposed structures;
(10) Proposed lighting plan indicating the planned area of exposure and the
effective illumination in foot candles;
(11) Proposed signage;
(12) Proposed recreation areas and facilities.
Subd. 6 Site Plan Review Requirements and Performance Standards. All site plans
for development activities defined above shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission
and approved by the City Council according to the following design / performance
standards. Modifications of these standards may be granted by the City Council if the
Council finds that a modification would result in a more suitable development plan for a
particular site and that such modification is in keeping with the general spirit of this
Chapter.
A. Curbs. Interior concrete curbs shall be constructed within the property to separate
driving and parking areas from landscaped areas and control surface drainage.
B. Walkways. Surfaced walkways shall be provided from parking areas, loading
zones, recreation areas, and walkways along City streets to the entrances of
buildings.
C. Trash Storage. Any exterior storage of trash and recyclables shall be enclosed
within a container and completely screened by a wall constructed of the same
materials as the principal building. A trash storage facility shall be setback a
minimum of five (5) feet from the property line or right of way line.
D. Parking Structures. Detached accessory parking structures shall be constructed of
the same materials as the principal structure.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.2 Application, Review Procedures 53
E. Lighting. On-site lighting shall be provided as necessary for security, safety, and
traffic circulation. Lighting shall be designed and installed in conformance with
the standards set forth in Section 17.5.12 of this Chapter.
F. Usable Open Space. Each multi-family development complex shall have a
minimum usable open space area equal to three hundred (300) square feet for
each dwelling unit. A portion of the open space area, unless specifically designed
for senior citizens, shall include a paved recreation area and children’s play
equipment. The recreation area shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100)
feet from any water body, wetland or ponding area.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.3 Review and Approval Authorities 54
17.3 Review and Approval Authorities
17.3.01 General Provisions.
Subd. 1 Intent. This Section establishes review and approval authority under this
Chapter of the City Code. Specific requirements for each type of application or permit
are described in Section 17.2: Application, Review, and Approval Procedures.
Subd. 2 Conformity with Development Regulations. Every official and employee with
the City of Cloquet vested with the duty or authority to issue a permit, certificate, or
license under this Chapter shall not issue such for any use, building, or purpose that
conflicts with any provision of this Chapter. Any permit, certificate, or license issued in
conflict with the provisions of this Chapter shall be null and void.
Subd. 3 Other Review and Approval Authorities and Powers and Duties. This
Chapter may reference various review and approval authorities that are not specifically
described in this Section. Such lack of description shall not invalidate such review and
approval authorities. Furthermore, the review and approval authorities may have
additional powers and duties beyond those specified in this Chapter.
17.3.02 City Planner/Zoning Administrator.
Subd. 1 Establishment of Office. There is hereby established the Office of City
Planner/Zoning Administrator.
Subd. 2 Powers and Duties of the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other
Authorized Agent. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent
shall properly administer and enforce this Chapter. In addition and in furtherance of such
authority, the powers and duties of the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other
Authorized Agent shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Examine all applications pertaining to the use of land, buildings, or structures, and
grant approval of permits or take other appropriate action on such applications
when in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Keep a record of all non-conforming uses within the several zoning districts in the
City.
C. Periodically inspect buildings, structures, and uses of land to determine
compliance with the terms of this Chapter.
D. Notify in writing any person responsible for violating a provision of this Chapter,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct
it.
E. Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; order removal
of illegal buildings, structures, additions, or alterations; order discontinuance of
illegal work being done; or take any other action authorized by this Chapter to
ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
F. Maintain permanent and current records of this Chapter, including all maps,
amendments, conditional uses and variances.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.3 Review and Approval Authorities 55
G. Maintain a current file of all permits, zoning certificates, certificates of zoning
compliance and notices of violation, discontinuance or removal, for such time as
necessary to ensure a continuous compliance with the provisions of this Chapter,
and on request, provide information to any person having a proprietary or tenancy
interest in any specific property or to any individual seeking an understanding or
clarification of the regulations and procedures stipulated in this Chapter.
H. Attend all scheduled Planning Commission meetings and hearings in an ex-officio
capacity. The responsibility for drafting recommendations, resolutions and
decisions for the public record may be assigned to the Zoning Administrator at the
option of the chairperson of the Commission.
17.3.03 Building Official.
Subd. 1 Establishment of Office. There is hereby established the Office of the Building
Official to include the positions of Building Official and such other inspectors as the City
Council may from time to time provide to supervise the construction of buildings and
permanent equipment of buildings. Such officials shall be selected by the Mayor with
approval of the City Council at a salary fixed by the City Council. The Building Official
position is also created by adoption of the State Building Code.
Subd. 2 Powers and Duties. The Building Official shall have power and it shall be his or
her duty to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and of all other laws and lawful orders
of the State of Minnesota and of all ordinances of the City of Cloquet relating to
buildings. The Building Official may appoint other Authorized Agents who shall have
the power and duty to enforce all, or specific portions of, said ordinances and laws. In
addition and in furtherance of such authority, the powers and duties of the Building
Official or other Authorized Agent shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Assist with the enforcement of zoning, health, and safety codes;
B. Inspect buildings, grounds, construction, maintenance, and repair activities to
ensure compliance with this Chapter and Minnesota Statutes;
C. Enter upon any private or public premises during any reasonable hours to make
inspections thereof;
D. Review job specifications and plans;
E. Issue permits and citations and keep the following permit records in his or her
office:
(1) Applications for building permits numbered consecutively;
(2) The number, description, and size of all buildings erected during his or her
term of office indicating the type of material used and the cost of each
building;
(3) All inspections made;
(4) All removal and condemnations of buildings; and
(5) All fees collected by him or her showing date of their receipt and delivery
to the City Treasurer.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.3 Review and Approval Authorities 56
F. Make a monthly report and an annual report to the City Council regarding
activities of the Office of the Building Official; and
G. Perform other functions as required by the City Administrator or the City Council.
17.3.04 Planning Commission
The Planning Commission is a Commission appointed by the Mayor of Cloquet with the
approval of the Council. All duties, responsibilities and procedures are specified in Chapter 2,
Section 2.2.01 of the City Code of the City of Cloquet.
17.3.05 City Council
The City Council Members are members elected by and represent their respective wards as
representatives on the City Council. The duties, responsibilities and procedures are specified in
Chapter 2, Section 2.1.03 of the City Code of the City of Cloquet.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.4 General Standards 57
17.4 General Standards
17.4.01 General Standards. Except as hereinafter provided: No building, structure or land shall
hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the
regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
Subd. 1 Compliance. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
A. to exceed in height;
B. to accommodate or house a greater number of families;
C. to occupy a greater percentage of lot area;
D. to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces
than therein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this
Chapter.
Subd. 2 Area Requirements. No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or
loading spaces required for or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying
with this Chapter shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or
loading space similarly required for any other building, except where specifically exempted
by a district provision in this Chapter.
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Chapter shall be reduced in size or area
below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective
date of this Chapter shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
Chapter.
Subd. 3 Minimum Requirements. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare. Wherever the
requirements of this Chapter are in variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulation ordinances, deed restriction or covenants, the most restrictive or
that imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
Subd. 4 Dwelling on Any Lot of Record. In any district where dwellings are permitted, a
one-family detached dwelling may be erected on any lot of official record at the effective
date of this Chapter irrespective of its area or width, provided the applicable yard and other
open space requirements are satisfied or modified by the Planning Commission as set forth in
Section 17.2.11: Variance.
Subd. 5 Height Limitations Not Applicable. The height limitations stipulated in this
Chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. Essential Service Structures, Architectural Features, Etc.
(1) Church spires.
(2) Belfries.
(3) Cupolas and domes.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.4 General Standards 58
(4) Monuments.
(5) Water towers.
(6) Fire and hose towers.
(7) Observation towers.
(8) Transmission towers.
(9) Chimneys.
(10) Smoke stacks.
(11) Flag poles.
(12) Radio and television towers.
(13) Masts and serials.
(14) Parapet walls extending not more than four (4) feet above the limiting height of
the building.
B. Elevator Penthouses, etc. Elevator penthouses (elevator machinery loft), monitors,
and scenery lofts, provided no linear dimension of any such structure exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the corresponding street lot line frontage. Fire hose or cooling
towers, elevators, gas holders or other structures incorporated into a principal
structure where a manufacturing process requires a greater height shall be accepted.
Subd. 6 Yards and Frontage Limitations Not Applicable. The yard and frontage
limitations stipulated elsewhere in this Chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. Average Depth of the Front Yard – Front Yard Observed. In any district where front
yards are required and where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on one side
of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have a
front yard that is greater or less than the required front yard in the district, no building
housing a principal use as defined by this Chapter shall project beyond the average
front yard so established. Where such varying average front yard setback has been so
established, no variance action by the Planning Commission shall be required for
structure placement. Accessory buildings and uses shall maintain the normal front
yard setback requirement of the district in which located unless a variance of those
requirements is obtained in accordance with Section 17.2.11: Variance.
Subd. 7 Yard Space, General. Any building, structure or use hereafter erected, altered or
established shall comply with the yard space requirements of the district in which it is located
except as specified below. The require yard space for any building, structure, or use shall be
contained on the same lot as the building, structure or use and such required yard space shall
fall entirely upon land in a district or districts which the principal use is permitted. Any
required yard space shall be open from thirty (30) inches above the ground to the sky except
as specified in Subd. 9 of this Section.
Subd. 8 Placement of Single and Two-Family Residential Structures on Large Lots. In
any residence district where a single or two-family structure is to be developed on large lots
which could later be subdivided and still meet the dimensional and area requirements for
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.4 General Standards 59
another lot for the district in which it is situated, it is desirable but not mandatory for such
structure to be placed in a manner which would permit such later subdivision.
Subd. 9 Yard Space Encroachments – Projections into Yards. The following projections
may be permitted into any front, rear or exterior side yard adjoining a street lot line:
A. Cornices, sills, belt courses, eaves and other ornamental features to a distance of not
more than two (2) feet six (6) inches.
B. Fire escapes to a distance of not more than four (4) feet six (6) inches.
C. Landings and uncovered porches, when constructed more than six (6) inches above
the ground level at the building line, to a horizontal distance of not more than eight
(8) feet, but in no case shall it be closer than five (5) feet to the property line,
provided said landing or porch has its floor no higher than the entrance floor of the
building. An open railing no higher than three (3) feet six (6) inches may be placed
around such structure.
D. Bay windows and chimneys to a distance of not more than three (3) feet, provided
that such features do not occupy, in the aggregate, more than one-third (1/3) the
length of the building wall on which they are located.
E. Attached car ports or canopies to a distance of not more than four (4) feet six (6)
inches but in no case shall it be closer than five (5) feet to the property line..
F. Balconies, in residential districts, to a distance of not more than four (4) feet into
yards of less than twenty (20) feet and to a distance of not more than eight (8) feet
into yards of more than twenty (20) feet; provided that said balconies do not occupy,
in the aggregate, more than one-third (1/3) the length of the building wall on which
they are located.
Interior Side Yards: Subject to the limitations for features projecting into front yards,
said features may also project into required yards adjoining interior side lot lines,
provided that the distance shall not exceed one-fifth (1/5) of the required least width
of such side yard and not more than three (3) feet in any case.
Subd.10 Yard Space Exception, Steep Slopes.
In any Residential District where the natural grade of a lot within the required front yard has
an average slope, normal to the front lot line at every point along said line, of such a degree
or percent of slope that is not practicable to provide a driveway with a grade of twelve (12)
percent or less to a private garage conforming to the requirements of this Chapter, such
garage may be located within such front yard, but not in any case closer than twenty (20) feet
to the street line.
Subd. 11 Erection of More than One Principal Structure on a Lot. In any district, no
more than one (1) structure housing a permitted or permissible principal use may be erected
on a single lot. A Planned Unit Development may allow more than one principal structure on
a lot.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.4 General Standards 60
Subd. 12 Animals other than Domestic House Pets/Animals.
A. No animals, other than domestic house pets/animals, as defined in Section 17.1.05,
shall be permitted in any zoning district other than the FR Farm Residential District.
B. No structure (excluding a doghouse and pen area) or uses of land intended for the
care and grooming of animals other than domestic pets/animals, as defined in Section
17.1.05, shall be permitted in any zoning district except the FR- Farm Residential
District.
Subd. 13 Controls Applicable to the Moving of Buildings – All Districts.
A. No existing principal buildings shall be relocated on any different and separate
building site within the City without the prior approval of the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator or other Authorized Agent. Any person desiring to relocate any
building shall first file a request therefore and apply for a permit and pay a filing fee
as stipulated by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator. The City Planner/Zoning
Administrator shall review the permit and shall take action on the request.
B. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent, in making their
decision, as to whether to grant or not to grant a permit to relocate a building within
or into the City limits, shall, but will not be limited to, consider the following factors:
(1) Whether the new proposed location is large enough in area for the relocation
of the building thereon and if such relocation conforms in all respects with the
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cloquet.
(2) Whether the building will conform in architectural style or size with any
existing buildings in the new location. If not, whether it would be detrimental
to the economic development of the area to permit said relocation.
(3) Whether modification is required and is possible as a condition of the granting
of the permit.
(4) Whether a permit should be issued conditioned upon the petitioner performing
any other act or acts deemed necessary by the Commissioners and / or Council
to fulfill the intent of this requirement.
C. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent shall determine
that if it is in the best interest of the City to grant the permit, it shall do so and shall
sign said permit.
Subd. 14 Controls Applicable to the Storage of Firewood, Lumber, and Wood Products
Used in Construction – All Residential Districts except FR - Farm Residential District.
A. Standards. In the interest of protecting public health and safety, wood piles must be
erected, located, and maintained in a safe and orderly fashion and in accordance with
the minimum standards established by this Section. These standards shall apply to the
storage of wood on residential properties within the City except for the exemptions
noted below. These standards shall apply to any wood or wood product usually used
or intended to be used as firewood in the residence or any accessory structure, as well
as any lumber and other wood products used in construction. In enacting these
standards, it is not the intention of the City to absolve individual property owners
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.4 General Standards 61
from responsibility for their own protection and the protection of others, nor is it the
intention to create any additional rights of action against the City.
B. Conditions of Storage. Firewood, lumber and other wood products shall be stored in
the following fashion:
1. In neat and secure stacks;
2. The height of the wood pile over three (3) feet high shall be no more than
twice its width. The maximum height allowed is seven (7) feet;
3. In a manner and location to minimize possible problems of rat or other pest
infestation;
4. No wood shall be stored in a front yard or yard that is commonly considered
the front yard. On corner lots, the front yard is that yard which corresponds to
the street address of the property;
5. The maximum amount of wood that may be stored is twenty-four (24) cords,
but in no event shall the amount stored result in exceeding the maximum
percentage of lot coverage as specified in Section 17.6.24: Tabulation of
Dimensional and Special Requirements for Zoning Districts.
C. Exceptions. Wood storage under the following circumstances shall be exempt from
the conditions outlined above:
1. Wood stored or kept in covered structure impervious to the elements;
2. Temporary storage of logs for up to thirty (30) days outside of the required
areas of setback from property lines and street rights-of-way is allowed for the
purpose of cutting and splitting logs to a size useable in the residence’s wood
burning device;
3. Temporary storage for up to thirty (30) days of lumber and other wood
products used in construction is allowed outside of the required areas of
setback from property lines and street rights-of-way.
D. Non Conforming Wood Piles. Any wood pile existing at the time of enactment of
these regulations and not in conformance with these minimum standards must be
removed or placed in compliance with these provisions within six (6) months of said
enactment. Wood piles established after the date of enactment of these regulations
shall be done so in conformance with these minimum standards.
E. Variances. A variance of any part of these regulations may be granted by the Planning
Commission in accordance with Section 17.2.11 of this Chapter only upon
presentation of evidence that (1) the essential character of the neighborhood will not
be altered by granting the variance, and (2) special and unique circumstances exist
relative to the property in question which prevent strict adherence to the regulations.
17.4.02 Performance Standards.
Subd. 1 Compliance Required. No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied
in any manner so as to create a dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable
element; also fire, explosive, or other hazard; excessive noise or vibration; smoke, dust, odor
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.4 General Standards 62
or other form of air pollution; also generate heat, cold, dampness, electrical or other
condition or element in such a manner, or in such amount, as to adversely affect the
surrounding area of adjoining premises, provided that any use permitted or not expressly
prohibited by this Chapter may be undertaken and maintained if it conforms to the
regulations of this Section limiting objectionable elements at the point of the determination
of their existence.
Subd. 2 Points of Measurement. The determination of the existence of any Objectionable
Element shall be made at the location of the use creating the same and at any points where
the existence of such elements may be more apparent; provided, however, that the
measurements necessary for enforcement or performance standard set forth in this Section
shall be taken at property line boundaries.
Subd. 3 Performance Standard Regulations. The following provisions, standards and
specifications shall apply:
A. Fire and Explosion Hazard. All activities involving, and all storages of, inflammable
and explosive materials shall be provided at conveniently accessible places, with
adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion, and adequate firefighting
and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in the industry. Burning
of waste materials in open fires shall be prohibited at any place. The relevant
provisions of State and local laws and regulations shall apply in all cases.
B. Radioactivity or Electric Disturbances. No activities shall be permitted which emit
dangerous radiation at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely affecting the
operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such
disturbance. Radioactive emissions shall be further subject to applicable federal and
state regulations.
C. Noise. At the points of measurement, the sound pressure level of noise radiated from
a facility at night time, during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., shall not exceed
fifty (50) decibels (sound pressure level decibels re 0.0002 dynes / cm²), or the
average sound level of the street traffic noise nearest the noise generator, whichever is
the higher, in any octave band of frequency above 300 cycles per second. The sound
pressure level shall be measured with a Sound Level Meter (American Standard
Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, publication 224.3
– 1944) and an Octave Band Analyzer (American Standard Specification for an
Octave – Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, publication
224.10 – 1953) that conforms to the specifications published by the American
Standards Association. Noise shall be so muffled or otherwise controlled, as not to
become objectionable, due to intermittence, beat frequency, impulsive character
(hammering, etc.) periodic character (humming, screech, etc.) or shrillness.
For facilities which radiate noise only during a normal daytime working shift, the
allowable decibel level given above shall be increased twenty (20) decibels, or ten
(10) decibels above the average sound level of the street traffic noise nearest the noise
generator, whichever is the higher. Sirens, whistles, bells, etc., which are maintained
and utilized solely to serve a public purpose (such as fire sirens) are excluded from
the above regulation.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.4 General Standards 63
D. Vibration. No ground vibration shall be permitted which is discernable without
instruments at the points of measurement for ordinance enforcement.
E. Smoke. No emission shall be permitted at any point, from any chimney or otherwise,
of visible grey smoke of a shade equal to or darker than No. 2 on the Power’s Micro-
Ringlemann Chart (published by McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, Inc., and
copyrighted 1954, being a direct facsimile reduction of the standard Ringlemann
Chart as issued by the United States Bureau of Mines), except that visible grey smoke
of a shade equal to No. 3 of said chart may be emitted for four (4) minutes in any
thirty (30) minutes. These provisions applicable to visible grey smoke shall also apply
to visible smoke of a different color but with an apparently equivalent capacity.
F. Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in
such quantities as to be unreasonably noxious at the points of measurement. Any
process which may involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided
with a secondary safeguard system, so that control will be maintained if the primary
safeguard system should fail. There is hereby established as a guide in determining
such quantities of offensive odors Table III, ‘Odor Thresholds’, in Chapter 5, ‘Air
Pollution Abatement Manual’, copyrighted 1951 by Manufacturing Chemists’ Assn.,
Inc., Washington D.C.
G. Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases and Other Forms of Air Pollution. No emission
shall be permitted which can cause any damage to health, to animals, vegetation or
other forms of property, or which can cause any excessive soiling, at any point.
Noxious emissions shall be measured as to degree of severity following the guidelines
and standards of the Pollution Control Agency (PCA).
H. Glare. No direct or structural or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from
high-temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise shall be
permitted so as to be visible at the points of measurement. This restriction shall not
apply to signs otherwise permitted by the provisions of this Chapter.
I. Heat. Every use and activity shall be so operated that it does not raise the ambient air
temperature more than two degrees Fahrenheit (2º F) at or beyond the point of
measurement.
J. Liquid or Solid Wastes. No discharge shall be permitted at any point into any public
sewer, private sewage disposal system, or stream, or into the ground except in accord
with standards approved by the Department of Health of the State of Minnesota or
standards equivalent to those approved by such department for similar uses, of any
materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply or
otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements.
Subd. 4 State Standards. The State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards shall take
precedence over the above regulations except where City standards are higher. Current State
regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the City Planner/Zoning Administrator, and
shall be the determining standard in resolving questions regarding performance standards.
Subd. 5 Compliance. In order to ensure compliance with the performance standards set forth
above, the City Planner/Zoning Administrator, with approval of the City Council, may
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.4 General Standards 64
require the owner or operator for any use to have made such investigations and tests as may
be required to show adherence to the performance standards. Such investigations and tests as
are required to be made shall be carried out by an independent testing organization as may be
selected by the City. Where compliance is determined, incurred costs shall be divided equally
between the use and the City; where a violation exists, said use shall remit full payment for
all incurred costs.
17.4.03 Outside Storage / Display – All Districts.
Subd. 1 Outside Storage.
A. Passenger automobiles and trucks not currently licensed by the State, or which are
incapable of movement under their own power due to mechanical deficiency, which
are parked or stored outside for a period in excess of ninety-six (96) hours, and all
materials stored outside in violation of the City Ordinances are considered refuse or
junk and shall be disposed of pursuant to City regulations.
B. Any accumulation of refuse not stored in containers which comply with City Code, or
any accumulation of refuse including car parts which has remained on property for
more than one (1) week is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated by
order of the City Planner/Zoning Administrator, as provided by Minnesota Statutes.
C. In all zoning districts, outside storage, including but not limited to equipment storage
and the parking of vehicles, shall be prohibited as a principal use of property.
D. Except for temporary construction trailers and mobile services operated by public
service agencies (i.e., bookmobile, bloodmobiles, etc.) as allowed by the City, and
trailers parked in a designated and improved loading area, no vehicle may be used for
office, business, industrial manufacturing, testing, or storage of items used with or in
a business, commercial or industrial enterprise, unless otherwise approved by the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent.
E. The City Council may order the owner of any property to cease or modify open
storage uses including existing uses, provided it is found that such use constitutes a
threat to the public health, safety, convenience, or general welfare.
Subd. 2 Residential Zoning Districts.
A. Personal Property. All personal property shall be stored within a building or fully
screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties and public streets, except
for the following:
(1) Basketball hoop provided it is set back at least four (4) feet from any lot line.
(2) Stacked firewood for the burning supply of the property pursuant to Section
17.5.06 and Section 17.4.01 Subd. 15.
(3) Construction and landscaping materials or equipment, if these are used or
intended for use on the premises within a period of three (3) months, unless
there is an active building permit issued for improvements on the property, or
as otherwise approved by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or other
Authorized Agent.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.4 General Standards 65
(4) Agricultural equipment and materials, if these are used or intended for use on
the premises within a period of twelve (12) months.
(5) Off-street parking of licensed passenger automobiles and personal vehicles
pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
(6) Recreational equipment.
(7) Recreational vehicles and recreational camping vehicles, provided they are
located in a side or rear yard, or in a designated driveway or parking area that
is surfaced in compliance with Section 17.5.11.
(8) One non-vehicular ice-fishing house may be located in a rear or equivalent
rear yard, provided it is set back at least six (6) feet from any lot line.
Subd. 3 Commercial, Public / Institutional and Industrial Zoning Districts.
A. Outside Storage / Display. Exterior storage and display shall be governed by the
respective zoning district in which such use is located.
B. Additional Standards. All exterior storage shall be located in the rear or side yard,
shall be screened with materials of ninety percent (90%) or more opacity, and shall
screen views from adjoining properties and public streets except for the following:
(1) Merchandise being displayed for sale in accordance with zoning district
requirements.
(2) Materials and equipment currently being used for construction on the
premises.
17.4.04 Non-Conformities.
Subd. 1 Intent. Within the district established by this Chapter or amendments that may later
be adopted, there exist lots, structures and uses of land and structures which were lawful
before this Chapter was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited under the terms
of this Chapter or future amendment.
It is the intent of this Chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are
removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this Chapter to be
incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this
Chapter that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded nor extended, nor be
used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
A non-conforming use of a structure, a non-conforming use of land, or a non-conforming use
of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Chapter by
attachment of additional signs to a building, or the placement of additional signs or display
devices on the land outside the building, or by the addition of other uses, if such additions are
a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the
plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was
lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Chapter and upon
which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is
hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.4 General Standards 66
fastened in a permanent manner, and demolition, elimination and removal of an existing
structure in connection with such construction, provided that actual construction work shall
be diligently carried on until the completion of the building involved.
Subd. 2 Non- Conformities.
A. Non-conforming Lots of Record. In any district in which single-family dwellings are
permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Chapter, a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any
undeveloped single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Chapter. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage
with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot
fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable
in the district, provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving
area or width, or both, of lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which
such lot is located. Variance of lot coverage and / or
yard requirements shall be obtained only though
action of the Planning Commission acting as the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
If in the case of two (2) or more contiguous lots or
parcels of land under single ownership, any
individual lot or parcel does not meet the minimum
requirements of this Chapter, such individual lot or
parcel shall not be considered as a separate parcel of
land for purposes of sale or development, but must
be combined with adjacent lots so that the
combination of lots will equal one or more parcels
of land meeting the full requirements of this section
or the provisions of the zoning district in which the property is located, whichever is
more restrictive. In no circumstances will there be approval of any proposal for
multiple lot developments based upon lots of record, and not conforming with the
provisions of the existing zoning district.
B. Non-Conforming Uses of Land. Where the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this Chapter, lawful use of land exists that is no longer permissible under the terms
of this Chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) No such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this Chapter.
(2) No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other
portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this Chapter.
(3) If any such non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of
more than ninety (90) days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.4 General Standards 67
the regulations specified by this Chapter for the district in which such land is
located.
C. Non-Conforming Structures. Any structure existing
on the effective date of this Chapter, which is not in
conformity with the regulations contained in this
Chapter, shall be allowed to continue, subject to the
following:
(1) Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the
placing of a structure in safe condition when
the Building Official declares said structure
unsafe.
(2) When any lawful non-conformity in any
district is discontinued for a period of more
than twelve (12) months or is changed to a
conforming use, any future use of said
structure or land shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this Chapter.
(3) Non-conforming structures may not be
enlarged or altered in a way that
increases their non-conformity unless in
compliance with the following:
(a) Expansion or alteration of a
structure found to be nonconforming
may be permitted
provided the expansion complies
with the requirements of this
Chapter.
(3)Whenever a lawful non-conforming
structure has been damaged by fire,
flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot, act of God or similar occasion, it may
be reconstructed, and used as it was before, if it is reconstructed within twelve
(12) months after such calamity. If the damage to the building or structure is
fifty percent (50%) or more of its fair market value, the owner may, within six
(6) months, apply for a building permit to reconstruct a non-conforming
structure for its use prior to the damage.
(4) Any structure which will, under this Chapter, become non-conforming but for
which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to it becoming nonconforming,
may be completed in accordance with the approved plans;
provided construction has started within sixty (60) days of the date it became
non-conforming and continues to completion within one year. Such structure
shall thereafter be a legally existing non-conforming structure.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.4 General Standards 68
(5) A lawful non-conforming use of a structure or parcel of land may be changed
to a similar or more restrictive non-conforming use. Once a structure or parcel
of land has been placed in a more restrictive non-conforming use, it shall not
return to a less restrictive non-conforming use.
(6) Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or related to a
lawful non-conforming use is permitted, including necessary non-structural
repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming
use.
(7) Alterations may be made to a building containing lawful non-conforming
residential units when they will improve the livability thereof, provided they
will not increase the number of dwelling units or bulk of the building except
that a garage may be added if none previously existed.
(8) A lawfully existing non-conforming structure, or structure containing a legally
existing non-conforming use may expand if the following criteria are satisfied:
a. A complete building permit application shall be submitted to the
Building Official, found satisfactory and issued prior to the
commencement of any work on the expansion.
b. The structure expansion shall meet all of the bulk standards for the
Zoning District within which the structure is located. A variance may
be applied for, if the structure expansion could not meet the respective
bulk standards. The variance application and its review by the City
shall be regulated according to Section 17.2.11: Variance.
c. If any expansion is requested under this sub-section, the City may
impose standards and / or conditions upon the underlying nonconforming
use or structure for purposes of health, safety or welfare.
D. Repairs and Maintenance. On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming
use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months
on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring
or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent (10%) of the current appraised
market value of the building, provided that the cubical space content of the building
as it exists at the time of passage or amendment of this Chapter shall not be increased.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed so as to prevent the restoration of a nonconforming
structure to a safe condition when said structure is declared to be
hazardous or unsafe by authorized City Administrative officials. Such restoration
shall not extend the non-conforming structure in any manner, except as reasonably
required to eliminate the hazardous or unsafe conditions.
17.4.05 Violations and Penalty.
Subd.1 Complaints Regarding Violations. Whenever a violation of this Chapter occurs, or
is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating
fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the City Planner/Zoning Administrator.
The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall record properly such complaint, immediately
investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this Chapter.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.4 General Standards 69
Subd. 2 Violation and Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who violates disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined and / or penalized not more than the maximum levels established by the State of
Minnesota for misdemeanor offences. Each act of violation and every day on which a
violation occurs or continues is a separate violation.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 70
17.5 Special Provisions
17.5.01 Accessory Buildings.
Subd.1 Requirements.
A. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of
construction of the principal building to which it is accessory, unless a permit to
construct the principal building has been issued.
B. No accessory building shall have more than one level nor shall it exceed the height of
the principal building in all zones (excludes agricultural buildings in the FR District).
A loft in an accessory structure is not considered a level if the floor area of the loft is
less than fifty percent (50%) of that of the main level of the accessory structure. The
City Council may allow accessory structures with more than one level pursuant to the
Conditional Use procedures of this Code.
C. In case an accessory building is attached to the main building, it shall be made
structurally a part of the main building and shall comply with the requirements of this
Chapter applicable to the main building, or to another accessory building.
An accessory building, unless attached to and made a part of the main building shall
not be closer than five (5) feet to the main building or to another accessory building.
D. Accessory buildings either detached or attached to the dwelling, in all residential
districts except F-R, Farm Residential District, are subject to the following
limitations:
(1) All accessory buildings larger than 200 square feet shall be designed,
constructed and finished of materials generally similar or compatible to the
principal building on the lot.
(2) Accessory buildings constructed primarily of canvas, plastic fabric, or other
similar non-permanent building materials shall be prohibited.
(3) Detached accessory buildings shall not be placed in any front yard, and shall
comply with all the applicable setback requirements.
a. Exceptions. In the SR District, detached accessory buildings may be
located in the front yard if the following conditions are met:
1. The lot size shall be at least one acre in size.
2. The principal building shall be existing as of June 1, 2010.
3. The detached accessory building shall meet the front yard setback for a
principal building in the SR District.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 71
4. The detached accessory building shall be fully screened by existing
vegetation, or new vegetation shall be installed to screen said
accessory building to 90% opacity year-round.
(4) Accessory buildings in the R-1 and R-2 Districts, and for one- and two-family
dwellings in the R-3 District, shall be restricted in size in accordance with the
formula in Table 17.45-1, listed below, based upon total lot size.
(5) Accessory buildings in the SR District shall be restricted in size to no larger
than 100% of the ground floor square footage of the principle dwelling on the
lot.
(6) Accessory garages for multi-family buildings shall be restricted in size to one
(1) stall of three hundred (300) square feet per stall per dwelling unit of the
principle building on the lot.
* Or 100% of the ground floor area of the dwelling unit on the same lot
therewith, whichever is less.
E. The square footage of accessory buildings shall be determined by the
dimensions of the building enclosed walls. In the absence of walls, such as a
carport or a wood pile shelter, square footage shall be measured by the area
enclosed by the roof, minus any overhang less than three (3) feet wide. Any
roof overhang wider than three (3) feet, whether or not enclosed walls are
present, will be considered as an extension of the main building. The area
covered by such extended overhang will be considered as part of the
building’s overall square footage measurement.
F. A site plan and zoning permit shall be required for all accessory buildings. A
fee shall be determined by the City Council for such application from time to
time.
Table 17.45-1: Maximum Size of
Accessory Buildings in R-1 and R-2 District
Size of Lot Maximum Size of Accessory Building
Less than 10,000 sq. ft. 672 sq. ft. *
10,000 sq. ft. to 1 acre 1,000 sq. ft.*
Larger than 1 acre to 1.5 acre 1,200 sq. ft. *
Larger than 1.5 acres 1,500 sq. ft. *
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 72
17.5.02 Required Yards and Open Space.
Subd. 1 Yards and Open Space. No yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or
dimension so as to make such yard or open space less than the minimum required by this
Chapter, and if the existing yard or other open space as existing is less than the minimum
required, it shall not be further reduced.
No required yard or open space allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be used to
satisfy minimum lot area requirements for any other building.
Subd. 2 Encroachments. The following shall not be considered to be encroachments of yard
requirements:
A. Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features,
cornices, eaves, gutters and the like, provided they do not extend more than two and
one-half feet into any required setback.
B. Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, patios, stoops or similar structures, provided they
do not extend above the height of the ground level of the principal building, and do
not extend to a distance less than five feet from any lot line.
C. Window or similar bays not to exceed a depth of three feet nor to contain an area of
more than thirty square feet; fire escapes not to exceed a width of three feet.
D. Fences and walls as regulated by Section 17.5.05 of this Chapter.
E. Detached outdoor picnic shelters, gazebos and recreational equipment and access
drives, except as regulated hereinafter.
F. Balconies, breezeways, sun porches, three season porches and the like which extend
above the height of the ground level of the principal building shall be subject to
required setbacks.
Subd. 3 Patio, Deck, Terrace, and Similar Uses.
A. Patio. A patio shall be no closer than five (5) feet to any property line.
B. Deck and / or Terrace. Decks and terraces shall comply with the minimum required
setback of the principal building from the front, corner street side, and side parcel
lines. Decks and terraces shall comply with the required setback of the principal
building from the rear parcel line, but in no case shall a deck or terrace be required to
be more than twenty –five (25) feet from the rear parcel line.
C. Porch. A porch shall meet the required setbacks of the principal building.
Subd. 4 Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses. Sport courts, play equipment,
and similar uses shall meet the same setbacks required for an accessory building. However,
sport courts, play equipment, and similar uses shall not count towards the maximum
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 73
allowable area of accessory buildings on a site but do count towards the maximum
impervious surface requirements.
17.5.03 Screening. The screening required in this Section shall consist of a fence, wall, landscaping
or earth berm but shall not extend within fifteen (15) feet of any public street. Natural features, such
as differences in elevation, tree masses or similar features may negate the need for man-made
screening in certain areas.
Subd. 1 Residential Districts. Screening shall be required in Residential Districts where:
A. Any off-street parking lot contains more than five parking spaces
B. Any material and equipment is stored other than recreational equipment, construction
and landscaping materials currently being used on the premises or the off-street
parking of automobiles and pick-up trucks
C. Recreational vehicles over thirty (30) feet in length are stored for more than seventytwo
(72) hours. Such vehicles shall be visually screened from adjacent properties and
public streets. Such screening shall be at least six (6) feet in height and at least fifty
percent (50%) opaque.
Subd. 2 Commercial and Industrial Districts. Screening shall be required in Commercial
and Industrial Districts where:
A. Any structure, parking or storage is adjacent to and within one hundred feet of
property zoned for residential use.
B. Any side yard of a business or industry is across the street from a residential zone.
C. Any materials and equipment are stored outside except for those being used for
construction on the premises.
D. Height of screening for parking areas adjacent to residential or public properties shall
be at least four (4) feet but no more than six (6) feet above the level of the parking lot.
Minimum opacity shall be seventy-five percent (75%).
E. Height of screening for loading facilities within view from public streets or adjacent
to residential or public properties shall be ten (10) feet above the loading facility.
Minimum opacity shall be ninety percent (90%).
F. Trash storage facilities and mechanical equipment shall be screened from all lot lines
and public streets. Screening shall be high enough to completely screen from property
lines, but not less than five (5) feet or greater than ten (10) feet. Minimum opacity
shall be ninety percent (90%). A trash storage facility shall be setback a minimum of
five (5) feet from the property line or right of way line.
G. Materials. Required screening may be achieved with any combination of the
following: earth mounds, walls, fences, shrubs, compact evergreen trees, or dense
deciduous hedge. In general, plant materials are preferred as opposed to walls and
fences. If walls and fences are used, they shall be architecturally harmonious with the
principal building. Color of freestanding fences and walls shall be compatible with
natural surroundings; earth tone colors are encouraged.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 74
H. Location. Required screening shall be located on the same lot as the facility to be
screened. It shall not be located within street rights-of-way, nor within fifteen (15)
feet of any street or driveway opening onto a street.
Subd. 3 All Districts.
A. Screening shall be required in all Districts where waste material is stored in
containers other than an enclosed building.
B. All screening shall be maintained by the property owners so as not to be unsightly, a
nuisance or create a hazard or safety problem.
17.5.04 Landscaping Requirements.
Subd. 1 Intent. It is the intent of the City of Cloquet to preserve its significant natural
resources as a complement to existing and future urbanization. In particular, steep slopes,
very steep slopes, woodlands, wetlands and drainage ways shall be preserved in their natural
state for their functional and ecological value as well as for their positive impact upon
proximate urban development. It is the intent of the City to require significant landscaping /
planting in open or disturbed areas as a normal part of land development. Specific
requirements shall be as set forth in this Section.
Subd. 2 Landscape Plan Required. A landscape plan shall be provided for all new
Industrial / Business / Office / Commercial / Multiple-Family Residential / and Public /
Semi-Public facilities and developments. The applicant for a building permit shall submit a
landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect, nursery designer or other qualified person
in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
The landscape plan shall include the following information:
A. General. Name and address of developer / owner; name and address of landscape
architect, designer; date of preparation; date and description of all revisions; name of
project or development.
B. Site Plan. A scale drawing of the site based upon a survey of property lines with
indication of scale and north point; name and right-of-way of proposed and existing
streets; location of all proposed utility easements and rights-of-way; location of
existing and propose buildings; parking areas; water bodies; proposed sidewalks.
C. Landscape Plan. A scale drawing of proposed landscaping for the site based upon a
survey of property lines with indication of scale and north point; existing and
proposed topography at two (2) foot contour intervals; delineation of both sodded and
seeded area; location and identification of proposed landscape or man-made materials
used to provide screening from adjacent and neighboring properties; location and
identification of all planting (trees, shrubs, flowers, ground cover, etc.) existing trees
and shrubbery to remain; details of fences, retaining walls, berms and other landscape
improvements; location of landscape islands and planter beds with identification of
plant material used; and location and details of irrigation systems.
D. Certain types of stormwater improvements that are landscaping in nature may qualify
for stormwater utility credit (to be evaluated by City Engineer). Listed below are
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 75
certain stormwater best management practices that meet the city’s landscaping
requirements; these areas are not required to be irrigated:
(1) Rain Gardens. Residential or commercial rain gardens designed and
vegetated to capture and soak in stormwater.
(2) Green Roofs. Green roofs filter, absorb and detain rainfall. The specialized
soil and plants reduce runoff by holding back and slowing down water that
would otherwise flow into the storm drains.
(3) Ribbon Curbs. Ribbon curbs, or curbless parking areas / streets, slope into
adjacent vegetated areas and allow rain from paved areas to drain into rain
gardens or vegetated swales. By reducing curbs and gutters, there are fewer
infrastructure costs and water can drain into the structure and soak into the
ground.
E. Planting Schedule. A table containing the common and botanical names, size of plant
materials, root specifications, quantities and special planting instructions.
Subd. 3 General Requirements, All Districts.
A. Required Landscaping: All disturbed areas of developed lots which are not devoted to
off-street parking, loading and driving areas, sidewalks, patios, gardens and similar
uses, shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover, trees, shrubs or other ornamental
landscape material. Minimum amount of green space on each site shall be twenty-five
percent (25%) of the total lot. Undisturbed areas containing existing viable natural
vegetation may be left in their natural state but shall be kept free of litter, debris and
noxious or unsightly weeds.
B. Sodding, Seeding and Ground Cover. In newly developed areas, sod shall be required
within street boulevards, within front and side yards which have been disturbed, and
within all yards adjacent to collector and arterial streets. Seeding or other acceptable
ground cover shall be required in rear yards. Seeding may be permitted in future
expansion areas shown on approved plans.
C. Slopes and Berms. Final slopes greater than the ratio of 3/1 (35%) shall not be
permitted without special approval or treatment, such as special seed mixtures or
reforestation, terracing or retaining walls. Berming used to provide screening of
parking lots and other open areas shall not have slopes in excess of 3/1 (35%).
D. Minimum Size of Required Trees or Shrubs.
Overstory Deciduous Trees
One and Two-family lots 1-1/2” diameter
All other lots 2-1/2” diameter
Understory Deciduous Trees 1-1/2” diameter
Coniferous Trees 6 feet tall
Major Shrub planting 5 gallons
E. Species. All required overstory trees shall be comprised of species which are
classified as overstory trees by the American Nurseryman’s Association. Trees which
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 76
are considered as half trees, shrubs, understory trees or ornamental trees shall not be
included in the count of require overstory trees. No more than fifty percent (50%) of
the required number of overstory trees shall be composed of one species.
F. Placement of Plant Materials. No trees or shrubs shall be allowed within any drainage
and utility easement or immediately adjacent to any driveway or street intersection
when it would interfere with motorists or view of the street at maturity. Any trees
planted must be seven (7) feet or greater from the curb or edge of road. Plant material
centers shall be located at least three (3) feet from fences or property lines.
G. Time Requirement for Installation. The landscaping required by this Section shall be
installed to the satisfaction of the City within one (1) growing season of building
completion or occupancy, whichever is first. In the event building occupancy occurs
after September 15, installation shall be required by July 1 of the following year. A
Financial Guarantee shall be provided in the amount of 125 percent of the cost to
assure the installation of the landscaping.
H. Responsibility. The developer shall be responsible for installation of required trees
and plant material unless there is no developer involved, in which case the property
owner shall be responsible. For three years after planting, the property owner shall be
responsible for timely replacement of any dead trees, shrubs and ground cover
required by this Section and shall maintain all materials in a sightly and healthy
growing condition without cost to the City.
Subd. 4 Requirements for One- and Two- Family Lots and Subdivisions.
A. Tree Planting. In addition to general requirements for landscaping in all districts as
set forth above, all new residential subdivisions and all new one and two family
dwellings shall be required to plant three (3) trees per single family lot and five (5)
trees per two family lot. At least one tree per lot shall be an overstory tree. Multiple
varieties shall be required for new subdivisions.
Minimum size of trees and planting time requirement shall be as set forth above. In
the event the required trees are not installed as a part of a subdivision’s public
improvements, such trees shall be installed as part of the building permit
requirements. Credit for preservation of existing trees may be given as determined by
the Zoning Administrator.
B. Where practical in newly developed areas, planted earth berms shall be provided
along collector and arterial streets to minimize negative impacts upon residential
properties from adjacent high traffic volumes. Plant material shall consist of tree and
shrub types which most effectively provide a visual screen, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
Subd. 5 Requirements for Commercial, Industrial, Public and Multiple Family Areas.
In developed areas other than one and two family lots, the following shall be required:
A. Minimum Number of Trees per Lot. The minimum number of overstory trees shall be
not less than the perimeter of the lot divided by fifty (50) or 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area of the building whichever is greater. In addition, a full complement of
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 77
understory trees and shrubs shall be provided to complete a quality landscape
treatment of the site.
B. Credit for Existing Trees: Sites containing significant existing trees which will
be retained may be given a credit against the number of required trees. Significant
trees are defined as coniferous trees six (6) feet or more in height, overstory
deciduous trees eight (8) inches or more in diameter, or understory deciduous trees
four (4) inches or more in diameter. Examples of acceptable overstory trees are oak,
maple, basswood and ash. Examples of acceptable understory trees are crab apple,
Russian olive, river birch and amur maple. The amount of credit will be based upon
location and size as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Credit shall not be
given for dead, diseased or damaged trees.
C. Certain types of stormwater improvements that are landscaping in nature may
qualify for stormwater utility credit (to be evaluated by City Engineer). Listed below
are certain stormwater best management practices that meet the city’s landscaping
requirements:
(4) Rain Gardens. Residential or commercial rain gardens designed and
vegetated to capture and soak in stormwater.
(5) Green Roofs. Green roofs filter, absorb and detain rainfall. The specialized
soil and plants reduce runoff by holding back and slowing down water that
would otherwise flow into the storm drains.
(6) Ribbon Curbs. Ribbon curbs, or curbless parking areas / streets, slope into
adjacent vegetated areas and allow rain from paved areas to drain into rain
gardens or vegetated swales. By reducing curbs and gutters, there are fewer
infrastructure costs and water can drain into the structure and soak into the
ground.
E. Planting Islands. Planting islands shall be required where necessary to visually break
up expanses of hard surface parking areas as determined by the Zoning
Administrator. Planting islands shall occupy at least five percent of the parking area.
F. Irrigation. To ensure continued maintenance and health of plant materials, an
irrigation system shall be required in all multifamily (greater than four unit housing),
commercial, and industrial districts.
17.5.05 Fences. Fences shall be permitted in all yards subject to the following:
Subd. 1 Residential Districts. Fences in Residential Districts may be located on any lot line
to a height of four feet. Exception: A fence up to six feet in height may be erected on the
side, corner side and rear lot lines behind the nearest front corner of the principal building,
provided that the fence meets the
following requirements:
A. No fence shall be permitted which
poses a danger to vehicular traffic
or pedestrians by obscuring the
view from any street, alley, or
driveway. No fence over three feet
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 78
(3’) high shall be permitted in the following site triangles:
(1) The sight triangle at the intersection of two streets described as beginning
from a point at the paved edge (or face of curb) of the intersection, two sides
of which extend a distance of twenty-five (25) feet along the edge of each
street and the third side being a line connecting the other sides.
(2) The sight triangle at the intersection of a driveway or alley described as
beginning from a point at
the paved edge (or face of
curb) of the intersection,
one side of which extends a
distance of fifteen (15) feet
along the edge of the
driveway or alley, another
side of which extends a
distance of fifteen (15) feet
along the paved edge (or
face of curb) of the street,
and third side being a line
connecting the other sides.
B. All fences must be located entirely outside of the street right-of- ways and in no case
shall they be located closer to the paved edge of a street (or face of curb) than five
feet.
C. All fences placed across City utility easements must provide a gate for maintenance
purposes.
D. For the purpose of this fence ordinance, the City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall
determine the rear lot line on through lots. In residential districts where the front
yards of neighboring properties abut the street at the rear lot line of the subject
property, a fence within thirty (30) feet of the street right-of-way at the rear lot line of
the subject property shall not exceed four feet in height.
E. Fence heights are measured to the top of the structure including any adornments that
may be in place.
Subd. 2 Commercial, Public, Public / Institutional and Industrial Districts. Fences in
Commercial and Industrial Districts may be erected on the lot line to a height of six (6) feet;
to a height of eight (8) feet with a security arm for barbed wire if a Conditional Use Permit is
obtained, pursuant to Section 17.2.10.
Subd. 3 Finishes. The finished side of fences shall face abutting property.
Subd. 4 Review. A zoning permit and site plan shall be required for all fences two feet six
inches (2’6”) or more in height. Exception: Fences in the F-R, Farm Residential District
intended as livestock and / or field enclosures shall not require a zoning permit. A fee
determined by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall be required to process the zoning
permit.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 79
Subd. 5 Fence Maintenance. Every fence shall be constructed in a high quality manner and
of substantial material reasonably suited for the purpose for which the fence is proposed to be
used. Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not by
reason of age, decay, accident, or otherwise be allowed to become and remain in a state of
disrepair so as to be or tend to be a nuisance to the injury of the public or any abutting
property. Any fence that is dangerous by reason of its construction or state of disrepair or is
otherwise injurious to the public safety, health, or welfare is a nuisance; any such fence that
has become or tends to be a nuisance shall be repaired or removed as necessary to abate the
nuisance caused.
17.5.06 Outdoor Wood-Fired Furnace. All outdoor wood-fired furnaces shall comply with the
following provisions:
Subd. 1 Burning Requirements. An outdoor wood-fired furnace shall burn only clean
firewood. All other materials including, but not limited to the following, shall not be burned
in an outdoor wood-fired furnace pursuant to Minnesota Statute 88.171: Open Burning
Prohibitions:
A. Rubbish or garbage, including, but not limited to, food wastes, food wraps,
packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted materials, furniture, composite shingles,
construction or demolition debris, or other household or business wastes;
(1) Waste oil or other oily wastes;
(2) Asphalt and products containing asphalt;
(3) Treated or painted wood, including, but not limited to, plywood, composite
wood products or other wood products that have been painted, varnished, or
treated with preservatives;
(4) Any plastic material, including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene or urethane foam, synthetic fabrics, plastic films, or plastic
containers;
(5) Rubber, including rubber tires or synthetic rubber-like products; or
(6) Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper, and other
materials.
B. An outdoor wood-fired furnace shall meet the setback requirements for an accessory
structure in the applicable zoning district.
C. An outdoor wood-fired furnace shall have a chimney that extends at least fifteen (15)
feet above the ground surface. The chimney shall be constructed of block or of a
galvanized-type metal that will not rust.
D. An outdoor wood-fired furnace shall be separated from adjoining properties by a
fence that is a minimum of six (6) feet in height.
E. An outdoor wood-fired furnace installed prior to the adoption of this Chapter or an
outdoor wood-fired furnace on property in the FR Farm Residential District that has
an area of five (5) acres or more, shall be exempt from the chimney and fencing
provisions of this Section.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 80
F. If the use of an outdoor wood-fired furnace creates a human health hazard or a public
nuisance as determined by the Building Inspector, City Planner/Zoning
Administrator, or other Authorized Agent of the City, continued use of said outdoor
wood-fired furnace shall be prohibited until all necessary corrections have been made
to the satisfaction of the City.
17.5.07 Mobile Storage Structures. Any assembly of materials which is so designed, constructed or
reconstructed to make it portable and capable of movement from one site to another, designed to be
used without a permanent foundation, designed with the purpose of storing tangible property and not
for occupancy by persons, and to have one dimension exceeding ten (10) feet.
Subd. 1 Procedure. The erection of a mobile storage structure shall require an administrative
permit as may be issued by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator, except as otherwise
provided by this Chapter.
Subd. 2 Special Requirements.
A. Location. Mobile storage structures may be located as a temporary structure on property
within the City.
B. Time Limitations. Mobile storage structures are allowed for a period not exceeding 48
hours in duration on a public street and not exceeding three weeks on private property,
from time of delivery to time of removal. Exceptions for special circumstances may be
granted by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator.
C. Placement. No more than one mobile storage structure may be located on a specific
piece of property within the City at one time. Such temporary structure may not be
located on a specific property more than two times in any sixty-calendar-day period.
Such temporary structure shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet to the property line
unless on a driveway and must be placed on an impervious surface. Such structure may
not be placed in a fire lane, or sidewalk. Such structure may not exceed eight feet six
inches in height, ten (10) feet in width or twenty (20) feet in length. It shall be the
obligation of the owner or user of such temporary structure to secure it in a manner that
does not endanger the safety of persons or property in the vicinity of the temporary
structure.
17.5.08 Home Occupations. An accessory use of a dwelling carried on for gainful employment
which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the dwelling as a residence.
Subd. 1 Intent. It is the intent of this Section to provide for those customary home
occupations of a primarily service character which may not be detrimental to the desired low
intensity residential environment of Cloquet’s neighborhoods. The basic philosophy
underlying the following regulations is that preservation of a quiet residential environment
and the use of dwellings for living purposes is primary, and conduct of home occupations is
secondary.
Subd. 2 Permitted Home Occupation / Criteria and Standards. Customary home
occupations as defined herein shall be permitted as accessory uses within the Residential
Districts of the City of Cloquet subject to the following criteria and standards.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 81
A. A home occupation may include such uses as professional offices, small service
establishments or offices, and home crafts which are typically considered accessory to
a dwelling unit. Examples are architects, artists, writers, manufacturers’
representatives, music teachers, beauticians, seamstresses, and food crafts.
B. A state license day care or residential facility as defined and regulated by State law is
considered a permitted single family use, and shall not be subject to home occupation
regulations set forth herein.
C. It is intended that retail sales of goods and products shall not be permitted with the
following exceptions:
(1) Articles made or originating on the premises such as home crafts;
(2) Articles incidental to a permitted commercial service such as shampoo sold by
a beautician or barber;
(3) Sales conducted by mail.
D. It is intended that manufacturing, defined as the conversion of raw materials to
finished products, shall not be permitted except for minor, unobtrusive activities such
as home crafts and clothes making.
E. No unreasonable use of materials or mechanical equipment, not recognized as being
part of and compatible with normal household use, shall be permitted.
F. The use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that reasonable or
normal to the district in which located.
G. It shall not involve the unreasonable or inappropriate use of commercial vehicles for
delivery of occupational materials to or from the premises.
H. A home occupation may be carried on within the accessory or principal building with
the following exceptions:
(1) No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of livable floor area of a principal
residence shall be used for such purpose.
(2) No more than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area of an accessory structure
shall be used for such purpose.
I. No special space within the principal building shall be designed or arranged for such
use so that it would require any major internal or external alterations or involve
construction features not customary to dwellings (either by color, materials, or
construction, lighting, sound or noise, vibration, or electrical interference, etc.).
J. There shall be no use of utilities or community facilities beyond that reasonable to the
use of the property for residential purposes.
K. Only persons residing in the dwelling and a maximum of one non-resident equivalent
shall be engaged in the home occupation. A non-resident equivalent shall be defined
as one or more persons who work a combined total of 40 hours per week in the
residence, but no more than one such employee may be allowed on the premises at
any one time.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 82
L. There shall be no exterior evidence of the occupation including:
(1) No exterior display of articles for sale;
(2) No sign except as permitted for a dwelling in the district;
(3) No exterior storage of equipment or materials used in the occupation.
M. There shall be no detriment to the residential character of the neighborhood due to
noise, odor, smoke, dust, gas, heat, glare, vibration, toxic or noxious emission,
electrical interference, customer traffic, number of deliveries, hours of operation or
any other annoyance resulting from the home occupation.
Home occupations for handicapped persons that do not meet these conditions may be
reviewed by the Planning Commission which may modify or waive the above requirements.
Subd. 3 Particular Home Occupations Prohibited. Permitted home occupations shall not
in any event be deemed to include:
A. Automobile repair operations.
B. Funeral homes.
C. Restaurants.
D. Stables, kennels, animal or veterinary hospitals.
E. Antique dealers.
Subd. 4 Enforcement. While the City does not issue a permit for a Home Occupation,
activities that exceed the criteria above will be reviewed by staff. In the event a home
occupation becomes non-compliant with the standards and criteria established above, the
City shall have the authority to cause the non-conforming feature to desist or be removed.
17.5.09 Bed and Breakfast Homes
Subd. 1 Intent. The City recognizes that certain single-family dwellings, because of their
size, location, historic significance, architectural design, etc., may be suitable for use as a
Bed and Breakfast Home. This section will establish minimum standards for such operations
so as to protect the health, safety and welfare of guests in such homes, as well as the
neighborhood in which they are located.
Subd. 2 Definitions.
A. Bed and Breakfast Home. A single-family dwelling containing not more than five (5)
guest rooms providing lodging accommodations to transient guests by prior
arrangement, for compensation. It may or may not include serving of meals to guests.
B. Transient. A person who travels from place to place away from his or her permanent
address for vacation, pleasure, recreation, culture or business. For the purpose of this
Section, accommodations for transients shall be limited to no longer than thirty (30)
calendar days at one location.
Subd. 3 Permits.
A. A Bed and Breakfast Home shall require a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with
Section 17.2.10 of this Chapter if located in the FR, R-1 or R-2 Zoning Districts. A
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 83
Bed and Breakfast Home shall be a permitted use in the R-3, NC, and RC Zoning
Districts, subject to compliance with the minimum requirements stipulated in Subd. 4
below.
B. A Conditional Use Permit, if required, shall be issued only if the conditions identified
in Section 17.2.10, and as further identified in this Section, are met.
C. Bed and Breakfast Homes located in the R-3, NC, and RC Zoning Districts must
comply with the stipulations contained in this Section, in addition to those
requirements of their respective Zoning Districts.
D. A Building / Zoning Permit shall be required for all Bed and Breakfast Home
operations, in addition to any other permits required by this Chapter. A Certificate of
Occupancy shall be required before beginning operation of a Bed and Breakfast
Home operation.
E. Any other permits, licenses, certifications, etc. as may be required by other state or
local agencies or authorities must be acquired and maintained in accordance with
applicable law.
Subd. 4 Minimum Requirements for Bed and Breakfast Homes.
A. Site Plan. An accurate scaled drawing indicating the major features of the property on
which the Bed and Breakfast Home is located must be submitted with any permit
application. The site plan shall contain the following minimum information: lot
dimensions, location and use of all existing and proposed buildings and structures
including sizes, outdoor storage, off-street parking areas, general drainage plan,
landscaping, and any other information to aid in evaluating the site.
B. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as stipulated in Section
17.5.11 of this Chapter. A minimum of two (2) parking spaces are required for the
primary dwelling, plus one (1) additional space for each rental unit. Off-street parking
may be either enclosed or unenclosed or both. Parking spaces and areas shall comply
with the minimum requirements this Chapter for size, location, screening, etc.
C. Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot area shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet
plus one thousand (1,000) square feet for each guest room. Areas not covered by
buildings, access drives or parking spaces shall be landscaped.
D. Occupancy. Maximum occupancy shall be no more than two (2) adults per guest
room, plus the owner’s or manager’s family.
E. Owner or Manager Residency. The owner or manager of the Bed and Breakfast Home
must reside in the home, and must be in residence when rooms are being rented and
occupied by paying guests.
F. Alcoholic Beverages. Serving of alcoholic beverages shall be as regulated by state
law.
G. Building Alterations. Any alterations to the interior or exterior of the Bed and
Breakfast Home shall not compromise the primary residential character of the
building.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 84
H. Signs. One on-site identification sign may be permitted, not to exceed twelve (12)
square feet in area. Such sign may be freestanding, or incorporated into the exterior
façade of the building. The sign design must match the architectural features of the
building.
I. Private Parties. Bed and Breakfast Homes may be used for small scale private parties,
such as wedding receptions, graduation parties, birthday parties, etc. Occupancy and
conduct of such gatherings shall be as regulated by the Fire Code and Chapter 7 of the
Cloquet City Code respectively, and any other applicable code, statute or ordinance.
17.5.10 Swimming Pools.
Subd. 1 Intent. The intent of this Subsection is to ensure that swimming pools, as defined
by this Chapter, are constructed and maintained in a manner that protects the health, safety,
and welfare of the intended users of the swimming pool. It is also the intent of this
Subsection to ensure swimming pools have adequate barriers to deter children and other
unauthorized persons from gaining unsupervised access to the swimming pool.
Subd. 2 Required Permits. All swimming pools as defined by this Chapter shall be
consistent with the swimming pool barrier requirements of this Chapter. In addition, any
swimming pool with a capacity of over three thousand (3,000) gallons or with a depth of over
three (3) feet of water shall require the issuance of a development permit and building permit.
Subd. 3 Required Plans. An application for a development permit and building permit shall
include the following information:
A. The type and size of pool; and
B. A site plan indicating the location of the pool; the location of the dwelling and/or
other buildings on the subject parcel; other improvements on the parcel; location of
the filter unit, pump heating unit, and wiring indicating the type of such units (if
applicable); location of back flush and drainage outlets; grading and/or surface
drainage plan; location of existing overhead or underground utilities; drainage and
utility easements, and any other existing features as may be necessary to determine
whether the proposed pool is consistent with this Chapter.
Subd. 4 Setbacks. The setback shall be measured at the edge of the waterline. Swimming
pools shall comply with the following setbacks:
A. Swimming pools shall not be located less than ten (10) feet from any side or rear
property line.
B. Swimming pools shall not be located within the front yard.
C. Swimming pools shall not be located less than six (6) feet from any principal
structure.
D. Swimming pools shall not be located less than ten feet from any portion of a septic
system or a well.
E. Swimming pools shall not be located less than ten (10) feet from any overhead utility
lines or less than five (5) feet from any underground utility lines.
F. Swimming pools shall not be located within any existing easements.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 85
Subd. 5 In-Ground Pools. In the case of in-ground swimming pools, necessary precautions
shall be taken during construction to avoid damage, hazards, or inconvenience to adjacent or
nearby property and to avoid erosion, dust, or other infringements on adjacent property from
the stockpiling of excavated material.
Subd. 6 Back Flush Water or Pool Drainage Water. Back flush water or water from pool
drainage shall be directed into the street storm water system or onto the owner’s property
unless otherwise authorized by the Building Inspector or other Authorized Agent.
Subd. 7 Mechanical Equipment. The filter unit, pump, heating unit, and any other noise
making mechanical equipment shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from any adjacent
residential structure and at least five (5) feet from any parcel line.
Subd. 8 Swimming Pool Barriers. An outdoor swimming pool shall be provided with a
barrier that shall be installed, inspected, and approved prior to filling the swimming pool with
water. The barrier shall comply with the following:
The barrier shall either surround the swimming pool or the property and shall be sufficient to
make the swimming pool inaccessible to unsupervised children.
The barrier, including gates therein, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements
of the Minnesota State Building Code.
All gates shall be secured when the swimming pool is unattended. Ladders for swimming
pools shall be removed when not in use and steps to decks abutting swimming pools shall be
locked with gates when unattended.
A natural barrier, hedge, pool cover, or other protective device approved by the Planning
Commission may be used provided that the protection afforded by the substituted devices or
structures is not less than the protection afforded by the enclosure, gate, and latch described
herein.
17.5.11 Off-Street Parking and Loading.
Subd. 1 Intent. The intent of this Section is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public
right-of-way and to promote safety and general welfare of the public by establishing
minimum requirements for off-street parking and loading and unloading of motor vehicles in
accordance with use of various parcels of land and / or structures.
Subd. 2 General Provisions. The following provisions apply in all districts.
A. Maintaining existing spaces. Upon effective date of this chapter, existing off-street
parking spaces and loading spaces shall not be reduced in number unless doing so
exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a similar use.
B. Minimum size regulations. Each space shall contain a minimum area of not less than
three hundred (300) square feet including access drives, a width of not less than nine
(9) feet, and a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet. Each space shall be adequately
served by access drives. All loading spaces shall be sufficient to meet the
requirements of each use and shall provide adequate space for storage and
maneuvering of the vehicles it is designed to serve. The minimum dimensions
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 86
allowable for a loading space or truck berth shall be twelve (12) feet in width and
sixty-five (65) feet in depth.
C. Reduction and use of parking and loading space. Off-street parking facilities existing
at the effective date of this Chapter shall not subsequently be reduced to an amount
less than that required under this Chapter for a similar new building or use. Off-street
parking facilities provided to comply with the provisions of this Chapter shall not
subsequently be reduced below the requirements of this Chapter. Such required
parking or loading space shall not be used for storage of goods or for storage of
vehicles that are inoperable or for sale or rent. Temporary / seasonal sales areas are
allowed in off-street parking areas up to 20 spaces, but not more than five (5) percent
of the total parking spaces.
D. Accessible parking. All parking shall comply with the Building Code accessibility
requirements or the Americans with Disability Act (ADA), as deemed necessary.
Accessible parking cannot be used for temporary / seasonal sales.
E. Computing requirements. In computing the number of such parking spaces required
the following rules shall govern:
(1) Floor space shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use.
(2) Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed
to be the nearest whole number.
(3) Other uses: For uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, uses for which a
specific number of spaces have not been defined or for joint parking facilities
serving two or more different uses, the Planning Commission shall determine
the number of spaces to be required by utilizing the requirements of the most
similar use. Issuance of building permits for the above situations shall be
subject to approval of all site plans.
F. Yards. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be exempt from the front yard
and rear yard regulations for the use district in which the parking is located, except
that:
(1) In any of the Residence Districts, no parking space shall be located within
twelve (12) feet of any front property line; or within five (5) feet of any side
or rear property line unless authorized by the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator or other Authorized Agent.
(2) In an HI Industrial District, no parking or loading space shall be located in any
front yard or in any side yard or rear yard that abuts any of the Classes of
Residence Districts, and in no instance shall parking or loading space be
located within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line, except for railroad
loading areas or except in the case of parking space which abuts parking space
on the adjoining property in which case no setback shall be required.
(3) Placement of loading docks and berths shall be limited to side and rear yards,
except that where a dock or berth is so designed as to be fully enclosed and
incorporated within a principal structure, including any vehicles being loaded
or unloaded, such dock or berth may be placed in a front area.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 87
Subd. 3 Design, Construction and Maintenance.
A. Access.
(1) All off-street parking spaces shall have access from private driveways or
parking lot aisles and shall not depend on a public street for access to parking
spaces or for circulation within the parking lot. Backing onto a public street
from a parking space, other than for parallel parking spaces on the street, is
prohibited. This requirement applies to parking for all uses except single and
two-family dwellings and townhouses where parking is accessed by individual
driveways. The width of the driveways and aisles shall conform to the
dimensional requirements as regulated in this Section and shall be so located
as to cause the least interference with traffic movement.
(2) The number and width of access drives shall be so located as to minimize
traffic congestion and abnormal traffic hazard. No driveway in the R-3
Residence District, all Commercial Districts except the NC District, and all
Industrial Districts shall be closer than fifty (50) feet from any right-of-way
line of a street intersection. In R-1, R-2 and NC Districts, the minimum
distance shall be twenty (20) feet.
(3) In the R-3, NC, LI and HI Districts, direct access from parking areas for more
than eight (8) vehicles shall be provided to a collector street as shown on the
adopted City Land Use Plan or to a related service road.
B. Approval of parking plans. Except for single-family and two-family dwellings, before
any construction occurs on any new, enlarged, reduced, reconfigured, or altered
parking lot, plans for the parking lots shall require review and approval by the City.
When the parking lot is in conjunction with the application for a new structure,
expansion of an existing structure, or expansion of a use of land, parking lot plans
shall be a part of the site plan review and approval process as specified in Section
17.2.14. The parking lot plans shall be shown on a site plan drawn to scale and shall
include: a layout of spaces, accessible spaces, drive aisles and access drives with
dimensions; construction materials; grading and drainage; screening; landscaping;
signage; lighting; and a tabulation of the number of spaces required relative to square
footages of specific uses on the site and the number of spaces provided.
C. Curbing. Interior concrete curbs shall be constructed within the property to separate
driving and parking areas from landscaped areas and control surface drainage. All
open off-street parking areas designed to have head-in parking along the property line
shall provide a curb not less than five (5) feet from the property line. The curbing
requirement applies to parking in all uses except private single and two-family
dwelling and townhomes unless requested by the City Engineer for drainage
purposes.
D. Fire access lanes. Fire access lanes shall be provided as required by the Building and
Fire Code.
E. Landscaping. Landscaping and maintenance shall comply with Section 17.5.04 of this
Chapter.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 88
F. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be in
accordance with Section 17.5.12.
G. Location of parking spaces. All required off-street parking spaces in all districts shall
be on the same lot as the principal building, unless allowed through the issuance of a
Conditional Use Permit (CUP), pursuant to Section 17.2.10. Combined or joint
parking facilities may be provided for one (1) or more buildings or uses provided that
the total number of spaces shall be determined as provided in Subd. 6, Schedule of
Parking Requirements, below.
H. Maintenance of off-street parking spaces. It shall be the joint responsibility of the
operator and owner of the principal use, uses, and / or building to maintain, in a neat
and adequate manner, the parking spaces, drive aisles, landscaping, screening and
fences.
I. Marking of spaces. To assure full parking capacity as designed, except in singlefamily,
two-family, and townhouse development, spaces shall be marked with painted
lines four (4) inches wide in accordance with the approved Site Plan. Accessible
parking spaces shall be marked with a symbol and sign that are in accordance with
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
J. Queuing of vehicles. Parking and circulation shall be designed to avoid the queuing
of vehicles within the public right-of-way. Gates or other access limiting devices shall
not be installed until the city finds that the devices will have no adverse impact on the
public right-of-way.
K. Screening. Screening of parking lots and driveways into parking lots shall be required
as specified in Section 17.5.03.
L. Surface and drainage.
(1) For multiple-family residential uses, commercial and industrial Districts,
parking areas and access drives shall be either an asphalt or concrete surface
with proper surface drainage.
(2) The operator of the principal building or use shall maintain parking and
loading areas, access drives, and yard areas in a neat and adequate manner.
(3) Alternative surface materials may be permitted in those circumstances where
it can be shown that vehicular traffic is exceptionally light (ie. less than two
vehicles per hour), or that the parking area in question is restricted to only
employee parking or long term parking (ie. two hours or longer). Such
alternative materials shall be treated, maintained and graded to minimize dust
and provide good surface water drainage. Such materials shall consist of a
minimum of Class 5 gravel as classified by the Minnesota Department of
Transportation specifications, crushed rock, brick, or similar materials
designed to meet the criteria described above. However, all access and
circulation drives must be paved with a dust-free, all-weather surface
providing proper surface drainage.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 89
Subd. 4 Parking Provisions in Residential Districts. The following provisions shall apply
to parking in all Residential Districts unless otherwise stated:
A. Location of parking spaces and driveway aisles.
(1) Same lot as principal building. Required off-street parking space in all
Residential Districts shall be on the same lot as the principal building.
(2) Multiple-family dwellings shall have their required parking within 200 feet of
the main entrance to the principal building being served.
B. Parking setbacks.
(1) Front yard. No parking space shall be located within twelve (12) feet of a
front property line unless located on a designated driveway leading directly
into a garage or one (1) surfaced space located on the side of a driveway
adjacent to the dwelling.
(2) Corner lots. Off-street parking shall not be located in required side yard
abutting a street on a corner lot.
(3) Side or rear yards. Off-street parking and driveways shall not be located
within five (5) feet of any side or rear lot line and cannot impede drainage.
Off-street parking and driveways, if placed in an easement, must be approved
in writing by the holder of the easement.
(4) Use of parking facilities. Off-street parking shall be used solely for the
parking of vehicles not to exceed one (1) ton capacity.
C. Screening of parking facilities.
(1) All parking and driveways adjacent to parking areas for multiple-family
dwellings shall be screened, as required in Section 17.5.03, from all adjacent
property.
(2) All parking and driveways adjacent to parking areas for nonresidential uses in
Residential Districts shall be screened, as required in Section 17.5.03, from all
adjacent property.
D. Types of Vehicles Prohibited on Residential Lots. Except for the purpose of loading
or unloading or rendering a service, the following commercially licensed motor
vehicles and recreational vehicles shall be prohibited from being parked or stored
outside on residential lots or within a platted residential district:
(1) Commercially licensed vehicles with a manufacturer’s nominal rated carrying
capacity of over one ton and commercially licensed trailers.
(2) Boats and unoccupied trailers over 25 feet in length.
(3) Other recreational vehicles (motor homes, camper trailers, etc.) over thirty-six
(36) feet in length.
E.Types of Vehicles Permitted to be parked on Residential Lots. The following motor
vehicles and recreational vehicles shall be permitted to be parked or stored outside
on residential lots subject to the requirements set forth below. When commercial
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 90
vehicles, motor vehicles, or recreation vehicles below are numerically exceeded on
a platted residential lot, they must be stored elsewhere in the city on either farm
residential, suburban residential, commercial or industrially zoned property.
Type of Vehicle Permitted Location Numerical Restrictions
a. Passenger automobiles,
vans and trucks with
carrying capacity of one
ton or less
On the designated driveway
or hard surfaced parking
area
Two commercially
licensed vehicles (must
not block sidewalk, no
exterior evidence of a
business)
b. Large recreational
vehicles such as travel
trailers, motor homes, and
pickups with slip-in
campers 36 feet or less
length *
Same as above One per lot
c. Motorboats, sailboats and
unoccupied trailers 25
feet or less in length
Same as above, and also in
the rear yard subject to
setbacks for accessory
buildings. Not in corner side
yards
No restrictions
d. Other smaller recreational
vehicles as defined herein
such as motorcycles,
snowmobiles, jet ski, etc.
Interior side and rear yards
subject to setbacks for
accessory buildings. Not in
corner side yards
No restrictions
* Recreational vehicles over thirty (30) feet in length which are stored on residential
lots for more than seventy-two (72) hours shall be subject to screening
requirements of Section 17.5.03.
F. Other Regulations. Other general regulations applicable to parking or storing motor
vehicles and recreational vehicles on residential lots are as follows:
(1) All vehicles stored on a residential property shall be owned by the residents of
such property.
(2) A motor home or travel trailer stored on a property shall not be occupied
while on the premises.
(3) Graphics on vehicles, particularly commercially used vehicles, shall be
subject to sign regulations of this Chapter.
Subd. 5 Driveways – All Districts. All driveways to or from public streets shall be subject
to the following restrictions:
A. Driveway Widths: Back of curb to back of curb.
Type Min. Feet
One Way 12
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 91
Two Way 24
B. Maximum Driveway Width at Street Curb: Thirty (30) feet, measured along street
curb lines excluding the radius at the intersection of the driveway and street.
C. Minimum Driveway Angle to Street: Thirty (30) degrees when street is one way or
divided otherwise sixty (60) degrees.
D. Minimum Distance Between Driveways: Twenty (20) feet, between curb ends
measured along street curb line.
E. Minimum Distance of Driveway from Street Intersections: No driveway in the R-3
Residence District, all Commercial Districts except the NC Neighborhood
Commercial and all Industrial Districts shall be closer than fifty (50) feet from any
right-of-way line of a street intersection. In the R-1, R-2 and NC Districts, the
minimum distance shall be twenty (20) feet.
Subd. 6 Table: Schedule of Parking Requirements.
Use / Use Category Parking Spaces Required Loading Spaces Required
Residential
Single Family Dwelling 2 per dwelling unit -----
Two Family Dwelling; Townhouse 2.0 per dwelling unit -----
Multiple Family Dwelling (except
elderly)
2 per dwelling unit 1 per complex building
Multiple Family Dwellings which are
specifically designed and occupied
exclusively by persons 60 years of age
or older
1 per dwelling unit 1 per complex building
Hotel / Motel 1 per rental unit plus 1 per
employee
1
Mobile homes (see also: MHC
Manufactured Home Community
[Mobile Home Park] District)
2.0 per mobile home stand
Educational, Cultural, and Institutional
Churches, Auditoriums and Other
Places or Assembly
1 per 4 seats in principal
assembly room plus 2 per
classroom
Under 100,000 sq. ft – 1
Over 100,000 sq. ft. – 2
Elementary, Middle and Nursery
Schools
3 per classroom. Adequate
space shall be allowed for
the dropping off and/or
picking up of students as
determined by the City
Planner/Zoning
1
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 92
Administrator.
Senior High Schools One space for each two
students based on the design
capacity. This requirement
may be reduced at the City
Planner/Zoning
Administrator discretion to
reflect facility use and/or
parking policy. Adequate
space shall be allowed for
the dropping off and/or
picking up of students as
determined by the City
Planner/Zoning
Administrator.
1
Hospitals, Convalescence or Nursing
Homes
1 per 4 beds plus
1 per 2 employees or
professional staff members
Under 10,000 – 1
10,000 to 50,000 – 2
Each part of 50,000 over
50,000 – 1 additional
Public Library, Art Galleries,
Museums, Etc.
1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area 1
Commercial (except CC District)
Automobile or Machinery Sales 6 per 500 sq. ft. of floor area
over 1,000 sq. ft.
Less than 2,000 – None
2,000 to 5,000 – 1
5,000 to 10,000 – 2
10,000 to 20,000 – 3
20,000 to 40,000 – 4
40,000 to 70,000 – 5
Each part of 50,000 over
70,000 – 1 additional
Bowling Alley 3 for each alley/lane
Car Wash, Machine 6 per lane
Clinics 1 per 200 sq. ft. floor area
Funeral Homes 1 for every 5 seats with
minimum of 20 spaces
Furniture and Appliance Stores 1 for every 400 sq. ft. of
floor area
Offices, Banks and Public
Administration
1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area
Restaurants, Night Clubs, Clubs One space for each 40
square feet of floor area of
dining and bar area and one
space for each 80 square
feet of kitchen area.
Retail Stores 1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area
Service Garages and Manual Car Wash 4 per service stall
Shopping Center 1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 93
All other Commercial 1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
Industrial, Warehousing and
Wholesaling
That space which is only
used for office space shall
comply with office space
requirements and 1 space
per each 2,000 sq. ft. of
floor area for warehouse,
plus 1 space for each 350 sq.
ft. for manufacturing. Proof
of parking shall be shown on
site plans for provided
minimum of one parking
space for each 400 sq. ft. of
floor space so that adequate
parking is provided in the
event a more labor intensive
use is installed.
Under 10,000 – 1
10,00 to 20,000 – 2
20,000 to 40,000 – 3
40,000 to 70,000 – 4
70,000 to 110,000 – 5
each part of 50,000 over
110,000 – 1 additional
* Floor space shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use. Where fractional spaces result, the
parking spaces required shall be construed to be the nearest whole number.
17.5.12 Lighting.
Subd. 1 Intent. The intent of this Section is to create standards for outdoor lighting so that it
does not interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of property within the City. It is the
intent of this Section to encourage, through regulation of types, kind, construction,
installations, and use of outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices, lighting practices
and systems which will reduce light pollution while increasing nighttime safety, utility,
security and productivity.
Subd. 2 Exemptions. The standards of this Section shall not apply to the following:
A. Temporary holiday lighting. This Section does not prohibit the use of temporary
outdoor lighting used during customary holiday seasons.
B. Civic event lighting. This Section does not prohibit the use of temporary outdoor
lighting used for civic celebrations and promotions.
C. Airport lighting. Required for the safe operation of airplanes.
D. Emergency lighting. By police, fire, and rescue authorities.
Subd. 3 Nonconforming Uses.
A. All outdoor lighting fixtures lawfully existing and legally installed prior to the
effective date of this Section are exempt from the regulations contained in this
Section.
B. Whenever an outdoor light fixture that was existing on the effective date of this
chapter is replaced by a new outdoor light fixture, the new fixture must meet the
standards of this Section.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 94
Subd. 4 Method of Measuring Light Intensity. The foot candle level of a light source shall
be taken after dark with the light meter held six (6) inches above the ground with the meter
facing the light source. A reading shall be taken with the light source on, then with the light
source off. The difference between the two readings will be identified as the illumination
intensity.
Subd. 5 Performance Standards.
A. Residential / Agricultural District Standards. In all Residential / Agricultural Districts
any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area or other structure or area
shall be arranged to deflect light away from any adjoining residential property or
from the public street.
(1) Shielding. The light source shall be hooded or controlled so as not to light
adjacent property in excess of the maximum intensity as defined in subsection
(B) below.
(2) Intensity. No light source or combination thereof which cast light on a public
street shall exceed one (1) foot candle meter reading as measured from the
centerline of the street, nor shall any light source or combination thereof
which casts light on adjacent property exceed 0.4 foot candles as measured at
the property line.
B. Commercial and Industrial Districts. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street
parking area or other structure or area shall be arranged to deflect light away from
any adjoining property or from the public street.
(1) Shielding. The luminaries shall contain a cutoff that directs and cuts off the
light at an angle of ninety (90) degrees or less.
(2) Intensity. No light source or combination thereof which cast light on a public
street shall exceed one (1) foot candle meter reading measured from the
centerline of the street, nor shall any light source or combination thereof
which cast light on adjacent property exceed 0.4 foot candles as measured at
the property line.
(3) Height. The maximum height above the ground grade permitted for light
sources mounted on a pole is twenty-five (25) feet except by Conditional Use
Permit (CUP) as regulated in Section 17.2.10. A light source mounted on a
building shall not exceed the height of the building, and no light source shall
be located on the roof unless the light enhances the architectural features of
the building and is approved by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator.
(4) Location. The light source of an outdoor light fixture shall be set back a
minimum of five (5) feet from a street right-of-way and five (5) feet from an
interior side or rear lot line.
(5) Hours. The use of outdoor lighting for parking lots serving commercial and
industrial businesses is restricted according to the following:
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 95
a. Outdoor lighting that serves businesses that do not operate after dark
must be turned off one (1) hour after closing except for approved
security lighting.
b. For those businesses that offer services after dark, outdoor lighting
may be utilized during the nighttime hours, provided the business is
open for service. Once the business closes, the outdoor lighting must
be turned off one (1) hour after closing except for approved security
lighting.
C. Outdoor Recreation. Outdoor recreational uses, such as, but not limited to, sports
fields, tennis courts, skating rinks, tubing hills, and snow skiing areas have special
requirements for nighttime lighting. Due to these unique circumstances, a Conditional
Use Permit, pursuant to Section 17.2.06, shall be required for all new outdoor lighting
fixtures that do not meet the regulations stated above.
(1) No outdoor recreation facility, whether public or private, shall be illuminated
after 11:00pm unless the lighting fixture conforms to this Section.
D. Uplighting. Uplighting, as defined in Section 17.1.05, is prohibited in all zoning
districts, except in cases where the fixture is shielded by a roof overhang or similar
structural shield from the sky and the light fixture(s) will not cause light to extend
beyond the structural shield, except as specifically permitted in this Section.
Subd. 6 Prohibitions. The following outdoor light fixtures are prohibited within the City:
A. Search lights.
B. Flashing lights.
C. Strobe lights.
Subd. 7 Submission of Plans. The application for any permit requiring outdoor lighting
must submit evidence that the proposed outdoor lighting will comply with this Section. The
submission shall contain the following in addition to other required data for specific permit:
A. Plans indicating the location on the premises and the type of illuminating devices,
fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices;
B. Description of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other
devices which may include, but are not limited to, catalog cuts by manufacturers and
drawings (including sections where required)’
C. Photometric data, such as furnished by manufacturers, or similar, showing the angle
of the cutoff or light emissions.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 96
17.5.13 Signs.
Subd. 1 Intent. It shall be the intent of the provisions of this chapter to achieve the following
objectives:
A. To establish standards which would permit businesses in the city a reasonable and
equitable opportunity to identify themselves;
B. To preserve and promote civic beauty and not allow signs which would detract from
this objective because of unusual size, shape, height, location, condition, cluttering or
illumination;
C. To ensure that signs in the city shall not create a safety hazard;
D. To preserve and protect the value of land and buildings, and to preserve and protect
landscapes;
E. To ensure that every sign has good scale and proportion in relationship to the site and
function, as well as the signage and use of neighboring properties;
F. To ensure that signs be designed as an integral architectural element of the building
and site.
Subd. 2 Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
A. Advertising Sign. A sign or billboard which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on
the premises.
B. Allied Business. Same or similar business with common name such as new and used
auto sales.
C. Area Identification Sign. A freestanding sign which identifies the name of a
commercial or industrial complex consisting of three or more businesses.
D. Area of Sign.
(1) Area of Freestanding sign. This means the area of the actual sign. It does not
include embellishments such as the monument base, pole covers, framing or
decorative roofing provided
that there is no advertising
copy on or attached to such
embellishments. If the
freestanding sign is double
faced (up to a 90 degree
angle), only one face is used
to calculate sign area.
FREE STANDING SIGN
(2) Area of wall sign. This
means the total area of the sign, including all structures framing the sign,
background embellishments or area contained within a rectangle or square
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 97
drawn completely around the display surface, even if the sign consists of
individual letters and / or graphics.
WALL SIGN
E. Awning. An attached canopy
or similar structure designed
to provide cover for
entrances, walkways and
windows.
F. Balloon Sign. An inflatable balloon or device used to draw attention to a business or
product.
G. Banded Areas. That portion of a building generally located along the front which is
constructed for purposes of attaching building signs in a consistent and coordinated
manner.
H. Banner. A temporary display of information on material such as canvas or plastic.
I. Bench Sign. A sign attached to or a part of a sitting bench.
J. Billboard Sign. See ADVERTISING SIGN.
K. Building Sign. A sign attached to the exterior wall of a building.
L. Business Sign. A sign which directs attention to the business or profession
conducted on the premises. A “For Sale”, “For Lease”, or “Information” sign shall
also be deemed a Business Sign. In order to be considered a Business Sign rather
than an advertising sign, all of the gross surface area of the sign must pertain to the
major functions or name of the business, the trade names of primary products or
goods manufactured or sold on the premises.
M. Changeable Sign. A sign or portion of a sign with separate inset letters, pictures and
/ or symbols which can easily be removed and which are periodically changed. See
also READER BOARD SIGN.
N. Construction Sign. A sign used temporarily at the construction site identifying the
contractors, financer, supplier, and / or builder.
O. Copy Area. See AREA OF SIGN.
P. Development Project Sign. A temporary sign located on the site of a new
development, listing owners, developers, builders, and similar identifying
information.
Q. Directional Sign. A sign erected upon private property to provide pedestrian or
traffic directions and which may bear a company logo or color scheme in addition to
the directional arrow or word message and may contain no additional advertising
information.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 98
R. Driveway Median. A raised median intended to divide or channel vehicular traffic.
S. Double Face Sign. A sign displaying identical information on opposite sides.
T. Flashing Sign. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained
both stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when a sign is in use
excluding electronic reader board signs and electronic video signs.
U. Freestanding Sign. Any pylon or ground sign that is not part of the principal
structure.
V. Gasoline Pump Island Canopy. A structure that provides shelter over gasoline pump
islands.
W. Grade of Sign. The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground,
paving or sidewalk within the area between the sign and a line five (5) feet from the
sign.
X. Ground Sign. A sign, which is not a pylon sign, erected upon or supported by
ground and not attached to any building.
Y. Identification Sign. A sign which bears the name and / or address of the occupant of
the building.
Z. Illuminated Sign. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, design or outline
illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as part of the sign proper.
AA. Informational Sign. A sign, not intended to be viewed from off-site, that identifies
building functions and is attached thereto, such as car wash bay or drive-in window.
BB. Major Anchor / Center Sign. A specially designed, masonry clad, freestanding sign
used to identify single-tenant buildings that are in excess of 100,000 square feet or
multi-tenant centers in excess of 150,000 square feet in building size.
CC. Menu Board. A sign listing drive-up items in conjunction with a business serving
customers in a car.
DD. Monument Development Sign. A ground sign intended to permanently identify by
name a residential development.
EE. Moving Device. A device which moves or rotates to attract attention for advertising
purposes.
FF. Multi-Occupancy Building. A building designed to be occupied by two or more
separate businesses.
GG. Non-Commercial Signs. Any sign that presents a message that is political,
philosophical, social or personal and does not advertise or sell a service, product or
other commercial undertaking.
HH. Pennant. A small flag used for decorative purposes or to attract attention.
II. Political Sign. A sign which displays information pertaining to an upcoming public
referendum, governmental district, city, county, state or national election.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 99
JJ. Portable Sign. A sign so designed as to be movable from one location to another and
not permanently attached to the ground or to any immobile structure. A PORTABLE
SIGN may consist of a panel supported by legs or wheels and / or a mobile structure
such as a trailer, panel truck, semi-truck trailer or other device whose primary
function during a specific time period is to be stationary and used as a sign.
KK. Promotional Sign. A temporary sign which shall not exist for more than thirty (30)
days which promotes civic events or promotions limited to city recognized activities,
events and / or celebrations.
LL. Pylon Sign. A free-standing sign erected upon a single post or posts or shafts that
converge at a common base with the posts not more than fifteen (15) feet apart,
with the display portion mounted on top thereof.
MM. Readerboard Sign. A sign with separate inset electronic panels, letters and / or
symbols or changeable copy which can be easily removed and which are or is
periodically changed. Electronic message boards are considered reader board signs
if a single message is displayed for not less than seven (7) seconds and the text
messages are in colored lights. See also CHANGEABLE SIGN.
NN. Real Estate Sign. A sign intended to aid on the sale, rental or lease of real property.
OO. Rear Identification Sign. A sign located adjacent to the rear entrance to individual
businesses to clearly identify the location for ‘deliveries’. This identification sign
shall not be considered in computing the maximum permitted sign area for a
business.
PP. Revolving Sign. A sign which rotates at a constant rate of revolutions per minute.
QQ. Roof Line. That line at which the exterior wall surface of a building structure
departs from a vertical plane.
RR. Setback for a Sign. The shortest distance between a property or public right-of-way
line and the surface or main supporting structure of a sign; whichever is closest.
SS. Sign. An accessory use depicting a name, identification, description, display,
illustration, structure, device which is affixed to, or painted, or represented directly
or indirectly upon a building or other allowed outdoor surface or a piece of land,
and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution,
organization or business.
TT. Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor
and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be
that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor
and the ceiling or roof above.
UU. Temporary Sign. Any sign which is erected for a limited time and / or special
purpose.
VV. Traffic Directional Sign. A sign erected by a public agency for the purpose of
guiding vehicular and pedestrian traffic in a safe and convenient manner and which
bears no advertising information.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 100
WW. Video Sign. A sign containing electronic panels capable of producing full color
video images and intended for this purpose to display full motion video similar to
television or motion picture images.
XX. Visibility Triangle. A triangular area established at the intersection of streets and
driveways protected from encroachments greater than 32” tall and intended to
protect the line of site of drivers, pedestrians and bicyclists.
Subd. 3 General Requirements. Except as otherwise provided by this Section, signs as
defined in Section 17.5.13, where permitted, shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Wall signs placed against, painted on, or attached to the exterior walls of buildings
shall not extend beyond fifteen (15) inches of the wall surface.
B. No temporary sign shall be attached to a light standard or the supporting pylon of a
freestanding sign. Temporary signs placed elsewhere must be expeditiously removed
by the responsible party upon termination of allowable time period specified in the
permit of this Chapter.
C. Advertising and business signs shall not face residential districts where the nonresidential
property abuts, is across a side street from, or is adjacent to such
residential district, except where a residential district is immediately across from the
front of the property.
D. Posting of Bills, Posters, Placards or Circulars.
(1) The posting of bills, posters, placards and circulars on any public right-of-way
or public property is prohibited. Advertising signs and devices or displays are
prohibited on public property or within public right-of-way except such signs
or bills as may be placed by City employees for traffic control, parking,
directional or civic purpose and except such signs or bills as may be
specifically authorized by the City Council to be placed by persons or groups
for civic or quasi-civic promotions.
(2) No bills, posters or signs are to be posted on private property, fences, trees,
walls, rocks, structures or similar appurtenances without permission of the
owner and conformity to City Ordinances.
(3) Political posters and campaign signs are prohibited on public property and
public rights-of-way.
(4) Any sign, poster or advertising placed on public property or on public street
right-of-way in violation of City Ordinances may be summarily removed by
the City, its employees or agents without notice.
(5) A violation of this Section 17.5.13, Subd. 3, D: Posting of Bills, Posters,
Placecards or Circulars, shall be a petty misdemeanor.
Subd. 4 Design Characteristics.
A. Wind: The effect of special local wind pressures shall be thoroughly considered in the
design; but in no case shall the wind load be assumed less than twenty (20) pounds
per square foot of net exposed area for roof signs, twenty (20) pounds per square foot
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 101
for freestanding signs over thirty (30) feet in height and fifteen (15) pounds per
square foot for other freestanding signs.
B. Illumination: No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical means and
electrical devices, and wiring shall be installed in accordance with the requirements
of the National Electrical Code. In no case shall any open spark or flame be used for
display purposes. The light from any illuminated sign or from any light source,
including interior of a building, shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed that the light
intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect surrounding or facing residential
districts, or adversely affect safe vision of operators of vehicles moving on public or
private roads, highways or parking areas. Light shall not shine or reflect on or into
residential structures.
C. Obstruction: No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any
fire escape, required exit-ways, window or door openings used as a means of egress
or to prevent free passage from one part of a roof to another part thereof or access
thereto. Also, no sign shall be attached in any form, shape or manner which will
interfere with any opening required for ventilation.
D. Use of Combustibles: Wood or approved plastic or other materials of combustible
characteristics similar to wood may be used for moldings, capping, nailing blocks,
letters, latticing and for other purely ornamental features of signs in accordance with
the municipal building codes and regulations. Sign facings, themselves, may be made
of approved combustible plastics provided the area of each face is not more than one
hundred (100) square feet and the wiring for electric lighting is entirely enclosed in
metal conduit and installed with a clearance of not less than two (2) inches from the
facing material.
E. Location: No sign shall be placed in the front five (5) feet of any lot. Where an
existing building occupies any part or all of the front five (5) feet of a lot, signs shall
be allowed to project up to eight (8) feet from said building face or three (3) feet from
the curb, whichever is less, even if extended over the street right-of-way.
F. Traffic Hazard: No sign shall be erected near or at any intersection of any streets in
such manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or at any location where by reason of
position, shape, or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused
with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device.
Subd. 5 Sign Requirements by Type
A. Marquees and Fixed Awnings.
(1) Projection Over Streets – No marquee or fixed awning shall hereafter be so
erected as to project over public property within the City of Cloquet until a
permit shall have been first secured from the building inspector to erect such
marquee or fixed awning.
(2) Load Capacity – Every marquee or fixed awning shall have its framework
constructed of metal or other suitable material approved by the building
inspector, and shall be so designed as to safely sustain a load of at least forty
(40) pounds per superficial foot of its upper surface. Wherever glass is used as
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 102
the roof of a marquee or fixed awning, it shall be wire glass and not less than
three eights (3/8) of an inch in thickness.
(3) Extending over Curb – No marquee or fixed awning shall extend nearer than
three (3) feet to the curb line, nor be of greater length than the width of the
building.
(4) Minimum Height – No marquee or fixed awning shall, at any point be less
than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk, and each marquee or fixed awning shall
be provided with proper gutters and rain water leaders to conduct the water
from its roof by a water leader underneath the public sidewalk to the street
gutter pan.
(5) Support Required – Except as hereinafter provided, every such marquee or
fixed awning shall be supported by properly designed and properly anchored
cantilever beams, extending into the building, or by chains or steel rods
properly fastened to its outer side or front and extending from thence at an
angle of at least forty (40) degrees with the horizontal plane, to the wall of the
building, and securely anchored to said wall and to the floor or roof
construction or the columns of said building. No marquee or fixed awning
shall be supported by columns or other support below the minimum awning
height, except where a permit specifically authorizing such support has been
approved by the Planning Commission acting as the Zoning Board of Appeals
and Adjustments.
(6) Materials – Marquee signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or other
approved noncombustible materials, except that the building inspector may
approve acceptable alternate combustible materials upon special application.
(7) Height- Marquee signs shall not exceed the height of the architectural facing
on which it is mounted.
(8) Length – Marquee signs may extend the full length but in no case shall they
project beyond the ends of the marquee.
B. Electric Signs.
(1) An electric sign, within the meaning of this Chapter, shall be any sign the
illumination of which, in whole or in part, is accomplished by electric wiring,
materials and / or devices installed on, in or in any manner attached to or
connected with such sign.
(2) Bottoms of signs for outdoor use, or otherwise exposed to dampness, must
have sufficient drain holes at least one-quarter (1/4) inch in diameter.
(3) Transformers, tubing and other electrical sign equipment shall be installed and
operated so as to not cause radio and television interferences, and interference
with communication systems.
(4) No section of any sign hereafter erected or attached against the wall of a
building shall prevent access to electrical boxes and fittings.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 103
(5) Before any electric sign is installed in place, or the wiring in the same
concealed, the erector or manufacturer thereof shall notify the building
inspector who shall make or have made, an inspection of such sign within
forty-eight (48) hours. Thereafter, if approved and certified by the inspector,
said sign may then be installed in place. After such sign is erected or installed
in place, the Building Inspector shall again be notified that a final inspection
and acceptance thereof is desired.
C. Projecting Signs.
(1) Materials – Projecting signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or other
approved noncombustible materials except that the Building Inspector may
approve acceptable alternate combustible materials upon special application.
(2) Clearance – A clear space of not less than ten (10) feet shall be provided
below all parts of such signs.
D. Freestanding Signs.
(1) Obstruction to Traffic – No freestanding sign shall be erected so as to obstruct
free access to an egress from any building.
(2) Bottom Clearance – The bottom capping of all freestanding signs shall be at
least thirty-six (36) inches above the ground for signs fifteen (15) feet or less
in height. Signs exceeding fifteen (15) feet in height must maintain a ten (10)
foot bottom clearance.
(3) Construction materials – No freestanding sign shall be constructed of
combustible materials except as approved by the Building Official following
special application.
Subd. 6 Maintenance: It shall be the duty of the owner of any sign or awning to maintain
the same constantly in a state of good repair and safety. The building official, in making an
inspection of any awning or sign, may order special repair to be made in order that the good
appearance and safety of the same may be maintained. The building official may order
repairs to be done within a set time and in all cases of repairs ordered, the owner shall submit
to the City a certificate stating that the designated repairs have been made. In all cases where
any sign is imminently or obviously unsafe, the building inspector is authorized forthwith to
remove such sign as a public nuisance without any demand for the removal of the same upon
the owner or any person maintaining such sign. Notification of such removal action shall be
made to the owner or responsible party within ten (10) days of the action taken.
A. No cloth, paper, or advertising matter shall be permitted to hang loose from any
billboard. It shall be the duty of every person maintaining a billboard to keep and
preserve the lot or parcel of land on which such billboard is erected, at all times,
clean, inoffensive and free and clear of any garbage, refuse, weeds, rubbish, paper or
other offensive material of any kind and description, which may be deposited or
gather thereon and to keep the same removed at all times for a space equal to twenty
(20) feet from any portion of such billboard. Billboards shall be kept in good repair
and with displays thereon. No billboard shall be left blank for a period of more than
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 104
seven (7) consecutive days. Where no client is found for the lease of the available
billboard space, the leasor shall provide public service advertising on the billboard.
B. Any billboard not maintained in accordance with this Chapter may be ordered
removed by the Building Official. Notice of removal shall be sent to the owner of the
billboard, if known, and if not known then by certified mail to the owner of the parcel
of property on which the billboard is located as shown by the public records. If no
action is taken in reference to removal within thirty (30) days, the City Council may
order the Building Official to physically remove the billboard and the costs of such
removal shall become a lien against the property on which it is located.
Subd. 7 Signs Allowed Without a Permit. The following outdoor signs are permissible
without a permit or payment of permit fees provided the standards and restrictions in this
section are met.
A. Development Project Signs.
(1) On-site residential. One temporary on-site development project sign shall be
permitted for each plat within a subdivision in any residential zoning district
(including multiple dwelling) under the following conditions:
a. The sign shall only be permitted for a residential plat after the final
plat has been filed;
b. The sign shall be located at least 30 feet from any existing or to be
occupied dwelling unit;
c. The sign shall be removed when the residential plat is 95% built out or
the multiple dwelling project is 75% sold or rented; and
d. Where more than one builder is involved in a residential plat, there
still shall be only one sign as described above, which may list the
builders for the plat.
(2) On-Site Commercial and Industrial Signs. One temporary on-site development
project sign shall be permitted in any commercial or industrial zoning district
under the following conditions:
a. The sign shall only be permitted after the final plat has been filed;
b. The sign shall not be located upon a developed lot and shall be
removed within three months after the lot upon which it is located is
developed, whereupon it may be moved to another vacant lot within
the subdivision; and
c. The sign shall be removed when ninety-five percent (95%) of the lots
in the plat are built upon.
(3) Construction Signs.
a. One Family and Two Family Residence Districts. Total number of
signs allowed per street frontage shall not exceed one sign for each
twenty (20) feet of lot frontage on the public or private street. The
aggregate area of all construction signs shall not exceed one hundred
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 105
(100) square feet. No individual sign shall exceed thirty –two (32)
square feet.
b. Multi-Family, Commercial and Industrial Districts. Total number of
signs allowed per street frontage shall not exceed one sign for every
fifty (50) feet of lot frontage on the public or private street. The
aggregate area of all construction signs shall not exceed two hundred
square feet. No individual sign shall exceed sixty-four square feet.
c. This sign or signs only be permitted while development or
construction activity is occurring on the project and shall be removed
before the building or any part thereof is occupied.
B. Informational Signs.
(1) Informational signs, attached to a building, shall be permitted in order to
locate building functions such as a car wash bay or drive-in window.
(2) Informational signs shall meet building sign requirements for maximum
height, shall be allowed for each bay, door, or window at a size not to exceed
six (6) square feet in area each, and shall be in addition to any other business
signs permitted by this chapter.
C. Directional Signs.
(1) On-site directional signs, not exceeding a maximum of two square feet per
sign, shall be permitted in any multi-family, commercial, industrial or
institutional zoning district for the purpose of directing vehicular or pedestrian
traffic in a safe and convenient manner.
(2) Off-site directional signs may be permitted by the City Council to direct the
public to emergency facilities.
D. Real Estate Signs.
(1) One temporary sign, not over sixteen (16) square feet in surface area, per
street frontage advertising buildings for rent and for sale shall be permitted in
the front yard or front side of the building. The sign shall be removed within
ten (10) days after the property is rented or the closing of the sale.
(2) Open house signs, which state that a particular house will be open for
inspection by the public for a limited number of hours on a specific day, only
during the day of the open house. Signs may be placed within a ½ mile radius
of the open house except as noted in subpart 3 below.
(3) Open house and for sale signs may not be placed within street right-of-way,
easements, roadway surface, sidewalks, medians and decorative surfaces, nor
within three hundred (300) feet of major arterial street intersections. Any sign
so placed is a nuisance and traffic hazard and is hereby determined to be in
violation of the sign regulations.
E. Promotional Signs. In promotion of a special civic event recognized by the City
Council signs not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area, for each sign, are
permissible for no more than sixty (60) days before the first day of an event,
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 106
celebration or festival and shall be removed immediately upon the completion of the
event, celebration or festival. Signs permitted under this division may be located in
any zoning district subject to the permission of the property owner.
F. Pump Island Signs. A double faced or single face sign with a single side not in excess
of three (3) square feet shall be permitted on each gasoline pump and not intended to
be viewed from off-site.
G. Pedestrian Awning or Canopy Sign. A business sign, limited to one (1) foot in height
and six (6) feet in length, may be located upon the front of a building or canvas
awning provided the awning is attached to the building and meets the minimum
building setbacks of the city’s zoning chapter. A pedestrian awning or canopy sign
may be placed perpendicular to the pedestrian walkway, provided it is at least eight
(8) feet above the pedestrian walkway.
H. Rear Entrance Identification Signs. Rear entrance identification signs not exceeding
six (6) square feet in copy area shall be permitted as building signs located adjacent to
the rear entrance to individual businesses to clearly identify the location for
‘deliveries’. The identification sign shall not be considered in computing the
maximum permitted sign area for a business.
I. Political Signs.
(1) Temporary political signs may be placed in regard to an election and shall be
permitted on each lot for a period of forty-six (46) days prior to the primary
election through ten (10) days after the general election for which they were
applicable.
(2) In all cases where campaign signs are not removed within the time limit
allowed or after notice to be removed by the City, the City may cause the
signs to be removed and the cost of removal shall be charged to the person
named on the sign.
J. Club, Lodge, Office Signs. One non-illuminated identification sign not to exceed
twelve (12) square feet in area for the following uses: clubs, lodges, fraternities /
sororities, and professional offices where permitted.
K. No Trespass / No Hunting Signs. No trespass, no hunting and similar restrictive signs,
not to exceed two square feet in area may be placed upon private property by the
owner.
L. Garage Sale Signs. Signs advertising garage sales shall be limited to a maximum of
three days for each sale. Signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area and shall
not be placed within public rights-of-ways, on any sidewalk, street or driveway
median.
M. Bench Sign. Signs painted upon or otherwise attached to or a part of a sitting bench
shall be permitted in any district.
N. Signs Erected by the City, Council or State.
O. Address Numbers. Address numbers less than six (6) feet in total copy area shall not
be subject to the maximum sign area provisions of this chapter.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 107
P. Public Interest Landmark Signs. Public interest landmark signs (such as park signs)
may be erected on property which is owned or controlled by the City and must be
approved by the City Council.
Q. Civic, Religious Organization, and Other Permitted Non-Residential Uses. One
illuminated or non-illuminated sign not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
Such sign may include the following uses: offices devoted to business management,
professional services, trade associations, labor unions, insurance companies or
agencies, banks, financial institutions, real estate offices, funeral homes, etc.
R. Public and Quasi-Public Use Signs. One illuminated or non-illuminated identification
sign or bulletin board not to exceed a total of twelve (12) square feet in area for the
following uses: public schools, parochial schools, colleges, public libraries, museums,
social and recreational buildings, parks, playgrounds, hospitals, sanitariums,
charitable and religious institutions, churches, cemeteries, and governmental office
buildings.
S. Table of Temporary Sign Size Regulations. The table of temporary sign size
regulations concerning size requirements shall be as detailed in Subd. 13 of this
Section.
Subd. 8 Signs Requiring a Permit. The following signs may be erected or maintained, as
shown for each zoning district or land use, only after obtaining a permit from the city and
payment of permit fees, providing the standards and restrictions in this Section or met.
A. Building Signs / Location on Building.
(1) Building signs shall be permanently affixed to buildings according to the
following requirements:
a. Prior to issuance of a sign permit, the owner of the building shall
designate a signage plan for all sides of single or multi-occupant
buildings. The signage plan shall include the maximum height and
width of signs, materials and colors to be used on signs and the
location and dimensions of the sign area. All building signs shall be
affixed to a building wall, within the designated sign area, and shall
not exceed the allowable dimensions of this code. All signs proposed
by the building owners or tenants shall adhere to the requirements
outlined in the signage plan for the building.
b. The sign locations designated shall be located no higher than the top of
the parapet walls or the overhang of the roof.
c. In multi-story buildings, no sign shall be permitted above the ceiling of
the first floor, except a sign may be allowed on the second floor of a
multi-story building provided that the second floor is the top floor or
has an exterior entrance; and except as provided in subpart 2 below.
d. Primary signs shall be placed on the side of the building where the
main entrance is located. In buildings with individual entrances,
business identification signs shall be placed within ten feet of the main
entrance to each business. Businesses located in the West End or
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 108
Downtown on corner lots as defined in 17.1.05 Subd. 73 or that have
corner visibility exposure and are not significantly setback from the
street or sidewalk grid may be allowed to have two building signs per
the dimensional requirements of 17.5.13 Subd.14. Signs on the
exterior of an enclosed mall shall be located near entrances closest to
the business location. Sign locations for each tenant shall be assigned
and identified in the signage plan.
e. Additional building or identification signs are permitted under the
following conditions:
1. The owner / agent shall submit a master signage plan
containing the following information:
(a) A dimensioned site plan and elevations of the building
or buildings to be included in the master sign plan;
(b) Computation of the maximum total sign area, the
maximum area for individual signs, the height of the
signs, and the number of free-standing signs allowed in
the plan under this Chapter; and
(c) An accurate indication on the site plan of the proposed
location of each present and future sign of any type.
2. The maximum number of signs affixed to a building by each
business within the building shall be controlled through the
master sign plan and as regulated in Subd. 14 of this Section;
3. Additional lighted signs are allowed on a side of a building
which abuts business or industrially zoned property or a public
street which abuts residentially zoned property. Signs proposed
to be located on the building face abutting a residentially zoned
property must be approved by the Planning Commission as part
of the Sign Plan review.
4. The wall of a building where additional signs are located shall
have wall materials and / or exterior colors similar to the main
entrance wall.
5. In multi-occupant buildings, additional signs shall be affixed to
the building at the location identified in the master signage
plan.
6. Table of building sign size regulations. Regulations concerning
size requirements shall be as detailed in Subd. 14 of this
Section. (See Table)
(2) Multi-story building signs.
a. Building of three stories or more, located in a commercial or industrial
district shall be permitted additional building signs in addition to any
signs otherwise permitted by this chapter.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 109
b. The additional building sign shall be a maximum of two signs with
each sign not to exceed two square feet of sign area for each 1,000
square feet of gross floor area of the building.
c. The two additional building signs shall not be located upon the same
side of the building.
d. The two additional building signs shall be similar in size, scale and
material.
e. The two additional building signs shall not extend above the highest
outside wall or below the fourth floor of the building.
f. The two additional building signs shall not extend across more than
40% of the width of the side of the building upon which it is located or
40% of the height for vertical signs.
g. The additional building signs shall only be permitted after approval by
the Cloquet Planning Commission.
(3) Free-standing signs; a pylon or ground sign.
a. Free-standing signs throughout the City of Cloquet shall be ground
signs with the exception that properties abutting Interstate 35 or Hwy
33 may be allowed to erect modified pylon signs if authorized by the
Planning Commission.
b. The base or support structure for free-standing signs shall compliment
the design of the building to which it is accessory by incorporating
materials such as brick, stone, decorative block, or similar substantial
materials used in the construction of the building. The base of ground
signs shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height in all zone districts.
c. All signs shall be constructed in such a manner and of such material
that they shall be safe and substantial, conforming to the design
requirements of the adopted building code of the City of Cloquet.
d. Regulation concerning size requirements shall be as detailed in Subd.
14 of this Section.
e. Regulations concerning setback and height requirements shall be as
detailed in Subd. 15 of this Section.
(4) Monument development signs. A monument sign intended to permanently
identify a multiple dwelling or single-family residential development shall be
permitted under the following conditions:
a. There shall be an entity established to the satisfaction of the city such
as a homeowners association, which shall be clearly responsible for
the perpetual maintenance of the monument sign and its environs with
corresponding powers to raise maintenance capital.
b. The monument sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of
copy area.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 110
c. The monument sign shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from any
existing or future residence.
d. An easement must be established for the location of the sign.
(5) Major anchor / center signs.
a. Major anchor signage. One major anchor / center sign may be
permitted to identify tenants or building occupants for a center in
excess of 100,000 square feet, subject to subsection (c) below.
b. Shopping center signage. Two major anchor / center signs may be
permitted for a center in excess of 150,000 square feet, subject to the
provisions of subsection (c) below.
c. All major anchor / center and shopping center sign structures are
subject to the following criteria:
1. The sign(s) shall be the only freestanding sign(s) permitted for
the business or center. Signs may be placed on any lot within
the planned unit development of subdivision provided the sign
applicant controls the land by easement or title.
2. The sign structure exterior face shall be encased in the same
style, color, and approved exterior material used on the face of
the principal building. This material shall be concentrated
between the finished grade and forty-two (42) inches above the
grade.
3. The sign shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the
property line, sidewalk / trail easement or public street right-ofway
line. Signs may be no closer than 250 feet to the nearest
freestanding sign on the same side of the right-of-way, nor
closer than 50 feet to a corner intersection of two right-of-way
lines.
4. Tall post or pylon signs along the Interstate Highway right-ofway
are discouraged. Ground signs are encouraged in lieu of
such pylon signs. A pylon sign may be allowed as a second
sign. The size of the sign shall be limited to ½ square foot of
sign face area per lineal foot of lot width facing all streets on
each of two sign faces. Pylon sign height shall not exceed
twenty-five (25) feet for developments less than fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet, and thirty-five (35) feet for developments
fifty thousand (50,000) square feet and larger. Ground signs
height shall not exceed ten (10) feet.
5. All signage shall have identical, internal backlit letters and
symbols.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 111
6. Landscaping plans for the area around the base of the sign shall
be completed and reviewed as part of the sign permit approval
process.
(6) Area identification signs. Area identification sign(s) shall be located in the
following manner:
a. Area identification sign(s) shall be located upon the property of the
complex it is identifying.
b. Area identification sign(s) shall be located along a public street
frontage.
c. Area identification sign(s) shall be located a minimum of fifty (50)
feet apart from any other area identification sign or pylon sign.
d. No more than one area identification sign for a particular complex
shall be located along the same street frontage.
(7) Gasoline pump island signs.
a. Gasoline pump island canopies shall be entitled to two signs in
addition to those otherwise permitted on the principal structure.
b. Canopy signs shall not exceed ten feet in length or twenty (20) square
feet each and shall not be placed on the same side of the canopy.
c. Lettering on the signs shall not exceed two feet in height or the
average height of the letters on the sign attached to the principal
structure, whichever is less.
d. Canopy signs shall be placed in a manner that will allow a six-inch
minimum border between the top, bottom and sides of a canopy face.
The sign area is determined by measuring the text only. Stripes or
colors do not contribute to the sign area computation.
(8) Second ground sign. A second ground sign may be allowed when all of the
following conditions are met.
a. The lot must be in commercial or industrial zoning classification.
b. The lot must be a through lot with double street frontage, or a corner
lot with street frontage on three sides.
c. The second ground sign must be located on the side of the lot abutting
the minor or interior roadway.
d. The ground sign must meet the size, height and setback requirements
for the primary ground sign permitted on the site.
e. The ground sign shall be in addition to all other permitted ground
signs.
(9) Other signs. The following additional signs are permitted under this Section,
subject to the restrictions thereof and are intended to serve the business needs
of advertising an initial grand opening for a business and other special
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 112
promotions, sales or events. Portable signs, banners, streamers and / or
balloon signs are permitted, upon the issuance of a permit from the City, in
commercial, industrial and institutional zoning districts for the purpose of
promoting a grand opening, special sales or events.
a. One non-lighted portable sign or balloon sign not exceeding thirty-two
(32) square feet per plane (side) and additional banners, flag banner
signs and/or streamers located upon the site of the grand opening,
promotions, sales or events shall be allowed at any time of the year for
any period of time for any given event so long as the aggregate time
that any and all of these “other signs” are present at the business does
not exceed one hundred twenty (120) days in any one calendar year.
Said “other signs: shall not be located within five (5) feet of any
property line. The total number of flag banner signs shall not exceed
one (1) per fifty (50) lineal feet of the site abutting a road. A permit
issued by the City will include a fee established by resolution of the
City Council which shall be based upon each occurrence of the
signage described here-in.
b. A small portable 2’ x 3’ unlighted free standing sign may be placed
adjacent to the building at or near the entrance to the business,
intending to only serve to advertise to pedestrian traffic at the building.
This sign shall not occupy parking spaces, block sidewalks or
walkways. This sign would be calculated as a part of the allowable
building signage and once permitted would be allowed to be used for
an unlimited time period within the calendar year. The City shall issue
a twelve (12) month permit and reserves the right to refuse the permit
if abuse of this Section or complaints regarding this signage are
received.
(10) Menu boards subject to the following conditions:
a. A maximum of two menu boards per drive thru lane shall be permitted
on a parcel of land with a restaurant providing drive-up window
service.
b. The menu board shall be a maximum of thirty (30) square feet in area
and may be in addition to any other signs permitted by this chapter.
c. The menu board shall be single-sided and oriented in such a manner so
that the signs provide information to the patrons using the drivethrough
facility only, and do not provide supplemental advertising to
pass-by traffic.
d. The menu board signage shall be completely enclosed within one sign
area.
e. Order confirmation signage no greater than one square foot and
incorporated into the drive-through speaker pedestal shall not be
calculated as part of the menu board signage area. Order confirmation
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 113
signage greater than one square foot shall be incorporated into menu
board and calculated as part of said board’s sign area.
(11) Video Signs.
a. Video signs shall only be allowed as a component of a modified pylon
sign and shall not exceed fifty percent of the allowable copy area.
b. Video signs must be located on the site of the use identified or
advertised by the sign.
c. The leading edge of the sign must be a minimum distance of one
hundred (100) feet from an abutting residential district boundary.
d. Video signs must be separated from other electronic graphic display,
electronic changeable copy signs or video display signs by at least
thirty-five (35) feet.
e. Video signs shall be required to automatically adjust in intensity
related to ambient light levels.
f. Audio speakers or any form of pyrotechnics are prohibited in
association with a video sign.
g. The City shall issue a twelve (12) month permit after review and
approval of the Planning Commission and reserves the right to refuse
the extension of the permit in the case of abuse of the applicable
requirements here-in.
Subd. 9 Prohibited Signs
A. Advertising or Billboard Signs. No new sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment shall be placed or located within any street
rights-of-way. No sign shall be on property other than the premises on which the
business, commodity, service or entertainment is located.
B. Open House, For Sale, Garage Sale Signs and the like. Open house, for sale and
garage sale signs and the like may not be placed within street rights-of-way,
easements, roadway surface, sidewalks, medians and decorative surfaces, nor within
300 feet of major arterial street intersections. Any sign so placed is a nuisance and
traffic hazard and are hereby determined to be in violation of the sign regulations.
C. Paper Signs. There shall be no paper cardboard or similar signs, notices or flyers,
pasted, tacked or otherwise affixed to the exterior wall or window of any building.
D. Portable or Movable Signs. There shall be no use of a sign so designed as to be
movable from one location to another, such as, but not limited to, changeable
message signs, reader boards, trailer, panel truck or semi-truck trailer or other device
whose function is to be stationary and serve as a sign except as described in Subd. 8,
A, (9): Other Signs.
E. Revolving Beacons, Sequential Flashing, Flashing Signs and all Similar Devices.
There shall be no use of revolving beacons, sequential flashers or similar devices.
F. Roof Signs. There shall be no use of roof signs anywhere in the City.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 114
G. Signs Imitating Official Signs. Signs which imitate an official traffic sign or signal or
which contain the words ‘stop’, ‘go slow’, ‘caution’, ‘danger’, ‘warning’, or similar
words.
H. Signs Advertising Terminated Businesses. Business signs which advertise an activity,
business, product, or service no longer produced or conducted on the premises upon
which the sign is located. Where the owner or lessor of the premises is seeking a new
tenant, such signs may remain in place for not more than ninety (90) days from the
date of vacancy.
Subd. 10 Signage Plan. Prior to issuance of a sign permit for other than the replacement of
sign faces within an existing cabinet, the owner of the site and / or building shall designate a
signage plan for all signs proposed to occur on the site and building. The signage plan shall
include the maximum height and width of signs, materials and colors to be used on signs and
the location and dimensions of the sign area on the building and yard sign locations. All
building signs shall be affixed to a building wall, within the designated sign area, and shall
not exceed the allowable dimensions of this code. All free standing signs shall be
permanently installed in designated locations and shall not exceed the allowable dimensions
of this code. All signs proposed by the building owners or tenants shall adhere to the
requirements outlined in the signage plan for the building:
A. The signage plan shall contain all of the information required for a master signage
plan and shall also specify standards for consistency among all signs affected by the
plan with regard to color scheme, lettering or graphic style, lighting, location of each
sign on the buildings, materials and sign proportions.
B. Other provisions of the plan may contain other restrictions as the owners of the
development or buildings may reasonably determine.
C. The plan shall be signed by all owners or their authorized agents as required by the
City.
D. A signage plan shall be included with any building permit authorization, site plan
review, nonresidential planned unit development, exterior remodel or other official
plan required for the proposed development and shall be reviewed simultaneously
with other plans.
E. A signage plan may be amended by filing a new plan that conforms to all of the
requirements of the City Code in effect at that time.
F. Existing signs not conforming to plan. If a new or amended signage plan is filed for a
property on which existing signs are located, it shall include a schedule for bringing
into compliance, within five years, all signs not conforming to the proposed amended
plan or requirements of this chapter in effect on the date of submission.
G. After approval of a signage plan, no signs shall be erected, placed, painted or
maintained, except in conformance with the plan, and the plan may be enforced in the
same way as any provision of this code. In case of any conflict between the
provisions of a plan and this code, the code shall control.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 115
Subd. 11 Performance Standards
A. Lighting Regulations.
(1) All illuminated signs shall have an indirect or diffused light source and be
designed so as not to direct rays of light onto public streets or adjacent
property, thereby creating a nuisance or safety hazard.
(2) Electronic message boards used as changeable copy signs or reader boards
shall be required to adjust in intensity related to ambient light levels.
(3) There shall be no flashing signs or use of flashing message or pictures of any
type including electronic message signs and video signs permitted in any
district. For the purpose of this Section, electronic message signs with smooth
transitions such as fading or slow scrolling would not be considered flashing.
For the purpose of this Section video signs which display consistent images
without dramatic changes in either image or intensity intended specifically to
draw attention to the sign would not be considered flashing.
B. Changeable Copy and / or Reader Boards. A maximum of one half of the total copy
area allowed for a freestanding sign may be used for changeable copy or reader
board.
C. Placement of Signs on Driveway Island or Entrance. No permanent or temporary sign
shall be located upon a driveway median for a distance of a minimum of ten (10) feet
from a public street right-of-way.
D. Change of Sign Message. Upon any change or replacement of more than a sign face
within an existing cabinet, the sign will constitute a new sign, requiring a new initial
fee and issuance of a new permit. If the sign does not exceed the size requirement as
provided in this chapter and the change is in content only, an application and
drawings must be submitted, but the fee will not be required.
E. Nonconforming signs; Continuation of Previously Permitted Signs. Existing signs,
other than temporary signs, which were permitted under sign regulations in effect
prior to enactment of the Chapter from which this chapter is derived, may be kept as
and where they were then located, even though they may not conform to these
regulations. Upon replacement of any element of the sign other than the sign faces
within an existing cabinet, there must be compliance with these regulations unless the
replacement is for the purpose of repair and is 100% identical to the original.
F. Illegal Sign. When an illegal sign(s) exists upon a parcel of land or business property,
the City may refuse to issue a permit for any other sign on that property until the
illegal sign(s) is removed.
G. Exposed Structural Components; Preventing Adverse Effect Upon Adjacent Property.
Exposed backs of all signs and the sign structure must be painted a neutral color and
otherwise be maintained so as not to have an adverse effect upon the adjacent
property.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 116
H. Signs which Interfere with Traffic Signs, Signals or Devices. No sign shall be
installed or allowed to exist, which, by reason of position, shape, color or wording
would interfere with the proper functioning of any traffic sign, signal or device.
I. Maintenance; Refuse and Removal.
(1) All signs shall be maintained in good condition and the areas around them
kept free from debris, bushes, and high weeds and from anything else which
would be a nuisance.
(2) All business signs shall be removed from the building and property by the
owner of the property within ten (10) days after business or use is terminated
except for framework that is expected to be used for a future business sign.
(3) All signs shall contain current information. Outdated signs or signs with
outdated information shall be removed by the owner.
(4) When any sign is removed, the enforcing officer shall be notified and the
entire surrounding area shall be cleared of all debris and unsightly projections
and protrusions.
(5) Signs not in compliance with code.
a. When a sign placed on private property is not in compliance with this
code and has not been removed by the owner or operator of a business,
the City shall have the right to remove the sign, after ten (10) days
written notice and charge the cost of the removal to the owner or
operator. Where a safety hazard exists, the City may remove the sign
without notice.
b. When a sign placed on public property is not in compliance with this
code, the City shall have the right to remove the sign immediately and
store the sign for not less than three (3) days, whereupon the City may
dispose of the sign in a manner similar to other abandoned property.
J. Table of Setback and Height Requirements. The minimum setbacks and maximum
heights shall be required for all signs, as detailed in Subd. 15 of this Section.
Subd. 12 Sign Administration
A. Compliance with Chapter. No sign shall be erected, installed, constructed or painted
in the City, except in compliance with this chapter and unless it shall conform to and
meet the requirements of this chapter.
B. Enforcing Officer. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator or Authorized Agent(s)
shall be the enforcing officer of this chapter.
C. Permit Fees. The fees for erection permits shall be paid to the City, and shall be
assessed on the basis of the surface area of the sign as determined by the Building
Official. Such fee shall be as determined from time to time by the City Council.
D. Variance; Authorized. To provide reasonable flexibility in the sign regulations, the
Planning Commission acting as the Board of Adjustment, may approve a variance for
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 117
a sign otherwise not permitted by these regulations where an exception would not be
inconsistent with the intent of the sign regulations.
E. Variance; Conditions to Granting. No variance shall be granted unless the Planning
Commission acting as the Board of Adjustment shall find that either condition (1) or
(2) hereinafter set forth exists:
(1) All of the following requirements must be met:
a. Special conditions exist which are peculiar to the land, structure,
building involved and which are not applicable to other lands,
structures or buildings in the same district;
b. The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant;
c. A literal interpretation of the provisions of these regulations would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties
in the same district and the terms of these sign regulations;
d. That granting the variance requested would not confer on the applicant
any special privilege for a use not common to other lands, structures or
building in the same district; and
e. The proposed use of the property shall have an appearance what will
not have an adverse effect upon adjacent properties and there will be
no deterrence to development of vacant land.
(2) Any proposed signage beyond the maximum square footage permitted would
have the primary function of providing a public service.
F. Variance; Requests, Fees. All requests for variances shall be made in writing to the
City of the form provided by the City and the request shall include the fee specified in
the City Council Resolution. All information required when applying for a sign
permit, as outlined in this division shall be required before the request for a variance
is considered by the Planning Commission acting as the Board of Adjustment.
Subd. 13: TABLE: TEMPORARY SIGN SIZES
The following are size regulations for all temporary signs
Sign Description Pylon Sign Ground Sign Building Sign Maximum Area (sq. ft.)
Construction ----- * ----- *
Real Estate ----- 1 1** 6 in residential district; 32
other districts
Development ----- 1 ----- 64 in any district
Noncommercial ----- 1 ----- 6
Other *** *** ***
Promotional ----- Note ----- 32
* see Section 17.5.13, Subd. 7, A (3)
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 118
** Multi-tenant spaces may have one (1) building sign per vacant space
*** see Section 17.5.13, Subd. 8, A (9)
Note – As determined by the City Council
Subd. 14: TABLE: SIGNS REQUIRING PERMITS/SIZE REGULATIONS
The following signs may be erected or maintained, as shown for each zoning district or land use, only
after obtaining a permit from the City and payment of permit fees, providing the standards of this
chapter are met.
District Pylon
Sign*
Ground
Sign
Building
Sign
Sign Area Ground
Sign
(sq. ft.)**
Sign Area Building
Sign (sq. ft.)**
Agricultural ----- 1 1 40 -----
Residential SF*** ----- 1 1 4 4
Residential MF ----- 1 ----- 40 -----
Institutional * ----- 1 1 40 sf each building 40 sf each building
Neighborhood Commercial ----- 1 1 .5 sf / lin. ft. of lot
width facing street
1 sf / lin. ft. of street
frontage facade
Downtown**** ----- 1 1 .5 sf / lin. ft. of lot
width facing street
1 sf / lin. ft. of street
frontage facade
General Business
Single occupant * 1 1 .5 sf / lin. ft. of lot
width facing street
1 sf / lin. ft. of street
frontage facade
Multi-occupant * 1 1/business .5 sf / lin. ft. of lot
width facing street
1 sf / lin. ft. of street
frontage facade
Regional / Shopping Center
Multi-occupant; under 50,000
sq. ft.
* 1 1/business .5 sf / lin. ft. of lot
width facing street
1 sf / lin. ft. of street
frontage facade
Multi-occupant; over
50,000 sq. ft.
* 2 1/business .5 sf / lin. ft. of lot
width facing street
1 sf / lin. ft. of street
frontage facade
Light Industrial ----- 1 1 .5 sf / lin. ft. of lot
width facing street
1 sf / lin. ft. of street
frontage facade
Heavy Industrial ----- 1 1 .5 sf / lin. ft. of lot
width facing street
1 sf / lin. ft. of street
frontage facade
Planned Unit Development
The Ordinance establishing each planned unit development district shall be used to
determine the most applicable zoning district designated for each lot and signs
shall be permitted by the most applicable zoning district as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
* Pylon signs will only be considered on sites with trunk highway frontage
** Building signs listed may also be calculated as percent of wall area of building frontage with 7%
considered equal to 1.5 sq. ft. per lin. ft. and 10% equivalent to 2 sq. ft. per lin. ft.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 119
***Business signs for home based businesses with a valid Home Occupation permit – one sign only
permitted.
****Businesses located in the West End or Downtown on corner lots as defined in 17.1.05 Subd. 73
or that have corner visibility exposure and are not significantly setback from the street or sidewalk
grid may be allowed to have two building signs, the size of the second building sign will be held to
the maximum size allowed along the primary or main building face.
Subd. 15: TABLE: SETBACK AND HEIGHT
The following minimum setbacks and maximum heights shall be required for all signs. All signs shall
be placed in a manner to avoid conflicts with visibility triangles at streets, sidewalks, trails and
driveways.
Type of Sign Minimum Setback;
Public Street Right-of-
Way Line (feet)
Minimum Setback;
Other Yards (feet)
Maximum Height
(feet)
Advertising Minimum required
building setback
Minimum required
building setback
25 ft
Business building Minimum required
building setback
Minimum required
building setback
Highest outside wall
Construction 5 ft 5 ft with a minimum of
50 ft from a residence
8 ft
Development;
residential, commercial
and industrial
5 ft 5 ft with a minimum of
50 ft from a residence
10 ft
Garage sale, political
and promotional
5 ft 5 ft 6 ft
Ground sign 5 ft 5 ft 10 ft
Menu boards 20 ft 5 ft 8 ft
Monument
Development sign
5 ft 5 ft 8 ft
Pylon sign* 5 ft 5 ft 25 ft – Developments
less than 50,000 sf
35 ft – Developments
50,000 sf or more
Real estate 5 ft 5 ft 8 ft
Noncommercial 5 ft 5 ft 8 ft
* A pylon sign must be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any other pylon sign. Any pylon
or ground sign must be three hundred (300) feet away from any major anchor / center sign. Pylon
signs are prohibited in the West End / Downtown Area and are discouraged within the Hwy 33
Corridor.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 120
17.5.14 Design Standards for the West End and Downtown Business Districts
Subd. 1 Intent. The intent of this Section is to provide design standards that will preserve
and enhance the architectural character that exists in the West End and Downtown Business
Districts. The community’s business heritage is tied to its buildings, and these buildings
contribute significantly to the community’s image and identity. These standards are intended
to implement the community’s vision for the West End and Downtown Business Districts as
articulated in the Community Revitalization Master Plan of 1998. These standards shall be
applicable to all new construction and uses of land, and to any remodeling, additions and / or
renovations to the existing development, which takes place after the effective date of
adoption of these standards. Additions, alterations or repairs may be made to any building or
structure without requiring the existing building or structure to comply with all of the
requirements of this Section, provided the addition, alteration or repair conforms to that
required for a new building or structure. Existing buildings, where the siding material is not
in conformance with these standards, may have such non-conforming material replaced with
similar material, provided such replacement does not constitute more than fifty percent
(50%) of the area of the wall on which it is located. Replacement of more than fifty percent
(50%) shall require that all of the material on that wall shall be replaced with conforming
materials.
Subd. 2 District Boundaries
A. The West End Business District shall consist of all properties zoned HC, Historic
Commercial District, lying within an area bounded on the north by Avenue A, on the
west by Market Street, on the south by Avenue D, and on the east by Trunk Highway
#33, as depicted on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Cloquet.
B. The Downtown Business District shall consist of all properties zoned commercial and
/ or industrial lying within an area bounded on the north by the Railroad Right-of –
Way just north of Avenue B, on the west by Trunk Highway #33, on the south by
Avenue F, and on the east by 18th Street, as depicted on the Official Zoning Map of
the City of Cloquet. This District shall reflect a ‘Central Business District’ character
and permit a wider range of architectural styles and designs. A ‘Central Business
District’ is characterized by a broad mix of commercial uses and building styles and
designs reflective of such an eclectic mix.
Subd. 3 General Provisions
A. Renovation of existing buildings shall return a building’s storefront to as close to its
original architectural character as possible. In many cases, this will require removal of
inappropriate later façade additions, such as: wood siding cover-ups; ribbed steel
siding overlays; large signs, inappropriate to the scale of the building; wood shake
mansard roofs; plastic or oddly shaped awnings; window openings in-fills or
surrounds designed to reduce the size of the openings; lighting fixtures inconsistent
with the era and architectural style; and other features of similar inappropriate
character.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 121
B. The upper stories of a building shall be visually integrated with lower stories through
the use of design details, colors and materials.
C. New construction shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with existing
buildings. The creation of a ‘false historical look’, through the use of materials and
features which appear to be historic but are in fact new, is to be avoided. Infill
building construction shall reflect the design of adjacent structures in height,
materials and style.
D. Buildings shall be the focus in the Districts, not parking areas, accessory uses or
signs. Such features shall be designed, located and arranged to complement the
principle building on the property and on adjacent properties.
E. Formula and ‘corporate’ architecture (i.e. incorporates symbols or designs which are
highly representative of a corporate logo or image, or which utilize the same
architectural designs regardless of location), franchise patterns and buildings that are
designed as signs shall be prohibited. Building design shall, as much as possible,
incorporate characteristics that already exist in the area.
F. These Standards shall apply primarily to buildings facing Avenue C in the West End
Business District and Cloquet Avenue in the Downtown Business District. They shall
also apply to corner buildings and those buildings within the block where the sides of
the building can be seen from Avenue C and / or Cloquet Avenue. Buildings not
facing Avenue C and / or Cloquet Avenue may conform to a lesser standard as an
exception to the rule. This includes buildings facing other streets within the said
Districts.
Subd. 4 Dimensional Standards. Building height, lot area, bulk and yard setback
requirements shall be those set forth in Section 17.6.24: Tabulation of Dimensional and
Special Requirements for Zoning Districts, with the following exceptions:
A. Build-to Line (the line measured from the street right-of-way which at least seventy
(70) percent of the primary structure must touch).
(1) West End and Cloquet Avenue – 0 feet
(2) Avenue B and other side streets – 10 feet
B. Minimum street frontage build-out (that portion of the primary street frontage which
must be occupied by the primary structure at the build-to line).
(1) West End and Cloquet Avenue – One hundred (100) percent, except that
pedestrian passages and plaza spaces developed in concert with buildings are
exempt.
(2) Avenue B – Sixty percent (60%)
(3) Side streets – Thirty percent (30%)
C. Minimum lot coverage by structures (plazas, outdoor gatherings or sales areas are not
included in minimum coverage calculation).
(1) West End and Cloquet Avenue – Forty percent (40%), except that pedestrian
passages and plaza spaces developed in concert with buildings are exempt.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 122
(2) Avenue B – Thirty percent (30%), except that pedestrian passages and plaza
spaces developed in concert with buildings are exempt.
D. Building footprint size and bay width (the width of a storefront or segment of a
continuous façade at which the building must be divided) for the primary structure
one each site:
(1) West End and Cloquet Avenue – Two thousand (2,000) square feet minimum,
ten thousand (10,000) square feet maximum; twenty (20) to forty (40) foot
bays
(2) Avenue B – Two thousand (2,000) square feet minimum, thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet maximum; twenty (20) to sixty (60) foot bays
(3) Up to one hundred (100) percent lot coverage, and buildings larger than the
maximums permitted in 1. and 2. above, may be permitted by Conditional Use
Permit, as stipulated in Section 17.2.10, if adequate off street parking is
provided through the use of parking ramps, shared parking lots, etc. and if
other amenities are incorporated into the building design to effectively
substitute for the require landscaping features.
Subd. 5 Parking Standards. General off street parking requirements shall be as specified in
Section 17.5.11: Off-Street Parking, with the exception as noted in Section 17.6.13, Subd. 6,
B: City Center, Special Provisions, Parking. Other parking standards specific to the West
End and Downtown Business Districts shall be as follows:
A. Off street parking shall be located in the side or rear yards only. No more than
twenty-five (25) percent of required parking shall be in a side yard.
B. Parking areas adjacent to street intersections shall be prohibited unless buffered
landscaping and appropriate setbacks are provided.
C. Parking areas and access drives shall not be placed closer than ten (10) feet to any
building, and no closer than ten (10) feet to a public sidewalk. Interior walk ways and
landscaping complying with the provisions of Subd. 7 herein shall be installed
between parking areas and public rights-of-way that consist of landscaping or
ornamental fencing (no berms) that is at least fifty percent (50%) opaque to a height
of twenty-eight (28) to thirty-six (36) inches in all seasons.
D. Joint-use parking facilities that balances high peak and off peak parking demand, and
shares spaces between adjoining properties, shall be encouraged.
E. On street parking that fronts each site shall be included in the calculation of the
required number of parking spaces as per Section 17.5.11: Off-Street Parking. On
street parking on the side of the building shall not be included in this calculation.
F. Employee parking shall be designated in remote areas of parking areas to allow
customer parking nearest the destination. On street parking for employees shall be
discouraged.
G. Access to off street parking areas and sites shall be from cross streets only. No curb
cuts shall be allowed on commercial and / or industrial properties on Cloquet Avenue,
Avenue B or Avenue C.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 123
H. Parking ramps or similar structures may be used to fulfill off street parking
requirements, provided such structures incorporate design elements consistent with
this Section.
Subd. 6 Architectural Standards. The Department of Interior ‘Standards for Rehabilitation’
and the Guidelines which accompany them shall be the starting point for storefront and
building design, and shall guide the re-use and rehabilitation of any structure in the West End
Business District consistent with its historical character. The Standards applicable to the
Downtown Business District shall promote a more eclectic character consistent with that
which has emerged over the years. New construction shall incorporate such design principles
as are consistent with these ‘Standards’ and Guidelines. Because of the sensitive nature of
storefront and building design in the West End and Downtown Business Districts, it is
strongly encouraged that the design for such work be prepared by a registered architect with
particular expertise in such areas. It is the intent of these Standards that buildings fronting on
Avenue C and Cloquet Avenue will require a different architectural standard than those
fronting on side and other streets within the District. The following Standards are intended to
reflect that difference:
A. Materials. The use of quality building materials and methods to create an enduring
stock of buildings shall be required. Acceptable materials and methods shall include:
(1) Brick, stone, wood, EIFS (exterior insulating finish system) or high quality
precast concrete are acceptable as exterior finish material. Wood, high quality
metal (matte finish preferred) or synthetic siding may be acceptable as
secondary trim or accent materials if used in combination with other
acceptable materials, provided such materials do not exceed twenty percent
(20%) of the exterior façade which is visible from a ‘public way’. Wood
frame, steel frame or masonry construction is acceptable. Exceptions will be
allowed for high quality synthetic material that mimics brick, masonry, etc.
Materials must be durable and property maintained at all times.
(2) Materials shall be durable, easily maintained, attractive at close distances, and
scaled to pedestrians when structures are within ten (10) feet of public rightof-
way or public walkway (i.e. no ‘jumbo’ brick).
(3) Exception for side and other streets. Buildings not fronting on Avenue C and /
or Cloquet Avenue may use any materials permitted by applicable Zoning and
Building Codes, provided they are durable and properly maintained at all
times.
(4) Exception for residential buildings. Buildings fronting on Avenue C and / or
Cloquet Avenue that are residential in character or use may use materials that
will reflect that character. For example, vinyl lap siding may substitute for
wood lap siding, provided such material complies with Subd. 6 above.
(5) Accessory structures. Mechanical systems shall be integrated into the design
of the building. Trash storage areas that are visible from a public roadway
shall be completely enclosed or incorporated as part of the building.
Accessory buildings shall be designed to be compatible with the principal
building in color, architectural style, building materials, etc.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 124
(6) Any outdoor storage of materials and merchandise shall be screened from
public view with a fence, wall, or other enclosure, or vegetative screening.
B. Doors and Windows. Buildings shall relate to people at all publicly visible sides. A
‘back door’ appearance for service areas and rear entrances from parking lots shall be
eliminated or prohibited.
(1) Facades facing streets or public walkways shall be articulated with windows
and doors resulting in a minimum of forty percent (40%) window or door area
at street level (sidewalk to twelve (12) feet high).
(2) Windows shall have a generally vertical orientation, and shall consist of
transparent glass if located at street level. Mirrored glass at street level shall
not be permitted.
(3) Entries shall be designed to be the highlight of the building.
(4) Original window and door openings shall be retained in the case of existing
buildings, unless security and functional issues require a change. New doors
will be allowed as long as the design complements the overall architectural
style of the building. New windows shall have similar mullion arrangement to
the original windows. Newer types of windows, such as casement windows,
shall not replace original double-hung windows.
C. Colors. Colors should be selected from historic analysis of what is found at each site
and architectural feature. They should be from a palette of base colors that are earth
tones with accent colors that are earth tones or complimentary highlights. Color
selections shall be governed as follows:
(1) Selection shall be from historical color palettes available from all paint
manufacturers.
(2) For painted buildings, subdued colors shall be used because the sheer mass of
a building will make the color appear considerably brighter than on a small
paint chip.
(3) Use of a multi-colored paint scheme is encouraged where the various colors
will highlight ornate architectural detailing.
(4) Large expanses of white or light colored walls shall not be allowed.
D. Details and Restoration. Each property is a unique example of physical features, time
and use. Therefore, restoration of any original architectural detailing that has been
removed from a building, or covered over, shall be a priority. The following rules
shall govern:
(1) Distinctive features, finishes and craftsmanship that specially characterize a
property shall be preserved.
(2) Deteriorated features shall be repaired rather than replaced. If replacement is
necessary, it shall be selective rather than total, and be substantiated by
documented evidence of what was authentically present.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 125
(3) Changes that create a false sense of history, or copy elements from nearby or
similar buildings shall be prohibited. Colonial details, for example, are almost
always inappropriate, since they do not represent the history of the districts.
(4) Cleaning shall be done by the gentlest means possible. Chemical treatments
and sandblasting shall be avoided, unless it can be conclusively shown that
such treatment will not be harmful.
(5) New work. Additions or alterations shall not destroy the historic materials that
characterize the property, and shall be differentiated from the old, yet shall be
compatible with the massing, size, scale and architectural features of the
original structure. Such work shall be applied such that, if removed in the
future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and
environment will be maintained.
(6) Changes to buildings that have acquired historic significance in their own
right may be retained and preserved.
E. Signs and Awnings. The following standards shall supersede and, where necessary,
substitute for the provisions found in Section 17.5.13: Signs.
(1) Canvas awnings in the West End Business District or extension of the roof
material, for awnings are encouraged. Nylon awnings, or other synthetic
materials, as well as those awning structures meant to be illuminated from
within, are prohibited. Awnings may be continuous only across ‘storefronts’
occupied by a single tenant. They shall not be allowed to extend across the
face of more than one building, even if the buildings are occupied by the same
tenant. Back lit awning signs are permitted if well designed and in keeping
with the character of the building. These requirements do not apply to the
Downtown Business District.
(2) Signs shall be incorporated into the building façade, windows or awnings, and
shall not exceed one (1) square foot of signs area per lineal foot of street
frontage façade (exception buildings located on corner lots as defined in
17.1.05 Subd. 69 or that have corner visibility exposure and are not
significantly setback from the street or sidewalk grid may be allowed a second
building sign that is held to the maximum size of what is allowed on the
primary or main building face and will be located on the building in
accordance with 17.5.13, Signs, Subd.8, Subp. A (1) d). Signs projecting over
the sidewalk may be permitted as a second sign, and must be perpendicular to
the building front, or be part of a marquee complying with Section 17.5.13:
Signs. Projecting signs shall be no larger than six (6) square feet in sign area.
Window signs must maintain seventy percent (70%) of clear window area in
the surface of the window. One sign will be permitted for each public entry
(exception: signs that are part of an awning, or within or part of a window, are
encouraged and will not be counted in determining the number of signs
allowed)
(3) Tenant signs in multi-tenant buildings shall be no larger than three (3) square
feet of sign area per tenant at each public entrance
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 126
(4) Temporary signs up to a maximum of six (6) square feet in area may be
permitted for up to twenty-one (21) successive days. One such sign may be
permitted per business, and may cover up to fifty percent (50%) of the total
window area if placed in a window. Such signs shall not be placed in a public
right-of-way, nor be attached to a building.
(5) Ground signs may be allowed to a maximum size of one half (1/2) square foot
of sign area per lineal foot of street facing façade on each of two sign faces.
Ground signs shall not exceed a height of seven (7) feet. Pylon or similar freestanding
signs are prohibited.
(6) All buildings must be identified at each public entrance with its full street
address in numbers no smaller than two (2) inches nor larger than four (4)
inches in height. This signage shall not be included in the total signage
allowed.
(7) Building mounted signs may not exceed the height of the building on which
mounted. Signs may not be mounted on top of the roof of the building.
Subd. 7 Landscaping and Lighting Standards
A. All open areas of properties not used for buildings, off street parking, access drives,
plazas or storage shall be landscaped with combination of conifers and deciduous
trees, shrubs, flowers, ground covers and grass. Properties without open areas and / or
off street parking shall be exempt from such landscaping requirement. Landscape
plans shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect or other professional
possessing equivalent expertise by training or experience, for all development
projects valued at $50,000 or more. A landscape architect, or other professional, is
not required, but is encouraged, for projects valued at less than $50,000. All
landscaping shall be in accordance with the following minimum standards:
(1) Maintenance of landscaped areas shall consist of all acts necessary to ensure
that areas remain useable as originally designed and that no hazards, nuisances
or unhealthy conditions exist. The property owner shall be responsible for all
such maintenance.
(2) Credit may be given for existing trees, buffers or other landscape materials,
provided they are maintained in accordance with Subd. 7, A above. The City
Planner/Zoning Administrator, upon receipt of a written request and submittal
of a survey of existing trees, landscaping or buffers, may waive the
landscaping requirements to the degree that the waiver is consistent with the
intent of this Chapter.
(3) Certain types of stormwater improvements that are landscaping in nature may
qualify for stormwater utility credit (to be evaluated by City Engineer). Listed
below are certain stormwater best management practices that meet the city’s
landscaping requirements these areas are not required to be irrigated:
(a) Rain Gardens. Residential or commercial rain gardens designed and
vegetated to capture and soak in stormwater.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 127
(b) Green Roofs. Green roofs filter, absorb and detain rainfall. The
specialized soil and plants reduce runoff by holding back and slowing down
water that would otherwise flow into the storm drains.
(c) Ribbon Curbs. Ribbon curbs, or curbless parking areas / streets, slope
into adjacent vegetated areas and allow rain from paved areas to drain into
rain gardens or vegetated swales. By eliminating curbs and gutters, there are
fewer infrastructure costs and water can drain into the structure and soak into
the ground.
(4) Plant materials shall be provided along property lines, within separation areas
in parking areas, and in similar open areas as follows:
a. Side and rear yards abutting parking areas shall be screened at a
minimum of fifty percent (50%) opacity to a height of twenty-eight
(28) to thirty-six (36) inches;
b. Trees shall be planted to provide a shade canopy within, throughout
and along the edges of off-street parking areas. Such trees shall be
arranged in landscaped islands at least four (4) feet wide to break up
the expanse of the parking area in a defined manner, with a goal of
achieving fifteen percent (15%) shade coverage when the trees reach
maturity; and
c. Plantings shall not block important architectural, historic or natural
features on the site or on adjacent property, nor shall they block the
line of sight at driveway access points.
(5) Minimum plant sizes are established as follows:
a. Canopy trees: 2.5” caliper (diameter or thickness)
@ 6” above ground
b. Understory / Evergreen trees:
Understory: 1.5” caliper (diameter or thickness)
@ 6” above ground
Evergreens: 60” in height
c. Shrubs:
Deciduous: 24” in height
Evergreen: 18” in height
Plantings in excess of the initial fifty percent (50%) of required plantings may
be of any size.
(6) All plant materials shall conform to the standards of the American Association
of Nurserymen, and be planted in accordance with the standards of the
American Institute of Architects. Plant species shall be indigent to the area
and / or of a hardiness that will assure successful growth. 17.5.15 Subd. 9:
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 128
Table: Examples of Acceptable Plantings, may be used as a guide in this
respect.
(7) No occupancy permit shall be granted for any structure or site required to
meet the provisions of this Chapter until these landscaping requirements have
been met. However, a temporary occupancy permit may be granted if the
owner provides the City with a letter of credit, performance bond, or some
other financial guarantee acceptable with the City Attorney, in an amount
equal to one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the estimated cost of
completing the landscape work. Any improvements covered by the financial
guarantee must be completed by the owner prior to the following August 1, or
the City shall have the right to exercise said guarantee and have the work
completed.
(8) Any modification to the exterior of an existing structure, or the construction of
any new structure, or the addition to an existing structure shall require
compliance with these landscaping standards, unless exempted by Subd. 7, A
above. The minimum amount of landscaping shall equal at least three (3)
percent of the project cost, or be measured at a ratio of one (1) square foot of
landscaping for each ten (10) square feet of new development. Whichever
formula results in the greater amount of landscaping shall govern.
B. Parking lot and yard lighting shall be of a similar, though not necessarily identical,
style as the street lighting within the district. Within each property, lighting shall be
of the same height, pole type and color, fixture type and wattage, and mounting
height and levels if mounted on the building.
Subd. 8 Review Procedure. Any proposed improvement project subject to compliance with
these design standards, and valued at one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or more, shall
require plan review and approval by the Cloquet Planning Commission before a building
permit for the project shall be issued. Any project valued at less than one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000) shall be reviewed for compliance with these regulations by the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator.
Appeals of City Planner/Zoning Administrator decisions may be made to the Planning
Commission in accordance with Section 17.2.12: Appeals, of this Chapter. Variances of these
rules may be filed in accordance with Section 17.2.11: Variance, of this Chapter. Variances
shall be granted only upon finding that the proposed variance is consistent with the purpose
and intent of these Standards. Cost of compliance by itself, with no additional reasoning,
shall not be a valid reason for granting a variance.
17.5.15 Design Standards for the Highway 33 Corridor
Subd. 1 Intent. The intent of this Section is to provide design standards that will establish
and enhance an architectural character for the Trunk Highway 33 Commercial Corridor. The
community’s image on Highway 33 must be tied to the character of development that occurs
along the corridor. These Standards are intended to define that character, and are intended to
implement the community’s vision for the Highway 33 Corridor as articulated in the
Community Revitalization Master Plan of 1998. These Standards shall be applicable to all
new construction and uses of land, and to any remodeling, additions and / or renovations to
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 129
and of existing development, which takes place after the effective date of adoption of these
standards. Additions, alterations or repairs may be made to any building or structure without
requiring the existing building or structure to comply with all the requirements of this
Section, provided the addition, alteration or repair conforms to that required for a new
building or structure. Existing buildings, where the siding material is not in conformance
with these standards, may have such non-conforming material replaced with similar material,
provided such replacement does not constitute more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of
the wall on which it is located. Replacement of more than fifty percent (50%) shall require
that all of the material on that wall shall be replaced with conforming materials.
Subd. 2 District Boundaries. These Standards shall apply to all lands located within the
Highway 33 Corridor which are zoned commercial. The Highway 33 Corridor extends from
the intersection with Interstate 35 on the south, to the north City limits. The corridor shall not
extend more than one quarter mile to the east or west of the highway. The area lying within
the West End and Downtown Business District shall be exempted from these standards, since
that area is covered by its own standards as stipulated in Section 17.5.14 of this Chapter.
Subd. 3 General Provisions
A. Buildings in the Highway 33 Corridor shall be designed to reflect a sense of
permanence. New buildings, and additions to existing buildings, may be of steel
frame, wood frame, masonry or concrete. They shall have an exterior façade of
primarily masonry, concrete, brick or EIFS (exterior insulating finish system, or
stucco), and may have metal or wood trim. Metal buildings may be allowed, provided
exterior facades which can be viewed from a ‘public way’ (i.e. public or private
roadway) are at least fifty percent (50%) masonry, concrete, brick, EIFS or wood. If
all sides of a building can be viewed from a ‘public way’, a minimum of two (2) sides
of the building shall have exterior facades constructed to this standard. Heavy
vegetative screening may substitute on the remaining two sides, subject to compliance
with all other requirements of this Section. New buildings should be designed
whenever possible to maximize land utilization. The concrete block or metal building
‘pillbox’ must be avoided. Exceptions will be allowed for high quality synthetic
material that mimics brick, masonry or other appearance as approved by the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator. Materials must be durable and properly maintained at
all times.
B. Buildings shall be designed to relate to people at all publicly visible sides. Buildings
shall be scaled to pedestrians, with architectural elements designed to establish some
rhythm and relief. Single block –form buildings, or the ‘white concrete block’ look,
shall be avoided, and the forms shall be broken into smaller increments. Exterior
materials shall be muted in color, and shall be of brick, stone or other long lasting
material. Windows will be strongly encouraged, and should be positioned to allow
views into and out of the building. Canvas awnings should be considered to add detail
and interest to the façade.
C. Development shall be designed to have the appearance of being carved from the
forest. The design of the site shall have equal importance to the design of the
buildings. Buildings shall be sited relatively close to the street and property lines to
define the street edge. Dense plant material shall be used as buffers along the sides.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 130
Parking shall be primarily located to the sides or rear of the building, with limited
parking allowed in the front. Strict and careful attention shall be made to landscaping
and site design to achieve these ends.
D. Formula and ‘corporate’ architecture, franchise patterns and buildings that are
designed as signs shall be strongly discouraged.
Subd. 4 Dimensional Standards. Building height, lot area, bulk and yard setback
requirements shall be those set forth in Section 17.6.24: Tabulation of Dimensional and
Special Requirements for Zoning Districts, with the following exceptions:
A. Setback at Front Yard: Thirty-five (35) feet minimum; one hundred (100) feet
maximum for buildings under twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; one hundredfifty
(150) feet maximum for buildings twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and
larger. In designing the site layout, the established setbacks of neighboring properties
should be used as a guideline and followed as closely as possible.
B. Minimum Street Frontage Build-Out. (That portion of the primary street frontage
which must have a majority of the primary structure touching the setback line):
(1) Sunnyside area of Highway 33 North – forty percent (40%)
(2) Remainder of Highway 33 Corridor – thirty percent (30%)
Exception: Development proposals which cannot meet the above build-out standard
will require special review by the Planning Commission to assure that compliance
with the goals of this Section and the Community Revitalization Master Plan of 1998
will be achieved.
C. Building footprint size for the primary structure on each site: one thousand (1,000)
square feet minimum; seventy thousand (70,000) square feet maximum. Proposals to
develop large lots with relatively small buildings (i.e. with less than ten percent
(10%) lot coverage) shall require review of the development plan by the Planning
Commission to assure compliance with the goals of this Section and the Community
Revitalization Master Plan of 1998. A phased development plan may be required to
show how compliance will be achieved at a future date.
D. Complexes, or planned developments, of more than one building sized at the
maximum allowed footprint may be permitted if designed in accordance with these
Standards, and provided the maximum lot coverage stipulated in Section 17.6.12:
Regional (Highway) Commercial District, is not exceeded. Buildings over seventy
thousand (70,000) square feet may be permitted subject to issuance of a Conditional
Use Permit as stipulated in Section 17.2.10, provided the overall development plan is
consistent with these Standards and the general provisions of this Chapter.
Subd. 5 Parking Standards. General off street parking requirements shall be as specified in
Section 17.5.11 of this Chapter. Parking standards specific to the Highway 33 Corridor shall
be as follows:
A. Sites shall be designed to facilitate the location of off street parking in the side and
rear yards. Parking spaces located in the front yard shall be buffered from the street
with appropriate landscaped screening, and shall be designed with amenities to reduce
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 131
the visual impact. Examples include, but are not limited to, breaking up the expanse
of the parking lot with landscaped islands, decorative lighting designs and patterns,
decorative paving materials and layout, etc.
B. Parking areas adjacent to street intersections shall be prohibited, unless buffered
landscaping and appropriate setbacks are provided.
C. Parking areas and access drives shall not be placed closer than ten (10) feet to any
building, and not closer than ten (10) feet to a public sidewalk or street. Interior walk
ways and landscaping shall be installed within those separation areas. A visual barrier
shall be installed between parking areas and public rights-of-way that consist of
landscaping or ornamental fencing (no berms) that is at least fifty percent (50%)
opaque to a height of twenty-eight (28) to thirty-six (36) inches in all seasons. For
very large parking areas, the accumulated additional separation may be located in a
median between two rows of parking.
D. Joint-use parking facilities that balances high peak and off peak parking demand, and
shares spaces between adjacent properties, shall be encouraged. Trade-offs in the
required number of off street parking spaces may be considered between adjacent
properties where joint-use parking is factored into the site design (e.g. a movie
theater’s parking being available to serve a nearby office use during the theater’s nonpeak
hours).
E. A goal of these Standards is to achieve fifteen percent (15%) shaded coverage of
parking areas with mature trees. Calculations for such coverage shall be based upon
noontime shade measurements. Landscaping plans shall incorporate this goal into the
overall design. Lesser coverage may be considered if the landscaping plan shows that
fifteen percent (15%) coverage is not necessary to achieve the general goals of this
Section.
F. Access to off street parking areas and sites shall be from side streets or frontage roads
only. Direct access from Highway 33 shall not be allowed except in the ‘Sunnyside’
area of Highway 33 North, and in that area such access shall be restricted to right turn
in and out designs that comply with MnDOT standards. The ‘Sunnyside’ area is
bounded by the St. Louis River on the south and by Adams Street on the north.
Subd. 6 Architectural Standards. The Cloquet Community Revitalization Master Plan of
1998 shall be the starting point for building and site design in the Highway 33 Corridor. New
construction shall incorporate the general design principles found in Chapter IV, Design
Guidelines, and in particular shall follow the guidelines found in Sections 17.2.01: General
Provisions and 17.2.02: Zoning Permit, and following, as they apply to the Highway 33
Corridor. Additional, specific standards shall apply as follows:
A. Materials. The use of quality building materials and methods to create an enduring
stock of buildings shall be required. Materials shall be durable, easily maintained,
attractive at close distances and scaled to pedestrians (i.e. ‘jumbo’ brick or block is to
be avoided). Acceptable primary exterior finish materials shall include: brick, stone,
decorative concrete block, EIFS and precast concrete. Wood, high quality metal
(matte finish) or synthetic materials may be acceptable as secondary, trim or accent
materials used in combination with a primary material as listed above, provided they
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 132
do not exceed fifty percent (50%) of any exterior façade which is visible from a
‘public way’. Exceptions will be allowed for high quality synthetic material that
mimics brick, masonry, etc. Materials must be durable and properly maintained at all
times.
B. Doors and Windows. Buildings shall relate to people at all publicly visible sides. A
‘back door’ appearance for service areas and rear entrances from parking lots shall be
eliminated or prohibited. Facades facing streets or public walkways shall be
articulated with windows and doors. Entries shall be designed to be the highlight of
the building.
C. Colors. Colors shall be selected from a palette of base colors that are earth tones.
Accent colors shall be earth tones or complimentary highlights. For painted buildings,
subdued colors shall be used because the sheer mass of the building will make the
color appear considerably brighter than on a small paint chip. Large expanses of
white or light colored walls shall not be allowed.
D. Signs. The following standards shall supersede and, where necessary, substitute for
the provisions found in Section 17.5.13, Signs, of this Chapter.
(1) Signs shall be incorporated into the building façade, windows or awnings.
Signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot of sign area per lineal foot of lot
width at the street frontage, or ten percent (10%) of the front exterior façade
area of the principle building, whichever is less. Signs may be part of a
marquee complying with Section 17.5.13: Signs. Window signs must maintain
seventy percent (70%) of clear window area in the surface of the window. No
more than one sign shall be allowed, except as provided in subpart 3 below.
(2) Each tenant, or business, in a multi-tenant building, or building with more
than one business, may be allowed one sign complying with the standards in
Subd. 6, A above. The area of the sign shall be based upon the square footage
of the exterior façade, or storefront face, occupied by the tenant, not the entire
building. Tenants without exterior façade or storefront face may have a sign
not exceeding fifty (50) square feet in area.
(3) It is the intent of these Standards to reduce the amount of overhead clutter that
interferes with the view of the forest. Therefore, tall post or pylon signs will
be discouraged. Ground signs are encouraged in lieu of such pylon signs. A
pylon sign may be allowed as a second sign. The size of the sign shall be
limited to one-half (1/2) square foot of sign face area per lineal foot of lot
width facing the street on each of two signs faces. Pylon sign height shall not
exceed twenty-five (25) feet for developments of less than fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet, and thirty (30) feet for developments fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet and larger. Ground sign height shall not exceed seven (7)
feet.
(4) Signs shall be designed to be complimentary to the principle building
architecture and approved color scheme. Sign design and color shall be part of
the plan review process stipulated in Subd. 9 herein.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 133
E. Accessory Structures. Mechanical systems shall be integrated into the design of the
building. All dumpsters, trash cans, incinerators, exterior storage, etc. shall be
screened from public view with a fence, wall or other enclosure six (6) feet in height
with a minimum of ninety percent (90%) opacity, unless contained within a
completely enclosed building. Accessory buildings shall be designed to be
compatible with the principle building in color, architectural style, building materials,
etc.
Subd. 7 Landscaping and Lighting Standards
A. All landscaping within the Highway 33 Corridor shall be guided by the concept of
development being ‘carved from the forest’, as articulated in the Cloquet Community
Revitalization Master Plan of 1998 (see pages 55 and 60 thereof). In other words,
plantings of indigenous species shall be arranged in a manner reflective of a forest
environment. The planting layout shall be designed accordingly (i.e. clustering of
plants shall be employed, as well as buffer yards along property lines, etc.). Open
areas shall be strategically designed and placed on the property to complement, buffer
and shade buildings, off street parking areas, access drives, storage areas, etc. in
accordance with the above, and with the minimum standards set forth below.
Landscape plans shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect or other
professional possessing equivalent expertise by training or experience, for all
development projects valued at fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or more. A landscape
architect, or other professional, is not required, but is encouraged, for projects valued
at less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000).
These landscaping standards shall apply to all new construction, and to all
remodeling, additions and / or renovations of existing development, which takes place
after the effective date of adoption of these standards. In the case of existing
development, the measure of required landscaping shall be based upon the amount of
new construction only, as per subpart 10 below, and shall not be retroactively
applied.
(1) Maintenance of landscaped areas shall consist of all acts necessary to ensure
that areas remain useable as originally designed and that no hazards, nuisances
or unhealthy conditions exist. The property owner shall be responsible for all
such maintenance.
(2) Credit may be given for existing trees, buffers or other landscape materials,
provided they are maintained in accordance with subpart 1 above. The Zoning
Administrator, upon receipt of a written request and submittal of a survey of
existing trees, landscaping or buffers, may waive the landscaping
requirements to the degree that the waiver is consistent with the intent of this
Chapter.
(3) Certain types of stormwater improvements that are landscaping in nature may
qualify for stormwater utility credit (to be evaluated by City Engineer). Listed
below are certain stormwater best management practices that meet the city’s
landscaping requirements:
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 134
(a) Rain Gardens. Residential or commercial rain gardens designed and
vegetated to capture and soak in stormwater.
(b) Green Roofs. Green roofs filter, absorb and detain rainfall. The
specialized soil and plants reduce runoff by holding back and slowing down
water that would otherwise flow into the storm drains.
(c) Ribbon Curbs. Ribbon curbs, or curbless parking areas / streets, slope into
adjacent vegetated areas and allow rain from paved areas to drain into rain
gardens or vegetated swales. By eliminating curbs and gutters, there are fewer
infrastructure costs and water can drain into the structure and soak into the
ground.
(4) Plant materials shall be provided along property lines, within separation areas
in parking areas, and in similar open areas as follows:
a. Side and rear yards shall be buffered with dense plant materials to
delineate boundaries and screen parking and outside storage areas;
b. The front yard shall be landscaped to define the street edge and
provide a visual framework for the buildings. Where parking is located
in the front yard, additional landscaping shall be required to screen
objectionable elements of such.
c. Trees shall be planted to provide a shade canopy within, throughout
and along the edges of off street parking areas which are more than
one hundred (100) feet wide at any dimension or which can
accommodate fifty (50) or more vehicles. Such trees shall be arranged
in landscaped islands at least four (4) feet wide to break up the
expanse of the parking area in a defined manner, with a goal of
achieving fifteen percent (15%) shade coverage when the trees reach
maturity; and
d. Plantings shall be utilized so as to frame and enhance denoted view
corridors and vistas, and shall not block important architectural,
historic or natural features on the site or on adjacent property.
(5) Minimum plant sizes are established as follows:
a. Canopy trees: 2.5” caliper (diameter and thickness) @ 6” above
ground
b. Understory / Evergreen trees:
Understory: 1.5” caliper (diameter and thickness) @ 6” above
ground
Evergreens: 60” in height
c. Shrubs:
Deciduous: 24” in height
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 135
Evergreen: 18” in height
(6) Plant species shall be representative of a Cloquet forest environment, with a
mixture of evergreen and deciduous canopy and understory trees, shrubs,
grasses, flowers, etc. Evergreens shall represent at least thirty-three percent
(33%) but not more than sixty-seven percent (67%) of such mixture.
(7) All plant materials shall conform to the standards of the American Association
of Nurserymen, and be planted in accordance with the standards of the
American Institute of Architects. Plant species shall be indigent to the area
and / or of a hardiness that will assure successful growth. Subd. 9, Table:
Examples of Acceptable Plantings, may be used as a guide in this respect.
(8) Any outdoor storage of materials and merchandise not available for immediate
sale or lease shall be screened from public view with a fence, wall, or other
enclosure, or vegetative screening as per subpart 7 above and this Section.
Merchandise offered for direct sale or lease may be displayed without such
screening, provided the area so occupied is no larger than ten percent (10%) of
the ground floor area of the principal building on the same property therewith.
The ten percent (10%) limit shall not apply to merchandise customarily
displayed outdoors, such as garden supplies.
(9) No occupancy permit shall be granted for any structure or site required to meet
the provisions of this Chapter until these landscaping requirements have been
met. However, a temporary occupancy permit may be granted if the owner
provides the City with a letter of credit, performance bond, or some other
financial guarantee acceptable to the City Attorney, in an amount equal to one
hundred twenty -five percent (125%) of the estimated cost of completing the
landscape work. Any improvements covered by the financial guarantee must
be completed by the owner prior to the following August 1, or the City shall
have the right to exercise said guarantee and have the work completed.
(10) Any addition to an existing structure or the construction of any new structure
shall require compliance with these landscaping standards. The minimum
amount of new landscaping shall equal at least three percent (3%) of the
value of the new development, or be measured at a ratio of one (1) square
foot of landscaping for each ten (10) square feet of new development,
whichever formula results in the greater amount of landscaping shall govern.
B. Parking lot and yard lighting shall be of similar, though not necessarily identical,
style as the street lighting in the area. Within each property, lighting shall be of the
same height, pole type and color, fixture type and wattage, and mounting height and
levels if mounted on the building.
Subd. 8 Review Procedures. Any proposed improvement project subject to compliance with
these Design Standards, shall comply with the Site Plan Approval process in Section 17.2.10.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 136
Appeals of City Planner/Zoning Administrator decisions may be made to the Planning
Commission in accordance with Section 17.2.07: Appeals of this Chapter. Variance of these
rules may be filed in accordance with Section 17.2.08: Variance of this Chapter. Variances
shall be granted only upon a finding that the proposed variance is consistent with the purpose
and intent of these Standards. Cost of compliance by itself, with no additional reasoning,
shall not be valid reason for granting a variance.
Subd. 9 Table: Examples of Acceptable Plantings
Evergreens Deciduous Deciduous Shrubs
Balsam Fir Red Maple Black Cherry Common Juniper
White Spruce Freeman Maple Comn.
Chokecherry
Western
Serviceberry
Black Hills Spruce Sugar Maple Northern Pin Oak Black Chokecherry
Black Spruce Mountain Maple Bur Oak Bog Birch
Jack Pine Speckled Alder Northern Red Oak Gray Dogwood
Red Pine Inland Serviceberry Am. Mtn. Ash Red-leaved
Dogwood
Eastern White Pine Allegheny
Serviceberry Showy Mtn. Ash Red-osier Dogwood
Canada Yew Apple Serviceberry Basswood American Hazlenut
Northern White
Cedar Yellow Birch American Elm Beaked Hazle
Eastern Hemlock Heart-leafed Birch Slippery Elm Leatherwood
Paper Birch Rock Elm Common
Winterberry
Blue Beech Butternut Hickory Common Ninebark
Hackberry Dotted Hawthorn Smooth Sumac
Pagoda Dogwood White Ash Staghorn Sumac
Hawthorn White Oak Pussy Willow
Black Ash Bicolor Oak Coyote Willow
Green Ash Canada Plum American Elder
Butternut Pin Cherry Red-berried Elder
Tamarack Nannyberry
Ironwood Downy Arrow-wood
Balsam Poplar Am. Cranberry Bush
Bigtooth Aspen Common Pricklyash
Quaking Aspen Mountain Alder
American Plum Dull-leaf Indigo
bush
Common
Buttonbush
Silky Dogwood
Witch Hazel
American
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 137
Bladdernut
NOTE: This listing is not necessarily inclusive of all the plant species that would be
acceptable in the Cloquet area. It is intended to be illustrative of the types of plants that
generally grow well here. Contact a qualified landscaper or nursery professional for more
information.
17.5.16 Wireless Communication Facilities.
Subd. 1 Intent. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has issued wireless
communication licenses for personal communications services and other wireless
technologies in order for those license holders to provide wireless services throughout the
United States. The growing demand from citizens and businesses for new wireless
communications services has produced an increased need for the installation of wireless
communication facilities. The location, siting, design and construction of wireless
communication facilities can have adverse impacts on celestial observation and the
surrounding area. The City of Cloquet therefore finds that it is necessary to adopt regulations
that will accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses while protecting
the health, safety and welfare. These regulations will also minimize adverse visual effects of
wireless facilities through careful design and siting standards, avoid potential hazards or
damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through structural standards and setback
requirements, maximize the use of existing and approved towers and structures for new
wireless communication antennas, and reduce the number of towers needed to serve the area.
Subd. 2 Definitions.
A. Alternative Tower Structure. Any structure not specifically designed or intended for
the placement of antennas and wireless communication equipment.
B. Amateur Radio Operator. A person holding a written authorization to be the control
operator of an amateur radio facility. This authorization shall be in the form of a
license or permit issued by the Federal Communications Commission or a foreign
national or multinational license or permit recognized by treaty as valid in the United
States.
C. Amateur Radio Services. The radio communication services including the amateursatellite
services and the amateur service, which are for the purpose of self-training,
intercommunication and technical investigations carried out by amateurs who are
duly authorized persons interested in radio technique solely with a personal aim and
without pecuniary interest, as defined in 47 CFR, Part 97 and regulated thereunder.
D. Antenna. Any device or equipment used for the transmission or reception of
electromagnetic waves, which may include Omni-directional antenna (rod),
directional antenna (panel) or parabolic antenna (disc).
E. Collocation. The location of more than one antenna or set of antennas on the same
tower structure.
F. FAA. Federal Aviation Administration.
G. FCC. Federal Communications Commission
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 138
H. Height. The distance measured from ground level to the highest point on a tower or
structure, including any attachments.
I. Public Utility. Any persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas, electric,
transportation, water, sewer, or land line telephone service to the general public. For
the purposes of this section, commercial wireless communication service facilities
shall not be considered public utility uses, and are defined separately.
J. Tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of
supporting one or more antennas, including guy towers, monopole towers and selfsupporting
lattice towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers,
microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative
tower structures and the like.
K. Tower Accessory Structure. Any structure located at the base of a tower for housing
base receiving or transmitting equipment.
L. Wireless Communications. Any personal wireless services as defined in the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, including FCC licensed commercial wireless
telecommunications services such as cellular, personal communication services
(PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR),
paging and similar services that currently exist or may be developed.
Subd. 3 Applicability.
A. Preexisting Towers and Antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been
issued prior to the effective date of this Section shall not be required to meet the
requirements of this Section. However, any addition or change to a preexisting tower
or antenna shall comply with all applicable requirements of this Section.
B. Amateur Radio and Receive Only Antennas. This Section shall not govern the
installation of any tower or antenna less than ninety (90) feet in height that is owned
and / or operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator or is used exclusively
for receive only antennas.
C. Government Owned and Operated. This Section shall not govern government owned
and operated receive and or transmit telemetry station antennas for supervisory
control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems for water, flood alert, traffic control
devices and signals, storm water, pump stations and/or irrigation systems, exceeding a
height of 90 feet shall require a conditional use permit. Such towers shall conform to
the accessory structure setback for the zone district in which it is located.
Subd. 4 General Requirements.
A. All towers and antennas shall comply with all FCC and FAA rules, regulations and
standards. Any change in such rules, regulations and standards shall require
compliance within six (6) months for all existing towers and antennas. Failure to
comply shall be grounds for removal of the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense.
B. Design and installation of all towers shall comply with the manufacturer’s
specifications. Plans shall be prepared and certified by a registered professional
engineer.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 139
C. Installation of all towers and antennas shall comply with all applicable state and local
building and electrical codes.
D. For leased sites, written authorization must be provided from the property owner for
siting the wireless communication facilities.
E. All towers and antennas must be adequately insured for injury and property damage.
F. All abandoned or unused towers and antennas must be removed within six (6) months
of cessation of operation or use, unless an extension is granted by the City Council.
After removal of the facilities, the site shall be restored to its original or an improved
condition, and anchoring elements shall be removed from the ground to a minimum
depth of eight (8) feet below ground level. If such removal and restoration is not
completed within the time specified, the City of Cloquet may cause such removal and
restoration with the cost thereof assessed against the property as a special assessment.
G. When applicable, proposals to erect new towers and antennas shall be accompanied
by any required state or local agency license or application for such license.
H. Only one tower is allowed on a parcel of land. However, additional towers may be
permitted by special exception permit if said towers are located no more than two
hundred (200) feet from the existing tower and all other requirements of this Section
are met.
I. No tower, or related structure or equipment, shall be erected or constructed without
first obtaining a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with Section 17.2.10 of this
Chapter. A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for all new and replacement
towers, except as exempted in Subd. 3, A of this Section.
Subd. 5 Prohibitions.
A. No tower or antenna may be installed on a parcel within any Residential Zoning
District except the FR District, nor within the NC or HC Zoning Districts. A tower or
antenna may be allowed in the FR, CC, RC, LI, HI, and IP Districts only, subject to
the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit.
B. No advertising message shall be affixed to any tower or antenna, other than that
required by the FCC.
C. Towers and antennas shall not be artificially illuminated unless required by FCC or
FAA regulations.
D. Whenever any tower is required to have flashing type lighting or illumination, the use
of red flashing lights shall be required during the night time hours as opposed to
white strobe lights unless otherwise federally mandated.
E. No part of any tower or antenna shall extend across or over any right-of-way, public
street, public highway, public sidewalk or property line.
F. All visible light emitting devices shall be prohibited from being used on any tower at
any time with the exception of the requirements of the FCC or FAA for safety
purposes.
Subd. 6 Performance Standards.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 140
A. Setback and Height Requirements.
(1) Any property line setback – a distance equal to the height of the tower plus the
distance of any attachments extending above or beyond the tower. This
setback may be reduced to seventy-five percent (75%) of the combined height
if supporting engineering data is submitted by a registered professional
engineer that certifies that the tower is designed and engineered to collapse
upon failure within the distance from the highest point of the structure to the
property line.
(2) Any residence setback – five hundred (500) feet. Exception: the residence on
the parcel on which the tower is to be located.
(3) Maximum height – three hundred (300) feet. No tower shall exceed three
hundred (300) feet in height as measured from grade to the top of the tower
plus any attachments extending above or beyond the tower.
B. Collocation Requirements. All commercial wireless communication towers erected,
constructed or located within the City of Cloquet shall comply with the following:
(1) Provide documentation of the area to be served including maps demonstrating
the size of communication cells and search rings for the tower or antenna
location. A narrative describing a search ring of not less than one (1) mile
radius for the requested site, clearly explaining why the site was selected,
what existing structures were available, and why they are not suitable as
locations or collations.
(2) Provide documentation that the communications equipment planned for the
proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or
building within the search ring of the service area due to one or more of the
following reasons:
a. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified
professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be
reinforced or modified to accommodate planned equipment at a
reasonable cost.
b. The planned equipment would cause interference with other existing
or planned equipment at the tower or building as documented by a
qualified professional radio frequency engineer and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
c. No existing or approved towers or commercial / industrial building
within a one (1) mile radius meet the radio frequency design criteria.
d. Existing or approved towers and commercial / industrial buildings
within one (1) mile radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment
at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a
qualified professional radio frequency engineer.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 141
e. Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned
telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or
building.
(3) The applicant must demonstrate that a good faith effort to collocate on
existing towers and structures within a one (1) mile radius was made, but an
agreement could not be reached.
(4) Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall be
designed structurally, electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the
applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least three (3) additional
users (4 total users) if the tower is one hundred-thirty (130) feet or more in
height or two (2) additional users (3 total users) if the tower is less than one
hundred- thirty (130) feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for
future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas
mounted at varying heights.
(5) An agreement stating that the site will be designed for not less than three (3)
or four (4) users, depending upon tower height as stipulated in No. 4 above,
and with the applicant and property owner commitment to collocation, must
be included with any permit application. The agreement shall also include a
statement that any unused or obsolete tower shall be removed by the property
owner and / or applicant at the property owner’s and / or applicant’s expense.
The agreement shall also state that the property owner and / or applicant shall
abide by all applicable terms and conditions of applicable permits, including
the restoration and reclamation requirements of this Section. Said agreement
shall be signed by the applicant and the property owner and shall be attached
to and become part of the permit.
C. Screening and Landscaping. The tower location shall provide for the maximum
amount of screening of the facilities. The site shall be landscaped with a buffer of
plant materials that effectively screens the view of all tower accessory structures,
equipment and improvements at ground level from adjacent properties. The standard
buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four (4) feet wide outside the
perimeter of the area where tower accessory structures and equipment are located at
ground level. In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the
landscaping requirements may be reduced or waived by the City Council. Existing
mature vegetation and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible.
D. Security fencing and lighting.
(1) All towers shall be reasonably protected against unauthorized access. The
bottom of the tower from ground level to twelve (12) feet above ground shall
be designed to preclude unauthorized climbing and shall be enclosed with a
minimum of six (6) feet high chain link fence with a locked gate.
(2) Security lighting for on-ground facilities and equipment is permitted, as long
as it is down shielded to keep light within the boundaries of the site.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 142
E. Color and Materials. All metal towers shall be constructed or treated with corrosion
resistant materials. All towers and antennas shall utilize building materials, colors,
textures, screening and landscaping that effectively blend the tower facilities within
the surrounding natural setting and environment to the greatest extent possible.
F. Parking and Access. Adequate parking spaces and access drives shall be provided in
accordance with Section 17.5.11: Off-Street Parking of this Chapter. In addition,
access drives must be provided with a locked security gate to restrict admittance to
the site.
G. Alternative Tower Structures.
(1) If an antenna is installed on an alternative tower structure, the antenna and
supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that
is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure
so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as
possible.
(2) If equipment is to be installed on an alternative tower structure, the applicant
shall furnish a report from a professional engineer certifying the proposed
alternative tower structure to be suitable for applicant’s equipment and
intended use. Suitable shall be understood to include, but not be limited to,
structural integrity and human safety concerns.
H. Noise. Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages and for testing
and maintenance purposes. If the facility is located within 100 feet of a residential
dwelling unit, noise attenuation measures shall be included to reduce noise levels to
an exterior noise level of at least a Ldn of 60 dB at the property line and an interior
noise level of a Ldn of 45 dB. Testing and maintenance shall only take place on
weekdays between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m.
I. Abandoned or Unused Towers or Portions of Towers. All abandoned or unused
towers and associated facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the Zoning
Administrator. In the event that the tower is not removed within 12 months of the
cessation of operations at a site, the tower and associated facilities shall be deemed to
be a hazardous building within the meaning of Minnesota Statute which may be
removed by the City and the cost of removal assessed against the property owner
upon which the tower and facilities are located in the manner provided by Minnesota
Statute.
Subd. 7 Conditional Use Permit Applications. In addition to the submittal requirements
specified in Section 17.2.10 of this Chapter, all applications for permits for new wireless
communication facilities shall include the following information:
A. Report. A report from a registered professional engineer and other professionals
which:
(1) Describes the tower height and design, including a cross section and elevation;
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 143
(2) Certifies the facility’s compliance with structural and electrical standards;
(3) Describes the tower’s capacity, including the potential number and type of
antennas that it can accommodate;
(4) Describes the lighting to be placed on the tower, if required by the FCC or
FAA;
(5) Certifies that the facilities will not cause destructive interference with
previously established public safety communications systems as required by
the FCC;
(6) Describes how the requirements and standards of these ordinances will be met
by the proposed facilities; and
(7) Provides a periodic maintenance and safety check schedule for the structure
which is consistent with the design of the structure.
B. Facility Plan. Each application shall include a facility plan, which includes the
following:
(1) A written description of the type of consumer services each provider will
provide to its customers (cellular, PCS, SMR, ESMR, paging or other
anticipated wireless communication services).
(2) A map of the City and the surrounding area which shows the geographic
service areas of the existing and proposed cell site, including sites to be
upgraded or replaced, and identifies the sea level elevation for the proposed
tower site.
C. Additional Information and Analysis. Additional information and analysis may be
required as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission and / or City Council, at
the applicant’s expense. Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
D. Existing Tower / New Antenna. Additions of new antennas to existing towers shall
not require issuance of a Conditional Use Permit. However, such additions will
require a Building Permit and / or Electrical Permit in accordance with applicable
regulations. All other requirements of this Section shall also apply.
17.5.17 Sewage and Wastewater Treatment Systems
Per MN Rule 7082.0040, Subp. 2, Carlton County Planning and Zoning Department administers
subsurface sewage treatment requirements for the City of Cloquet, MN.
17.5.18 Floodplain Regulations
Subd. 1 Statutory Authorization, Finding of Fact and Purpose.
A. Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in Minnesota
Statutes Chapters 103F and Chapter (394 for counties or 462 for municipalities)
delegated the authority to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 144
minimize flood losses. Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 103F further stipulates that
communities subject to recurrent flooding must participate and maintain eligibility in
the National Flood Insurance Program. Therefore the City Council, City of Cloquet,
Minnesota does ordain as follows:
B. Statement of Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to maintain the community’s
eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program and to minimize potential losses
due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of
which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
C. Warning or Disclaimer of Liability. This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside
of the floodplain district or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from
flooding and flood damages. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of
the City of Cloquet or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decisions lawfully made
thereunder.
Subd. 2 General Provisions.
A. Adoption of Flood Insurance Rate Map. The Flood Insurance Rate Map for the City
of Cloquet, dated September 27, 1991, developed by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) is hereby adopted by reference as the Official
Floodplain Zoning District Map and made a part of this Ordinance. This map was
previously entitled the Flood Hazard Boundary map dated April 23, 1982.
B. Lands to Which Ordinance Applies. This Ordinance shall apply to all lands
designated as floodplain within the jurisdiction of the City of Cloquet.
C. Interpretation. The boundaries of the floodplain district shall be determined by scaling
distances on the Official Floodplain Zoning District Map. Where interpretation is
needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the floodplain district, the City of
Cloquet City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation
based on elevations on the regional (100-year) flood profile, if available. If 100-year
flood elevations are not available, the community shall: 1) require a floodplain
evaluation consistent with Subd. 4, C of this Section to determine a 100-year flood
elevation for the site; or 2) base its decision on available hydraulic / hydrologic or site
elevation survey data which demonstrates the likelihood the site is within or outside
of the floodplain.
D. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
Ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in
common usage and so as to give this Section its most reasonable application.
(1) Accessory Use or Structure. A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 145
(2) Basement. Basement means any area of a structure, including crawl spaces,
having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides,
regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level.
(3) Flood Fringe. The Flood Fringe is that portion of the floodplain outside of the
floodway.
(4) Floodplain. The channel or beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland,
lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regional flood. Floodplain areas within City of Cloquet shall encompass all
areas designated as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(5) Floodway. The floodway is a bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a
watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are
reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.
(6) Obstruction. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, dredged spoil, channel modification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, stockpile of sand or gravel or
other material, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel,
watercourse, lake bed, or regulatory floodplain which may impede, retard, or
change the direction of flow, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris
carried by floodwater.
(7) Regional Flood. A regional flood is a flood which is representative of large
floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably
characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in
magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous
with the term ‘base flood’ used in the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(8) Regulator Flood Protection Elevation. The Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of
the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.
(9) Structure. A structure is anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground or on-site utilities, including but not limited to:
buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes,
travel trailers / vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in Subd.
12, A of this Section and other similar items.
Subd. 3 Conflict with Pre-Existing Zoning Regulations and General Compliance.
A. The Floodplain District as Overlay Zoning District. The floodplain zoning district
shall be considered an overlay zoning district to all existing land use regulations of
the community. The uses permitted in Subd. 4 and Subd. 5 of this Section shall be
permitted only if not prohibited by any established, underlying zoning district. The
requirements of this Section shall apply in addition to other legally established
regulations of the community and where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this Section shall apply.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 146
B. Compliance. No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall
be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with
the terms of this Section and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within
the jurisdiction of this Section. Within the Floodway and Flood Fringe, all uses not
listed as permitted uses in Subd. 4 in this Section shall be prohibited. In addition, a
caution is provided here that:
(1) New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain
travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of this
Section and specifically Subd. 4 and Subd. 12;
(2) Modifications, additions, structural alterations or repair after damage to
existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures or
land are regulated by the general provisions of this Section and specifically
Subd. 9; and
(3) As-built elevations for elevated structures must be certified by ground surveys
as stated in Subd. 7 of this Section.
Subd. 4 Permitted Uses, Standards, and Floodplain Evaluation Criteria.
A. Permitted Uses in the Floodplain. The following uses of land are permitted uses in the
floodplain district:
(1) Any use of land which does not involve a structure, an addition to the outside
dimensions to an existing structure or an obstruction to flood flows such as
fill, excavation, or storage of materials or equipment.
(2) Any use of land involving the construction of new structures, the placement or
replacement of manufactured homes, the addition to the outside dimensions of
an existing structure or obstructions such as fill or storage of materials or
equipment, provided these activities are located in the flood fringe portion of
the floodplain. These uses shall be subject to the development standards in
Subd. 4, B of this Section and the floodplain evaluation criteria in Subd. 4, C
of this Section for determining floodway and flood fringe boundaries.
(3) Travel trailers and travel vehicles are regulated by Subd. 12 of this Section.
B. Standards for Floodplain Permitted Uses.
(1) Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected by
the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation – FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards
should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
(2) Storage of Materials and Equipment.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 147
a. The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
b. Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood
warning or if placed on fill to the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation.
(3) No use shall be permitted which will adversely affect the capacity of the
channels or floodways of any tributary to the main stream, or of any drainage
ditch, or any other facility or system.
(4) All structures, including accessory structures, additions to existing structures
and manufactured homes, shall be constructed on fill so that the basement
floor, or first floor if there is no basement, is at or above the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation. The finished fill elevation must be no lower than one
foot below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation and shall extend at such
elevation at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the limits of the structure
constructed thereon.
(5) All Uses. Uses that do not have vehicular access at or above an elevation not
more than two feet below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation to lands
outside of the floodplain shall not be permitted unless granted a variance by
the Planning Commission, acting as the Board of Adjustment. In granting a
variance, the Commission shall specify limitations on the period of use or
occupancy of the use and only after determining that adequate flood warning
time and local emergency response and recovery procedures exist.
(6) Commercial and Manufacturing Uses. Accessory land uses, such as yards,
railroad tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. However, a permit for such facilities
to be used by the employees or the general public shall not be granted in the
absence of a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation
if the area would be inundated to a depth greater than two feet or be subject to
flood velocities greater than four feet per second upon occurrence of the
regional flood.
(7) On-site Sewage Treatment and Water Supply Systems. Where public utilities
are not provided: 1) on-site water supply systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 2) new
or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to
impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage to
impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment
system designed in accordance with the State’s current statewide standards for
on-site sewage treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance
with this Section.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 148
(8) All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
C. Floodplain Evaluation.
(1) Upon receipt of an application for a permit, manufactured home park
development or subdivision approval within the floodplain district, the City of
Cloquet City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall require the applicant to
furnish sufficient site development plans and a hydrologic / hydraulic analysis
by a qualified engineer or hydrologist specifying the nature of the
development and whether the proposed use is located in the floodway or flood
fringe and the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation for the site. Procedures
consistent with Minnesota Rules 1983 Parts 6120.5600 (Technical Standards
and Requirements for Floodplain Evaluation) and 6120.5700 (Minimum
Floodplain Management Standards for Local Ordinances) shall be followed
during the technical evaluation and review of the development proposal.
(2) The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall submit one (1) copy of all
information required by Subd. 4, C, (1) of this Section to the respective
Department of Natural Resources Area Hydrologist for review and comment
at least twenty (20) days prior to the granting of a permit or manufactured
home park development / subdivision approval by the community. The City
Planner/Zoning Administrator shall notify the respective Department of
Natural Resources Area Hydrologist within ten (10) days after a permit or
manufactured home park development / subdivision approval is granted.
Subd. 5 Utilities, Railroads, Roads and Bridges in the Flood Plain District. All utilities
and transportation facilities, including railroad tracks, roads and bridges, shall be constructed
in accordance with state floodplain management standards contained in Minnesota Rules
1983 Parts 6120.5000 -6120.6200.
Subd. 6 Subdivisions.
A. No land shall be subdivided and no manufactured home park shall be developed or
expanded where the site is determined to be unsuitable by the City of Cloquet
Planning Commission for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or
sewage treatment facilities. The City of Cloquet Planning Commission shall review
the subdivision / development proposal to ensure that each lot or parcel contains
sufficient area outside of the floodway for fill placement for elevating structures,
sewage systems and related activities.
B. In the Floodplain District, applicants for subdivision approval or development of a
manufactured home park or manufactured home park expansion shall provide the
information required in Subd. 4, C, (1) of this Section. The Planning Commission
shall evaluate the proposed subdivision or mobile home park development in
accordance with the standards established in Subd. 4, B, Subd. 4, C and Subd. 5 of
this Section.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 149
C. For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe boundaries, the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation and the required elevation of all access roads
shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
D. Removal of Special Flood Hazard Area Designation. The Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood
hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-
year flood elevation. FEMA’s requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and
side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These
standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change
of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
Subd. 7 Administration.
A. Permit Required. A permit issued by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall be
secured prior to the construction, addition, or alteration of any building or structure;
prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure or land; prior to the change or
extension of a nonconforming use; and prior to excavation or the placement of an
obstruction within the floodplain.
B. State and Federal Permits. Prior to granting a Permit or processing an application for
a Variance, the City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall determine that the applicant
has obtained all necessary State and Federal permits.
C. Certification of Lowest Floor Elevations. The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered
land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this Section. The City Planner/Zoning
Administrator shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) for all new structures and alteration or additions to existing structures in
the floodplain district.
Subd. 8 Variances.
A. A variance means a modification of a specific permitted development standard
required in an official control including this Section to allow an alternative
development standard not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only as
applied to a particular property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship, practical
difficulty or unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in a community’s
respective planning and zoning enabling legislation.
B. The Planning Commission, acting as the Zoning Board of Adjustment, may authorize
upon appeal in specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of this Section as
will not be contrary to the pubic interest and only for those circumstances such as
hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under
consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation for planning and
zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In the granting of such variance, the
Planning Commission shall clearly identify in writing the specific conditions that
existed consistent with the criteria specified in the respective enabling legislation
which justified the granting of the variance.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 150
C. Variances from the provisions of this Section may be authorized where the Planning
Commission has determined the variance will not be contrary to the public interest
and the spirit and intent of this Section. No variance shall allow in any district a use
prohibited in that district or permit a lower degree of flood protection then the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. Variances may be used to modify permissible
methods of flood protection.
D. The Commission shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a
copy of the application for proposed Variance sufficiently in advance so that the
Commissioner will receive at least ten (10) days notice of the hearing. A copy of all
decisions granting a variance shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such action.
E. Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Commission may be made, and as
specified in this Community’s Official Controls and also Minnesota Statutes.
F. Flood Insurance Notice and Record Keeping. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator
shall notify the applicant for a variance that: 1) the issuance of a variance to construct
a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and 2) such
construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases risks of life and
property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its
annual or biennial report submitted to the Administrator of the Natural Flood
Insurance Program.
Subd. 9 Nonconformities. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this Section but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this Section may be continued subject to the following conditions:
A. No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity.
B. An alteration within the inside dimensions of a nonconforming use or structure is
permissible provided it will not result in increasing the flood damage potential of that
use or structure.
C. The cost of all structural alterations or additions both inside and outside of a structure
to any nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this
Section are satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions constructed
since the adoption of the Community’s initial floodplain controls must be calculated
into today’s current cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the current market value of the structure, then the
structure must meet the standards of Subd. 4 of this Ordinance for new structures.
D. If any nonconforming use of a structure or land or nonconforming structure is
destroyed by any means, including floods, to an extent of fifty percent (50%) or more
of its market value at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in
conformity with the provisions of this Section. The City Planner/Zoning
Administrator may issue a permit for reconstruction if the use is located outside of the
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 151
floodway and, upon reconstruction, is adequately elevated on fill in conformity with
the provisions of this Section.
Subd. 10 Penalties for Violation. A violation of the provisions of this Section or failure to
comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variance) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
A. In responding to a suspected Ordinance violation, the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator and Local Government may utilize the full array of enforcement
actions available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions,
after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a request to the National
Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party.
The community must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct
Ordinance violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
B. When an Ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to the attention of the
City Planner/Zoning Administrator, the City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall
immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extend of the
violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this information
will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural Resources and Federal
Emergency Management Agency Regional Office along with the Community’s plan
of action to correct the violation to the degree possible.
C. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the
requirements of this Section and all other Official Controls and the nature and extent
of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and / or use is under
construction or development, the City Planner/Zoning Administrator may order the
construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or approval is
granted by the Community. If the construction of development is already completed,
then the City Planner/Zoning Administrator may either 1) issue an order identifying
the corrective actions that must be made within a specified time period to bring the
use or structure into compliance with the official controls, or 2) notify the responsible
party to apply for an after-the-fact permit / development approval within a specified
period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days.
D. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that lapses
shall constitute as an additional violation of this Section and shall be prosecuted
accordingly. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall also upon the lapse of the
specified response period notify the landowner to restore the land to the condition
which existed prior to the violation of this Section.
Subd. 11 Amendments. All amendments to this Section, including revisions to the Official
Floodplain Zoning District Map, shall be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of
Natural Resources prior to adoption. The floodplain designation on the Official Floodplain
Zoning District Map shall not be removed unless the area is filled to an elevation at or above
the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation and is contiguous to lands outside of the
floodplain. Changes in the Official Zoning Map must meet the Federal Emergency
Management Agency’s (FEMA) Technical Conditions and Criteria and must receive prior
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 152
FEMA approval before adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given a
ten (10) day written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this Ordinance and
said notice shall include a draft of the Ordinance amendment or technical study under
consideration.
Subd. 12 Travel Trailers and Travel Vehicles. Travel trailers and travel vehicles that do
not meet the exemption criteria specified in Subd. 12, A below shall be subject to the
provisions of this Section and as specifically spelled out in Subd. 12, C and D below.
A. Exemptions. Travel trailers and travel vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this
Ordinance if they are placed in any of the areas listed in Subd. 12, B below and
further they meet the following criteria:
(1) Have current licenses required for highway use;
(2) Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system, are
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used in
campgrounds and trailer parks and the travel trailer / travel vehicle has no
permanent structural type additions attached to it;
(3) The travel trailer or travel vehicle and associated use must be permissible in
any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.
B. Areas Exempted for Placement of Travel / Recreational Vehicles.
(1) Individual lots or parcels of record;
(2) Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds;
(3) Existing condominium type associations.
C. Travel Trailers and Travel Vehicles Exempted. Travel trailers and travel vehicles
exempted in Subd. 12, A lose this exemption when development occurs on the parcel
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500) for a structural addition to the travel trailer /
travel vehicle or an accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The
travel trailer / travel vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be
treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the elevation requirements and the
use of land restrictions specified in Subd. 4 of this Section.
D. New Commercial Travel Trailer or Travel Vehicle Parks or Campgrounds. New
commercial travel trailer or travel vehicle parks or campgrounds and new residential
type subdivisions and condominium associations and the expansion of any existing
similar use exceeding five (5) units or dwelling sites shall be subject to the following:
(1) Any new or replacement travel trailer or travel vehicle will be allowed in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided said trailer or vehicle and its
contents are placed on fill above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation
determined in accordance with the provisions of Subd. 4, C of this Section and
proper elevated road access to the site exists in accordance with Subd. 4 of
this Section. No fill placed in the floodway to meet the requirements of this
Section shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or regional flood.
(2) All new or replacement travel trailers or travel vehicles not meeting the
criteria of (1) above may, as an alternative, be allowed if in accordance with
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 153
the following provisions. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for
the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. Said
plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual
and shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the
evacuation. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement
travel trailers or other recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed
so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in
accordance with Subd. 4, B, (7) of this Section.
17.5.19 Wetland Conservation Ordinance.
Subd. 1 Purpose. This Section is adopted to implement the Wetland Conservation Act of
1991 (Minnesota Laws 1991 Chapter 354, as amended), and the accompanying rules of the
Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources (Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420, as amended).
Subd. 2 Incorporation by Reference. This Section incorporates by reference the Act and
the Rules. Terms used in this Section which are defined in the Act of the Rules have the
meanings given there.
Subd. 3 Scope. This Section regulates the drainage and filling of wetlands and parts of
wetlands within the corporate limits of the City of Cloquet. It is part of the official controls of
the City of Cloquet. Conflicts with other official controls must be resolved in favor of
providing the most wetland protection.
Subd. 4 Procedures.
A. Exemption and No-Loss Determinations. Exemptions and no-loss determinations
under Minnesota Rule parts 8420.0315 and 8420.0320 shall be made by the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator should seek
the advice of the Technical Evaluation Panel on questions of wetland delineation and
type. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator’s decision is final unless appealed to the
Planning Commission, acting as the Zoning Board of Adjustments and Appeals
within thirty (30) days.
B. Sequencing and Replacement Plan Decisions. Sequencing and replacement plan
decisions under Minnesota Rule part 8420.0520-.0550 shall be followed.
C. Monitoring. The City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall assure that the replacement
plan monitoring and enforcement requirements of Minnesota Rule part 8420.0800-
.0830 are fulfilled.
D. Wetland Banking. Wetlands may be restored or created within the City of Cloquet for
purposes of deposit in the wetland bank in accordance with Minnesota Rules parts
8420.0700-.0760.
E. Appeals. Decisions made under this Section may be appealed to the Board of Water
and Soil Resources under Minnesota Rule part 8420.0905, after administrative appeal
rights under the official controls, as stipulated in the Zoning Ordinance, have been
exhausted.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 154
F. Variances. The Planning Commission, acting as the Zoning Board of Adjustments
and Appeals may issue variances from the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cloquet
so long as the variances do not vary requirements of the Act or the Rules.
G. Technical Evaluation Panel. The City Council of the City of Cloquet shall appoint a
person to serve on the Technical Evaluation Panel. The person must be a technical
professional with expertise in water resources management.
Decisions under this Section must not be made until after receiving the determination
of the Technical Evaluation Panel regarding wetland public values, location, size and
/ or type if the decision-maker, the landowner, or a member of the Technical Panel
asks for such determinations. This replacement does not apply to wetlands for which
such data is included in an approved comprehensive wetland management plan per
Minnesota Rule part 8420.0830.
The Planning Commission may seek and shall consider recommendations, if any,
made by the Technical Evaluation Panel in making replacement plan decisions.
H. Wetland Delineation. When it is deemed a wetland boundary delineation is necessary,
the property owner / developer will be responsible for such delineation.
Subd. 5 High Priority Areas. Decisions regarding sequencing, replacement plans, and
banking shall particularly favor preservation, restoration, and creation of wetlands in high
priority areas as identified in water management plans pursuant to Minnesota Rule part 8420.
0835.
Subd. 6 Delegation. The City Council of the City of Cloquet may, by joint powers
agreement, delegate to the Soil and Water Conservation District under M.S. sections 471.59
and 103C.331, Subdivision 19, the authority to administer all or any parts of this Section.
Subd. 7 Violations, Penalties and Enforcement.
A. Violations and Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this Section, or who shall fail to comply with any of the provisions
hereof, or who shall make any false statement in any document required to be
submitted under the provisions hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine and / or imprisonment in accordance
with applicable state law. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offence.
B. Administration and Enforcement.
(1) This Section shall be administered and enforced by the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator, who is hereby designated the enforcing officer.
(2) In the event of a violation or a threatened violation of the Section, the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator, in addition to other remedies, may institute
appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such
violations or threatened violations, and it shall be the duty of the City
Attorney to institute such action.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.5 Special Provisions 155
Subd. 8 Fees. Application Submittal. A complete application shall be submitted to the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or other Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 17.2.01, Subd.
4, B: Application Forms and Fees and Section 17.2.01, Subd. 4, D: Application Deadline.
Permits and / or Certificates issued in accordance with this Section shall be valid for one (1)
year from the date of issuance. Activities authorized as a result of such Permit and / or
Certificate must be started within this one (1) year period, and thereafter diligently pursued to
completion, or the Permit / Certificate will become null and void.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 155
17.6 Zoning Districts
17.6.01 Zoning District Regulations.
Subd. 1 Intent. The intent of Part 6: Zoning Districts is to establish zoning districts within
the City of Cloquet that correspond with the Land Use Plan and the City’s vision, goals,
objectives, and policies for sustainable growth and development as described in the City’s
Comprehensive Plan.
Subd. 2 Relationship of Zoning Districts to the Comprehensive Plan. The zoning district
requirements and the delineation of zoning district boundaries on the Zoning Map shall be
consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the City of Cloquet’s Comprehensive
Plan. The zoning district boundaries and rezoning requests shall also relate to the Land Use
Plan Map and the Staged Growth plans of the Comprehensive Plan. The official
Comprehensive Plan is on file with the City Planner/Zoning Administrator.
Subd. 3 Establishment of Zoning Districts. The City of Cloquet is divided into the
following base (underlying) zoning districts as regulated in this Chapter and as shown on the
Zoning Map.
FM - Forest Management and Research.
FR - Farm Residential District.
SR - Suburban Residential District.
R-1 - Single- Family Residential District.
R-2 - One- and Two- Family Residential District.
R-3 - Multiple- Family Residential District.
MHC - Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home Park) District.
MRC - Mixed Residential/Commercial District.
NC - Neighborhood Convenience District.
RC - Regional (Highway) Commercial District.
HC - General Commercial –Historical District.
CC - City Center District.
LI - Light Industrial District.
HI - Heavy Industrial District.
OM – Office/Manufacturing District.
PI - Public/Institutional District.
PP - Public Parks District.
AIR - Airport District.
The City of Cloquet is divided into the following overlay zoning districts as regulated by this
Chapter and as may be shown on the Zoning Map or illustrated or described within this
Chapter.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 157
SG - Sand and Gravel Overlay District.
PUD - Planned Unit Development Overlay District.
C- Conservation Subdivision Overlay District.
Subd. 4 Zoning Map.
A. Location and Boundaries of Zoning Districts. The location and boundaries of
the zoning districts established by this Chapter are set forth on the Zoning Map,
which is hereby incorporated as part of this Chapter, or are set forth in the pertinent
sections of this Chapter.
B. Official Zoning Map and Copies. An official Zoning Map shall be created
and kept on file in the office of the City Planner/Zoning Administrator. Paper or
electronic copies of the official Zoning Map may be created for ease of access.
Copies shall not be considered the official Zoning Map and shall contain a disclaimer
stating that the information may not be current and direct the user to the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator for the official Zoning Map.
(1) The Zoning Ordinance Chapter and Official Zoning Map shall be kept
on file in the office of the City Planner/Zoning Administrator.
(2) Changes to district boundaries. If, in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter
portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes will be made on the
Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the
City Council together with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows:
“By Ordinance Number ______ adopted ___(date)____ by the City of Cloquet
the following change or changes were made in the Official Zoning Map:
(Description or change),”.
In any event, the Official Zoning Map shall be redrawn to incorporate all
changes each year, and shall be completed on the anniversary of the effective
date of this Chapter.
(3) Any unauthorized change of the Official Zoning Map of whatever kind
by person or persons shall be considered a violation of this Chapter and
punishable under Section 17.4.05 of this Chapter.
(4) All territories which may hereafter by annexed to the City of Cloquet
shall be considered as being in the FR Farm Residential District or other
classification that is determined during the annexation process until an
amendment to this Chapter shall place annexed land in a different zoning
district. The Planning Commission shall review the zoning classification of
any annexed land and shall report thereon to the City Council giving their
recommendations as to the proper classification. Said report shall be
submitted within six (6) months of the effective date of the annexation.
(5) Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official
action of the City Council, the zoning districts adjoining each side of such
street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 158
such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and hence forth
be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts.
(6) Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts, as shown on
the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
a. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center
lines or right-of-way lines of streets, highways or alleys shall be
construed to follow such center lines.
b. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
c. Boundaries indicated approximately following City limits shall
be construed as following the City limits.
d. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be
construed to be midway between the main tracks.
e. Boundaries indicated as following rivers and streams should be
construed to follow the approximate center line of such river or stream,
should be construed as moving with the actual center line.
f. Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extension of, features
indicated in subsections a through e above shall be so construed.
Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall
be determined by the scale of the map.
g. Where the street or property layout existing on the ground is at
variance with that shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other
circumstances not covered by subsections a through f above, the
Planning Commission shall interpret the district boundaries.
C. Map format. The Zoning Map may be in hard copy or electronic format or both.
17.6.02 FM - Forest Management and Research District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The Forest Management and Research District is intended to delineate
appropriate areas within the community of Cloquet for the research, experimentation,
development and management of forests and forest harvest operations. The district purpose is
to acknowledge and encourage scientific management practices for our forest resources, by
identifying areas dedicated to forest management objectives, and relieving the responsible
agents of these operations from the encumbrances of applying for local permits otherwise
required by this Zoning Chapter.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted herein, without special
application requirements or conditions attached:
A. University of Minnesota Forestry Center – All University of Minnesota sanctioned
activities related to education, demonstration and research and all necessary structures
and facilities operated in conjunction with the Forestry Center.
B. Tree nurseries, certified* tree farms, forest harvest research operations managed in
conjunction with commercial timber and pulp activities; where such activities are
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 159
regulated and / or supervised by state or federal agencies, and where the ownership or
lease of the land is registered to the corporation involved in the forest research and
management activities. (*by the American Tree Farm System)
C. State and Federal agency forest research activities.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The purpose and character of the FM - Forest Management and
Research District is such that no conditional uses will be allowed.
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary to a principal
use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in their own stead.
Structures, equipment, signs and parking areas necessary as support facilities for any of the
uses listed above.
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations.
A. Parcel requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the FM - Forest
Management and Research District shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum parcel area. Five (5) acres.
(2) Minimum parcel width. Four hundred (400) feet.
(3) Minimum parcel depth. Four hundred (400) feet.
(4) Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility
and communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements of this
section.
B. Setback requirements for principal building. The minimum setback requirements for
principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Sixty-five (65)
feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line. Sixtyfive
(65) feet.
(3) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Fifty (50)
feet.
(4) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Forty (40) feet.
C. Maximum height of principal building. Forty-five (45) feet.
D. Setback and height requirements for accessory buildings.
(1) Minimum accessory building setback from interior side parcel line. Fifty (50)
feet.
(2) Minimum accessory building setback from rear parcel line. Forty (40) feet.
(3) Maximum height of accessory building. Forty-five (45) feet.
E. Maximum building coverage of the parcel. Forty percent (40%).
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 160
F. Maximum impervious coverage. Fifty percent (50%).
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions. All permitted uses in the FM District shall be exempt
from the permit requirements outlined in Section 17.2.02 and Section 17.2.03: Zoning Permit
and Certificate of Compliance, Section 17.5.13: Signs, and Section 17.5.17: Sewer and Water
Systems.
17.6.03 FR - Farm Residential District.
Subd. 1 Intent. Many areas within corporate limits are not yet urbanized, unsuitable for
development because of drainage or terrain, or used for agricultural purposes. It is not good
planning to allow unrestrained growth where it is not feasible to provide sewer and water
services, efficient police and fire protection and other centralized municipal services. The FR
District is essentially a “holding” district that includes land that should be managed through
conservation measures, land suitable for limited agriculture activities and land suitable for
urban development at some future time when the City would rezone it to a more intensive use
according to a sound growth plan. The developer would be responsible for showing good
land use relationships that would not burden the City with unreasonable municipal services
expense. However pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593,
subdivision 9, the City of Cloquet opts-out of the requirements of Minn. Stat. 462.3593,
which defines and regulates Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted as regulated herein, without
special application requirements or conditions attached:
A. Agriculture, to include farm dwellings and agricultural buildings (does not include
garages and non-agricultural outbuildings).
B. Religious Institutions, cemeteries, memorial gardens.
C. Day Care Home and Foster Family Homes as defined in Section 17.1.06 of this
Chapter.
D. Farm drainage systems, flood control and watershed structures, erosion controls.
E. Historical sites and monuments, scenic lookouts, public recreation information
centers.
F. National and State Forestry and Park Service activities and improvements.
G. Nurseries and tree farms.
H. Single family dwellings, but not including residential subdivision developments.
I. Public campgrounds, canoe trails, snowmobile trails, scenic and nature trails or
routes.
J. Public parks and recreation areas, wildlife areas, game refuge and forest preserves
owned or operated by government agencies.
K. Railroads rights-of way, but not including residential subdivision developments.
L. Seasonal dwellings, mobile and modular housing; manufactured home community
(mobile home parks), subject to all provisions of this Section and the Manufactured
home community (mobile home park) requirements stipulated in 17.6.09.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 161
M. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has determined
that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this district.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted only subject to the issuance of a
Conditional Use Permit as stipulated in Section 17.2.06. Additional uses itemized in that
section may situate in the FR District in the same manner as if they were listed hereunder:
A. Animal kennels and sales facilities. A commercial kennel shall be constructed of
impervious materials and all structures, areas and appurtenances shall be so designed
as to facilitate thorough and convenient cleaning. Commercial kennels shall be
adequately ventilated, and all doors, windows and other openings shall be screened.
Commercial kennels shall be provided with adequate water supplies and sanitary
facilities for disposal of wastes.
B. Commercial outdoor recreation areas that are similar to public recreation areas;
organized group camps.
C. Commercial radio, cellular towers or television transmitting stations and towers;
microwave relay stations.
D. Extraction of stone, gravel or mineral as regulated in Section 17.6.21: SG - Sand and
Gravel Overlay District.
E. Golf courses.
F. Public schools, or private schools having a curriculum equivalent to a public
elementary or public high school.
G. Water supply buildings, reservoirs, wells, elevated tanks, regional pipelines and
power lines, public sewage treatment facilities, and similar essential public utilities
and service structures.
H. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has determined
that the use is consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this district.
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary to a principal
use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in their own stead:
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17.5.01.
B. Animals: keeping of domestic animals or livestock.
C. Boathouses, docks and piers.
D. Fence, pursuant to Section 17.5.05.
E. Home Occupations, pursuant to Section 17.5.08.
F. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
G. Patio, deck, terrace, and similar use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02, Subd. 3.
H. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 162
I. Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02,
Subd. 4.
J. Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 17.5.10.
K. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has determined
that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this district.
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations.
A. Parcel Requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the FR - Farm Residence
District shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section
17.2.07(Variance).
(1) Minimum parcel area. Five (5) acres.
(2) Minimum parcel width. Two hundred (200) feet.
(3) Minimum parcel depth. Two hundred-fifty (250) feet.
(4) Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility
and communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements of this
section.
B. Setback Requirements for Principal Building. The minimum setback requirements for
principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Sixty-five (65)
feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line. Sixtyfive
(65) feet.
(3) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Ten (10)
feet.
(4) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Forty (40) feet.
C. Maximum Height of Principal Building. Thirty-five (35) feet.
D. Setback and Height Requirements for Accessory Buildings.
(1) Minimum accessory building setback from interior side parcel line. Ten (10)
feet.
(2) Minimum accessory building setback from rear parcel line. Fifteen (15) feet.
(3) Maximum height of accessory building. Fifty (50) feet.
E. Maximum Building Coverage of the Parcel. Forty percent (40%).
F. Maximum Impervious Coverage. Fifty percent (50%).
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 163
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions.
A. Setback from Normal High-Water Mark. No structure designed for habitations shall
be located closer than two hundred (200) feet to the normal high-water mark of any
stream, river, lake or body of water.
B. Grazing or Pasturing. Grazing or pasturing of livestock shall be controlled so as to
minimize pollution of water bodies. Current standards of the Minnesota Pollution
Control Authority shall be referred to for functional guidelines.
C. Agricultural Feed Lot Operations. Areas devoted to agricultural feed lot operations,
including pasturing of animals shall not be permitted within six hundred and sixty
(660) feet of any body of water, including intermittent streams, lakes or waterways.
D. Topography.
(1) The cutting or disturbance in other manner of natural forest ecology shall be
restricted within a reasonable area paralleling the shoreline or any recreational
trail. A length of this area may be clear cut to allow a view corridor to water.
However, any cutting shall leave sufficient cover to screen cars, dwellings and
other structures, except boathouses, piers, docks and marinas, from view from
the shoreline or trail.
(2) Natural shrubbery shall be preserved as far as practicable. Where removal is
necessary for construction of any structure or use except permitted principal
uses, shrubbery must be replaced with other vegetation which is equally
suitable in retarding surface run-off and soil erosion.
(3) In areas of unusual topography or substantial elevation above the lake, stream,
or river level, the water setback may be varied to allow a riparian owner
reasonable use and enjoyment of his property. Such determination shall be the
responsibility of the Planning Commission, following recommendation from
the City Planner/Zoning Administrator.
17.6.04 SR - Suburban Residential District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The purpose of the SR - Suburban Residential District is to provide areas, as
guided by the Comprehensive Plan, for single-family dwellings (and other compatible uses)
on lots with a minimum size of one (1) acre. Uses in the SR - Suburban Residential District
are not served by municipal water and / or sanitary sewer service. Any additional platting or
re-platting will require the tax rate to be changed to the City of Cloquet tax rate. As soon as
municipal services are extended to an area the zoning classification shall change to the R-1
Zoning District. There shall be no new SR – Suburban Residential Districts created. However
pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593, subdivision 9, the
City of Cloquet opts-out of the requirements of Minn. Stat. 462.3593, which defines and
regulates Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted as regulated herein, without
special application requirements or conditions attached:
A. Day Care Home and Foster Family Homes as defined in Section 17.1.06 of this
Chapter.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 164
B. Single family detached dwellings consisting of site-built or Class “A” Manufactured
housing.
C. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has determined
that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this district.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted only subject to the issuance of a
Conditional Use Permit as stipulated in Section 17.2.07. Additional uses itemized in that
section may situate in the SR District in the same manner as if they were listed hereunder:
A. Bed and breakfast Inns as regulated in 17.5.09.
B. Religious Institutions, cemeteries, memorial gardens.
C. Public or quasi-public parks and playgrounds.
D. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has determined
that the use is consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this district.
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary to a principal
use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in their own stead:
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17.5.01.
B. Animals: keeping of domestic animals.
C. Fence, pursuant to Section 17.5.05.
D. Home Occupations, pursuant to Section 17.5.08.
E. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
F. Patio, deck, terrace, and similar use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02, Subd. 3.
G. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13
H. Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02,
Subd. 4.
I. Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 17.5.10.
J. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has determined
that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this district.
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations.
A. Parcel Requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the SR Suburban
Residential District shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to
Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum parcel area. One (1) acre, provided that it can be shown that a
primary and secondary on-site septic system can be installed.
(2) Minimum parcel width. One hundred-fifty (150) feet.
(3) Minimum parcel depth. Two hundred (200) feet.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 165
(4) Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility
and communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements of this
section.
B. Setback Requirements for Principal Building. The minimum setback requirements for
principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line. Thirty
(30) feet.
(3) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Fifteen
(15) feet.
(4) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Forty (40) feet.
C. Maximum Height of Principal Building. Thirty-five (35).
D. Setback and Height Requirements for Accessory Buildings.
(1) Minimum accessory building setback from interior side parcel line. Ten (10)
feet.
(2) Minimum accessory building setback from rear parcel line. Ten (10) feet.
(3) Maximum height of accessory building. Fifteen (15) feet.
E. Maximum Building Coverage of the Parcel. Forty percent (40%).
F. Maximum Impervious Coverage. Fifty percent (50%).
17.6.05 R-1 - Single- Family Residence District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The R-1 Residence District is intended to identify areas for single-family
residential uses on larger parcels of land that are served by City water and sanitary sewer in
conjunction with the approved Land Use Plan for the City of Cloquet. District regulations are
designed to maintain low density residential uses and restrict incompatible development such
as apartment complexes, offices or commercial establishments. However pursuant to
authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593, subdivision 9, the City of
Cloquet opts-out of the requirements of Minn. Stat. 462.3593, which defines and regulates
Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted, as regulated herein, without
special application requirements or conditions attached:
A. Day Care Home and Foster Family Homes as defined in Section 17.1.06 of this
Chapter.
B. Single family detached dwellings consisting of site-built or Class “A”
Manufactured housing.
C. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 166
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted only subject to the issuance
of a Conditional Use Permit as stipulated in Section 17.2.06. Additional uses itemized in
that Section may situate in the R-1 District in the same manner as if they were listed
hereunder:
A. Bed and Breakfast Inns as regulated in Section 17.5.09.
B. Licensed day care centers when located in a religious institution or school.
C. Public or non-profit quasi-public accredited educational institutions.
D. Public or non-profit quasi-public libraries, museums and art exhibition centers.
E. Public or quasi-public parks and playgrounds; community / neighborhood centers.
F. Religious institutions, with associated educational, recreational staff facilities.
G. Two-family dwelling.
H. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this
district.
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary to a
principal use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in their own stead:
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17.5.01.
B. Animals: keeping of domestic animals.
C. Fence, pursuant to Section 17.5.05.
D. Home Occupations, pursuant to Section 17.5.08.
E. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
F. Patio, deck, terrace, and similar use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02, Subd. 3.
G. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13.
H. Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section
17.5.02, Subd. 4.
I. Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 17.5.10.
J. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations – Lots served by municipal sewer and water.
A. Parcel Requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the R-1 Single-Family
Residence District for those lots served by both municipal sewer and water shall
be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 167
(1) Minimum parcel area for one and two family dwellings. Fourteen
thousand- five hundred (14,500) square feet.
(2) Minimum parcel width. Seventy- five (75) feet.
(3) Minimum parcel depth. One hundred – twenty (120) feet.
(4) Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and
utility and communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel
requirements of this section.
B. Setback Requirements for Principal Building. The minimum setback requirements
for principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be
modified pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Twenty-five
(25) feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line.
Twenty-five (25) feet.
(3) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Ten
(10) percent of the lot frontage up to maximum of ten (10) feet.
(4) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
C. Maximum Height of Principal Building. Thirty-five (35).
D. Setback and Height Requirements for Accessory Buildings.
(1) Minimum accessory building setback from interior side parcel line. Five
(5) feet.
(2) Minimum accessory building setback from rear parcel line. Five (5) feet.
(3) Maximum height of accessory building. Fifteen (15) feet.
E. Maximum Building Coverage of the Parcel. Thirty-five percent (35%).
F. Maximum Impervious Coverage. Fifty percent (50%).
17.6.06 R-2 - One- and Two- Family Residence District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The R-2 Residence District is intended to provide suitable areas within the
community for the maintenance and new construction of single-family dwellings, duplexes
and double bungalows, and conditionally three and four family homes of a more compact
nature than the R-1 District, yet which retain the character and amenities of exclusive singlefamily
residential areas. However pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes,
Section 462.3593, subdivision 9, the City of Cloquet opts-out of the requirements of Minn.
Stat. 462.3593, which defines and regulates Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted, as regulated herein, without
special application requirements or conditions attached:
A. Day Care Home and Foster Family Home as defined in Section 17.1.06 of this
Chapter.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 168
B. Two family dwellings.
C. Public or non-profit quasi-public accredited educational institutions.
D. Public or non-profit quasi-public libraries, museums and art exhibition centers.
E. Public or quasi-public parks and playgrounds; community / neighborhood centers.
F. Single-family detached dwellings.
G. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted use standards.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted only subject to the issuance
of a Conditional Use Permit as stipulated in Section 17.2.06. Additional uses itemized in
that Section may situate in the R-2 District in the same manner as if they were listed
hereunder:
A. Bed and Breakfast Inns as regulated in Section 17.5.09.
B. Boarding and lodging houses, subject to a maximum of eight accommodation
units.
C. Modular or experimental single-family detached housing; double wide mobile
homes – subject to the limitations set forth in Section 17.1.06: Definitions. Three
and four unit housing; apartments, condominiums not to exceed eight (8) units per
structure – subject to a maximum density of 10 units per acre.
D. Religious institutions, with associated educational, recreational staff facilities.
E. Licensed day care centers when located in a religious institution or school.
F. Residence apartment – long term – hotels catering to non-transient guests.
G. Mortuary or Funeral Home.
H. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary to a
principal use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in their own stead:
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17.5.01.
B. Animals: keeping of domestic animals.
C. Fence, pursuant to Section 17.5.05.
D. Home Occupations, pursuant to Section 17.5.08.
E. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
F. Patio, deck, terrace, and similar use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02, Subd. 3.
G. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 169
H. Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02,
Subd. 4.
I. Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 17.5.10.
J. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations
A. Parcel Requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the R-2 One- and
Two- Family Residence District shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum parcel area for one and two family dwellings. Eight thousandseven
hundred (8,700) square feet.
(2) Minimum parcel width. Sixty (60) feet.
(3) Minimum parcel depth. One hundred (100) feet.
(4) Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and
utility and communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel
requirements of this section.
B. Setback Requirements for Principal Building. The minimum setback requirements
for principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be
modified pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Twenty-five
(25) feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line.
Twenty-five (25) feet.
(3) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Total
twenty (20) percent of lot frontage up to maximum of twenty (20) feet.
The minimum setback allowed is five (5) feet.
(4) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Twenty (20)
feet.
C. Maximum Height of Principal Building. Forty-five (45) feet.
D. Setback and Height Requirements for Accessory Buildings.
(1) Minimum accessory building setback from interior side parcel line. Five
(5) feet.
(2) Minimum accessory building setback from rear parcel line. Five (5) feet.
(3) Maximum height of accessory building. Fifteen (15) feet.
E. Maximum Building Coverage of the Parcel. Thirty percent (30%).
F. Maximum Impervious Coverage. Fifty percent (50%).
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 169
17.6.07 R-3 - Multiple- Family Residence District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The R-3 Residence District is intended to provide areas within the
community for the location of higher density multiple-family dwelling units. R-3 residence
zones will permit the most intensive residential development where the demand for housing
availability is the greatest, when such demand coordinates with the City Land Use
Development Plan. The character of the R-3 District should remain essentially residential;
however, provisions are made for conditionally permitting transitional office and service uses
which relate reasonably to multiple family structures and are pedestrian rather than
automobile oriented in function. However pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota
Statutes, Section 462.3593, subdivision 9, the City of Cloquet opts-out of the requirements of
Minn. Stat. 462.3593, which defines and regulates Temporary Family Health Care
Dwellings.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted, as permitted, as regulated
herein, without special application requirements or conditions attached:
A. Apartment complexes, townhouses or condominiums, subject to a maximum
density of 20 units per acre.
B. Boarding and lodging houses, subject to a maximum of eight accommodation
units.
C. Day Care Home and Foster Family Homes as defined in Section 17.1.06 of this
Chapter.
D. Group Care Homes as defined in Section 17.1.06 of this Chapter.
E. Mortuary or funeral home.
E. Public or non-profit quasi-public accredited educational institutions.
F. Public or non-profit quasi-public libraries, museums and art exhibition centers.
G. Public or quasi-public parks and playgrounds; community / neighborhood centers.
H. Residence apartment – hotels catering to non-transient guests.
I. Single-Family Residential Use - provided that the use was in existence prior to the
adoption of this Chapter and provided that the use has not lapsed for more than
twelve (12) consecutive months since the adoption of this Chapter.
J. Two, three and four multiple family dwellings.
K. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted only subject to the issuance
of a Conditional Use Permit as stipulated in Section 17.2.06. Additional uses itemized in
that Section may situate in the R-3 District in the same manner as if they were listed
hereunder:
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 171
A. Business and Professional offices, subject to a maximum gross floor area of 5,000
square feet, and subject further to the Special District Provisions listed below.
B. Hotels, motels and tourist homes for transient guests, when located on a lot with
frontage on a street officially designated as an arterial or collector street in the
City Land Use Plan. No food, liquor or entertainment licenses shall be issued in
conjunction with such operation.
C. Neighborhood medical / dental clinics and offices, subject to a maximum gross
floor area of 5,000 square feet.
D. Mortuary or funeral home.
E. Offices and quasi-public facilities of philanthropic or charitable institutions.
F. Licensed day care centers when located within a religious institution or school.
G. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this
district.
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary to a principal
use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in their own stead:
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17.5.01.
B. Animals: keeping of domestic animals.
C. Fence, pursuant to Section 17.5.05.
D. Home Occupations, pursuant to Section 17.5.08.
E. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
F. Patio, deck, terrace, and similar use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02, Subd. 3.
G. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13.
H. Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02,
Subd. 4.
I. Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 17.5.10.
J. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations
A. Parcel Requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the R-3 Multiple
Family District shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section
17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum parcel area for up to three dwelling units. Six thousand (6,000)
square feet.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 172
(2) Minimum parcel width. Sixty (60) feet.
(3) Minimum parcel depth. One hundred (100) feet.
(4) Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and
utility and communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel
requirements of this section.
B. Setback Requirements for Principal Building. The minimum setback requirements
for principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be
modified pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Twenty-five
(25) feet plus one (1) foot additional for each two (2) feet of building
height over forty (40) feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line.
Twenty-five (25) feet plus one (1) foot additional for each two (2) feet of
building height over forty (40) feet.
(3) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Each
side: twelve (12) percent of lot frontage plus one (1) foot additional for
each two (2) feet of building height over forty (40) feet up to maximum of
thirty (30) feet.
(4) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Twenty (20)
feet.
C. Maximum Height of Principal Building. Sixty (60) feet.
D. Setback and Height Requirements for Accessory Buildings.
1. Minimum accessory building setback from interior side parcel line. Five
(5) feet.
2. Minimum accessory building setback from rear parcel line. Five (5) feet.
3. Maximum height of accessory building. Fifteen (15) feet.
E. Maximum Building Coverage of the Parcel. Building height forty (40) feet or
less: thirty percent (30%); Building height over forty (40) feet: twenty-five
percent (25%).
F. Maximum Impervious Coverage. Seventy percent (70%).
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions. Business and Professional Offices may be
permitted subject to the following conditions:
A. Each application for a business or professional office operation shall be
individually evaluated in regard to customer or client traffic: It is desirable to
have minimal traffic generated by the operation in deference to the residential
character of the R-3 District. Any application which would appear to generate
unreasonable client patronage on the premises may be disapproved.
“Unreasonable” may be determined in relation to usual pedestrian and vehicle
traffic volumes without such use. This is especially important on minor or local
streets.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 173
B. All equipment, including vehicles, associated with such operation shall be placed
in acceptable enclosed storage areas.
C. All office functions shall be subject to approved hours of operation, such hours to
be determined and agreed upon at time of conditional permit issuance.
17.6.08 MHC - Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home Park) District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The intent of the MHC Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home
Park) District is to preserve and provide safe and attractive areas in Cloquet for manufactured
homes (mobile homes) in a manufactured home community (mobile home park) setting.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted herein, without special
application requirements or conditions attached:
A. Dwelling: single-family detached for use by the owner or caretaker of the
associated manufactured home community.
B. Manufactured home, mobile home, and manufactured home community pursuant
to this Section.
C. Public park.
D. Common facilities for use by residents and guests of a manufactured home
community such as a laundromat, indoor and outdoor recreation facilities, and a
storm shelter.
E. Parking lot as a principal use, provided that it provides parking for the exclusive
use of the residents of the mobile home community and their guests.
F. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are allowed in the MHC
Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home Park) District subject to the issuance of a
Conditional Use Permit as specified in Section 17.2.06.
A. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this
district.
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses. The following are allowed as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the MHC Manufactured Home Community District, pursuant to all
applicable specific use standards:
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17.5.01.
B. Animals: keeping of domestic animals.
C. Fence, pursuant to Section 17.5.05.
D. Home occupation, as regulated in Section 17.5.08.
E. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 174
F. Patio, deck, terrace, and similar use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02, Subd. 3.
G. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13.
H. Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02,
Subd. 4.
I. Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 17.5.10.
J. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations
A. Required Area. A manufactured home community shall have a minimum area of
ten (10) acres.
B. Lot Requirements for Manufactured Homes.
(1) Minimum lot width. Fifty (50) feet.
(2) Minimum lot length. One hundred (100) feet.
C. Required Setbacks at the Periphery of a Manufactured Home Community. All
principal and accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25)
feet from parcel or lot lines at the periphery of a manufactured home community.
D. Required Setbacks Internal to the Manufactured Home Community.
(1) Minimum principal and accessory building setback from all internal street
right-of-ways. Ten (10) feet.
(2) Minimum distance between all principal buildings. Twenty (20) feet.
(3) Minimum distance between an accessory building and a principal
building. Five (5) feet.
(4) Minimum accessory building setback from an interior parcel line. Five (5)
feet.
E. Building Height Requirements. No principal or accessory building shall exceed
one (1) story or twenty-five (25) feet in height, as measured pursuant to Section
17.1.05: Definitions: Height of Building.
F. Maximum Accessory Building Coverage of a Manufactured Home Lot.
(1) Manufactured home. Thirty-five percent (35%).
(2) Manufactured home and accessory buildings combined. Fifty percent
(50%).
G. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage. Seventy percent (70%).
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions
A. Manufactured Home Community Created After the Adoption of this Chapter. A
manufactured home community created after the adoption of this Chapter (or
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 175
addition of new lots to an existing manufactured home community) shall be
approved through the planned unit development (PUD) process, pursuant to
Section 17.2.09: Creation of a PUD.
17.6.09 MRC - Mixed Residential / Commercial District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The MRC Mixed Residential / Commercial District is intended to
integrate permitted uses within the RC Zoning District provided they have frontage along
HWY 33 with a mixture of residential uses. It is intended to allow for additional
residential housing with the expectation that higher density residential would be closer to
the commercial uses and transition to lower density residential the further the distance
from commercial development. This can be achieved by allowing a sensitive mixture and
integration of new residential uses in the district, including single and two-family
dwellings, single-family attached dwellings, and multi-family dwellings. Proposed
residential development shall comply with the base zoning district it resembles the most.
For example, single-family residential development shall apply to the R1 Zoning District,
whereas a higher density residential development shall comply with the R3 Zoning
District. This district should encourage development in the district to occur through the
planned unit development (PUD) process at a neighborhood or block scale that allows for
pedestrian connection to the surrounding businesses in the area. If the City of Cloquet has
adopted a plan for an area in the MRC District, the application of this Chapter is intended
to be consistent with the vision, goals, objectives and policies of that plan.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted herein, without special
application requirements or conditions attached:
A. Automobile and truck dealers, new or used, including lots and shops provided it
has frontage along HWY 33.
B. Building materials retail outlets, provided it has frontage along HWY 33.
C. Commercial recreation and entertainment centers, except game rooms as defined
in Section 17.1.06. provided it has frontage along HWY 33.
D. Dwelling: single-family detached.
E. Dwelling: two-family or duplex.
F. Dwelling: single-family attached, three to six units per building.
G. Dwelling: multi-family, three (3) or more dwelling units.
H. Educational institutions, banks provided it has frontage along HWY 33.
I. General merchandise retail centers provided it has frontage along HWY 33.
J. Marine and boat sales provided it has frontage along HWY 33.
K. Motels provided it has frontage along HWY 33.
L. Nurseries, landscape and garden stores provided it has frontage along HWY 33.
M. Office parks or complexes provided it has frontage along HWY 33.
N. Open space: public or private.
O. Public Parks.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 176
P. Restaurants, including Drive-in or Drive-up facilities provided it has frontage
along HWY 33.
Q. Retail sales outlets, discount stores, off sale liquor establishments provided it has
frontage along HWY 33.
R. Shopping centers, malls or plazas provided it has frontage along HWY 33.
S. Dry cleaning and laundry drop off and pick up, but excluding processing.
T. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are allowed in the MRC
Mixed Residential / Commercial District subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use
Permit as specified in Section 17.2.06:
A. Car wash.
B. Clinic.
C. Club or association.
D. Day care center: commercial.
E. Filling station with or without a convenience store.
F. Funeral home.
G. Laundromat.
H. Nursing home.
I. Parking lot as a principal use.
J. Personal service.
K. Recreation facility: commercial indoor or outdoor.
L. Religious institution.
M. School: primary or secondary, or specialty or personal instruction.
N. Theater.
O. Temporary construction building.
P. Temporary real estate sales office.
Q. Vehicle repair and service.
R. Veterinary clinic: small animals.
S. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this
district.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 177
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses. The following are allowed as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the MRC Mixed Residential / Commercial District, pursuant to all
applicable specific use standards:
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17.5.01.
B. Animals: keeping of domestic animals.
C. Fence, pursuant to Section 17.5.05.
D. Home Occupations, pursuant to Section 17.5.08.
E. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
F. Patio, deck, terrace, and similar use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02, Subd. 3.
G. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13.
H. Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section
17.5.02, Subd. 4.
I. Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 17.5.10.
J. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations.
A. Basic dimensional requirements. Basic dimensional requirements including parcel
area and width requirements, principal building setback requirements, allowable
height requirements, maximum building coverage requirements, maximum
impervious coverage, and other pertinent dimensional requirements shall be
identical to the dimensional requirements of the zoning district in this Chapter that
best resembles the use of the said parcel, as determined by the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City. For example,
the dimensional requirements for a single-family detached dwelling shall meet the
dimensional requirements for a single-family detached dwelling in the R-1 Single
Family Residential District; the dimensional requirements for a high density
residential use shall meet the dimensional requirements for a high density
residential use in the R-3 High Density Residential District; and the dimensional
requirements for a commercial uses shall meet the dimensional requirements for a
commercial use in the NC Neighborhood Convenience District.
B. Buffer requirements between different uses. Wherever a more intense use (or
expansion of a more intense existing use) in the MRC Mixed Residential /
Commercial District abuts a less intense existing use (as determined by the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City), the more
intense use shall provide a landscaped buffer pursuant to Section 17.5.04:
Landscaping Requirements and Section 17.5.03: Screening.
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions.
A. General Guidelines for Commercial Uses.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 178
(1) The City Council of the City of Cloquet recognizes that a variety of
commercial uses exist in the MRC District. Guidelines for continuation
and / or expansion of commercial uses in the district area as follows:
a. Allow existing commercial uses to continue (and potentially
expand) in a manner that is compatible with adjacent residential
uses.
b. In general, commercial uses should not replace existing residential
uses, but in unique situations, the City Council may find that it is
in the best interest of the overall community to allow this to occur,
especially along arterial roads where the dominant existing land
use relates to commercial use.
c. Commercial uses should generally serve the local and
neighborhood population. Large-scale commercial uses should be
directed to the RC District.
d. Where feasible, commercial uses should be integrated with each
other to allow for shared parking and enhanced vehicular and
pedestrian access.
e. In general, commercial uses should be limited to arterial and
collector streets.
f. The Highway 33 Design Standards will apply if the site is located
within the corridor.
B. General Criteria and Potential Conditions of Approval.
(1) Decision criteria. Required approvals associated with commercial uses in
the MRC District shall meet the intent of this district and shall be
consistent with all of the Conditional Use Requirements specified in
Section 17.2.06. Approval or denial of a conditional use permit shall place
special emphasis on how the use addresses neighborhood compatibility
and protection issues.
(2) Possible conditions of approval. The City Council may attach appropriate
conditions to any approvals associated with a conditional use in the
district. Conditions may include, but are not limited to the following:
a. Limited hours of operation;
b. Limited number, types, and hours of deliveries;
c. Limited or no outdoor storage;
d. Limited or no drive through window;
e. Special building and site design standards that ensure compatibility
with the neighborhood; and / or
f. Increased screening and / or buffers.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 179
17.6.10 NC - Neighborhood Commercial District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The NC Neighborhood Commercial District is intended to identify
suitable compact areas within the City for the maintenance and development of
commercial service nodes which offer convenience services and retail goods to adjacent
residential neighborhoods. These commercial clusters may have limited operations which
serve patrons in automobiles, subject to issuance of a Conditional Use Permit, but are
primarily pedestrian oriented for the convenience of local residents.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted herein, without special
application requirements or conditions attached:
A. Eating and Drinking Places. Soda fountains, ice cream parlors, tea rooms,
restaurant and cafes, but not those providing live entertainment.
B. Offices. Business and professional offices.
C. Residential. Dwelling units which are a part of the retail or service structure.
D. Retail and Service. Retail business or service establishment supplying
commodities or performing services primarily for residents of the surrounding
neighborhood on a day to day basis, such as grocery stores, pharmacies,
household light appliance repair, hardware stores, delicatessens, specialty and
handicraft shops, barber and beauty parlors, clothes cleaning or repair and laundry
pick-up stations.
E. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent of permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are allowed in the NCNeighborhood
Commercial District subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit as
specified in Section 17.2.06 and all applicable specific use standards:
A. Banks. Bank, Savings and Loan Associations, finance companies, including those
with drive-up facilities.
B. Entertainment. Cultural, recreational and amusement operations, neighborhood
pubs and hobby centers, except game rooms as defined in Section 17.1.06 of this
Chapter.
C. Mortuaries. Mortuaries or funeral homes.
D. Self-Service Establishments. Self-service laundries, dry cleaners, car washes and
fast food or drive-in restaurants.
E. Service Station. Automotive service station excluding major auto repair
operations and exclusive tire repair, retread or sales shops.
F. Studios. Art, television, radio, music and dance studios and / or conservatories.
G. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 180
determined that the use is consistent with the intent of permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary to a
principal use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in their own stead:
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17.5.01.
B. Fence, pursuant to Section 17.5.05.
C. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
D. Patio, deck, terrace, and similar use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02, Subd. 3.
E. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13.
F. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations.
A. Parcel Requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the NC Neighborhood
Commercial District shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to
Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum parcel area. Fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet.
(2) Minimum parcel width. One hundred (100) feet.
(3) Minimum parcel depth. One hundred (100) feet.
(4) Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and
utility and communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel
requirements of this section.
B. Setback Requirements for Principal Building. The minimum setback requirements
for principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be
modified pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Twenty-five
(25) feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line.
Twenty-five (25) feet.
(3) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Ten
(10) feet.
(4) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Fifteen (15)
feet.
C. Maximum Height of Principal Building. Thirty-five (35) feet, as measured
pursuant to Section 17.1.06: Definitions: Height of Building.
D. Setback and Height Requirements for Accessory Buildings.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 181
(1) Minimum accessory building setback from interior side parcel line. Five
(5) feet.
(2) Minimum accessory building setback from rear parcel line. Five (5) feet.
(3) Maximum height of accessory building. Fifteen (15) feet.
E. Maximum Building Coverage of the Parcel. Fifty percent (50%).
F. Maximum Impervious Coverage. Seventy percent (70%).
G. Setback from “R” District Boundary. Fifteen (15) feet.
H. Buffer Requirements Between Different Uses. Wherever a more intense proposed
use (or expansion of a more intense existing use) in the NC Neighborhood
Commercial District abuts a less intense existing use, the more intense use shall
provide a landscaped buffer pursuant to Section 17.5.04: Landscaping
Requirements and Section 17.5.03: Screening.
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions.
A. Size Restricted. Each business establishment is restricted to a maximum of 3,000
square feet in gross floor area.
B. Storage – Displays. All materials, supplies, merchandise or other similar matter
not on display for direct sale, rental or lease to the ultimate consumer or user shall
be stored within a completely enclosed building within the NC District, or within
the confines of a one-hundred (100) percent opaque wall or fence not less than
five (5) feet high. Merchandise which is offered for sale as described heretofore
may be temporarily displayed beyond the confines of a building in the NC
District, but the area occupied by such outdoor display shall not constitute a
greater number of square feet than five (5) percent of the gross main floor area of
the building housing the principal use, unless such merchandise is a type
customarily displayed outdoors such as garden supplies.
C. Performance Standards. All business operations and activities including, but not
limited to, the production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of
materials, goods, or products shall conform to the performance standards
established in Section 17.4.02 of this Chapter.
17.6.11 RC - Regional Commercial District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The RC Regional Commercial District is intended to establish suitable
areas within the City for the location and / or expansion of business operations providing
retail goods and services to the motoring public. Uses would be primarily highway
oriented, provide compact and convenient shopping areas and a means of safe access and
egress to abutting roads and highways.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted as regulated herein, without
special application requirements or conditions attached, except that where any use listed
herein is proposed to be developed abutting an urban primary arterial street as designated
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 182
on the approved City thoroughfares plan, and no frontage or service road is provided,
such use shall only be permitted by conditional use permit.:
A. Automobile and truck dealers, new or used, including lots and shops.
B. Building materials retail outlets.
C. Commercial recreation and entertainment centers, except game rooms as defined
in Section 17.1.06.
D. Drive-in theaters.
E. Educational institutions, banks.
F. General merchandise retail centers.
G. Marine and boat sales.
H. Motels.
I. Medical clinic, dental office, animal hospital etc.
J. Nurseries, landscape and garden stores.
K. Office parks or complexes.
L. Restaurants, including Drive-in or Drive-up facilities.
M. Retail sales outlets, discount stores, off sale liquor establishments.
N. Shopping centers, malls or plazas.
O. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent of permitted uses in this
district.
P. Brew Pub, Brewery Taproom, Cocktail Room and Micro-Distillery.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted only subject to the issuance
of a Conditional Use Permit as stipulated in Section 17.2.06. Additional uses itemized in
that Section may situate in the RC District in the same manner as if they were listed
hereunder:
A. Game rooms as defined in Section 17.1.06.
B. Light manufacturing and warehousing uses as listed in Section 17.6.15, LI-Light
Industry District, subject to the regulations of that District.
C. Dwelling: multifamily, three (3) or more units per building not to exceed 20 units
per acre.
D. Humane Societies and commercial kennels. A humane society or commercial
kennel shall be constructed of impervious materials and all structures, areas and
appurtenances shall be so designed as to facilitate thorough and convenient
cleaning. Commercial kennels shall be adequately ventilated, and all doors,
windows and other openings shall be screened. Commercial kennels shall be
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 183
provided with adequate water supplies and sanitary facilities for disposal of
wastes.
E. Buildings over seventy thousand (70,000) square feet within the Highway 33
corridor as described in Section 17.5.15.
F. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent of permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary to a
principal use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in their own stead:
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17.5.01.
B. Fence, pursuant to Section 17.5.05.
C. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
D. Patio, deck, terrace, and similar use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02, Subd. 3.
E. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13.
F. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations.
A. Parcel Requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the RC Regional
Commercial District shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to
Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum parcel area. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
(2) Minimum parcel width. One hundred twenty (120) feet.
(3) Minimum parcel depth. One hundred twenty (120) feet.
(4) Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and
utility and communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel
requirements of this section.
B. Setback Requirements for Principal Building. The minimum setback requirements
for principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be
modified pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance. Also see the Highway 33 Design
Standards Section 17.5.15.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Primary
arterials: one hundred (100) feet; Other streets: Thirty-five (35) feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line.
Primary arterials: one hundred (100) feet; Other streets: Thirty-five (35)
feet.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 184
(3) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Twenty
(20) feet.
(4) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
C. Maximum Height of Principal Building. Sixty (60) feet, as measured pursuant to
Section 17.1.06: Definitions: Height of Building.
D. Setback and Height Requirements for Accessory Buildings.
(1) Minimum accessory building setback from interior side parcel line.
Twenty (20) feet.
(2) Minimum accessory building setback from rear parcel line. Fifteen (15)
feet.
(3) Maximum height of accessory building. Fifteen (15) feet.
E. Maximum Building Coverage of the Parcel. Sixty percent (60%).
F. Maximum Impervious Coverage. Seventy percent (70%).
G. Buffer Requirements Between Different Uses. Wherever a more intense proposed
use (or expansion of a more intense existing use) in the RC District abuts a less
intense existing use, the more intense use shall provide a landscaped buffer
pursuant to Section 17.5.04: Landscaping Requirements and Section 17.5.03:
Screening.
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions.
A. Traffic and Circulation. All commercial buildings or structures and their
accessory uses shall be accessible to and from nearby public streets and sidewalks
by driveways and walkways surfaced with a hard, all-weather, durable, dust-free
material and properly drained.
B. Vehicular traffic generated by a commercial use shall be channeled and controlled
in a manner that will avoid congestion on the public streets, traffic hazards, and
excessive traffic through residential areas, particularly truck traffic. The adequacy
of any proposed traffic circulation system to accomplish these objectives shall be
determined by the Planning Commission who may require such additional
measures for traffic control as they may deem necessary, including but not limited
to the following: Directional signalization, channelization, standby turn lanes,
illumination, and storage area and distribution facilities within the commercial
site to prevent back-up of vehicles on public streets.
C. No area used by motor vehicles other than driveways serving as ingress and
egress to the commercial site shall be located within the public street right-ofway.
D. Wherever possible, the placement of structures in the RC District shall be such
that a service or frontage road may be constructed yet retain sufficient lot area for
parking and internal vehicular circulation.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 185
17.6.12 HC - Historic Commercial District.
Subd. 1 Purpose. The HC Historic Commercial District is intended to promote an area
for the grouping of general retail sales establishments, and similar uses that correspond to
the historic theme of the District. Said historic theme shall be as established by the
development or redevelopment plan for the area located within the District boundaries.
All uses and development within said District shall be in accordance with the general
concepts and / or themes established by said plan in all aspects of building design,
appearance and / or use. See Section 17.5.14 Design Standards for the West End and
Downtown Business Districts.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted as regulated herein, without
special application requirements or conditions attached:
Trade and Services: Any retail store, personal service or business service establishment
subject to all applicable regulations and such permits and licenses as may be required by
law and further provided that the use is not objectionable due to noise, fumes, smoke,
odor, or vibration. Such uses shall include the following and other similar uses that are
compatible with the redevelopment plan for said District, as stipulated in Subd. 1 above,
or as determined to be similar by the Planning Commission;
A. Commercial studios.
B. Cultural, entertainment and recreational uses and establishments, except game
rooms as defined in Section 17.1.06 of this Chapter.
C. Eating and drinking places, including taverns, club and off sale liquor
establishments.
D. General business offices.
E. General merchandising, apparel and accessories establishments.
F. Hotels and Tourist Homes (ie. Bed & Breakfast).
G. Religious institutions.
H. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent of permitted uses in this
district.
I. Brew Pub, Brewery Taproom, Cocktail Room and Micro-Distillery.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted in the HC District, subject
to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit as stipulated in Section 17.2.06 of this
Chapter. Additional uses itemized in that section may situate in the HC District in the
same manner as if they were listed hereunder.
A. Residential Uses: Apartments, Multiple-family structures existing independently
or incorporated with general commercial uses on floors other than the ground
floor provided the density does not exceed 20 units per acre.
B. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 186
determined that the use is consistent with the intent of conditional uses in this
district.
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary to a
principal use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in their own stead:
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17.5.01.
B. Fence, pursuant to Section 17.5.05.
C. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
D. Patio, deck, terrace, and similar use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02, Subd. 3.
E. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13.
F. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations.
A. Parcel Requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the HC Historic
Commercial District shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to
Section 17.2.07: Variance. See also Section 17.5.14: Design Standards for the
West End and Downtown Business Districts.
(1) Minimum parcel area. Three thousand (3,000) square feet.
(2) Minimum parcel width. Twenty-five (25) feet.
(3) Minimum parcel depth. Seventy-five (75) feet.
(4) Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and
utility and communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel
requirements of this section.
B. Setback Requirements for Principal Building. The minimum setback requirements
for principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be
modified pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Bulk and Yard Setbacks.
a. FAR (Floor Area Ratio) – 2.0.
Note: Side and rear yards are not required; building bulk is
governed by FAR. Side and rear yard abutting a residential
property shall provide a landscape buffer of at least 10’ in width.
b. Detached Accessory Structure from principal structure, in feet –
5.0.
Note: Shall be set no closer to a street right-of-way (ROW) line
than the principal building on the same lot therewith.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 187
(2) All buildings and uses shall conform to the Performance Standards
established in Section 17.4.02 and the Architectural Standards in Section
17.5.14 Subd. 6. of this Chapter.
C. Maximum Height of Principal Building. Forty (40) feet.
D. Setback and Height Requirements for Accessory Buildings.
(1) Maximum Height of Accessory Building. Fifteen (15) feet.
E. Maximum Building Coverage of the Parcel. One hundred (100) percent.
F. Maximum Impervious Coverage. One hundred (100) percent.
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions.
A. Building Exteriors and Store Fronts. All buildings shall have an exterior and / or
store front design that coincides with the historic theme of the District in which
located.
B. Parking. The parking provisions of this Chapter are modified as follows to carry
out the intent of the HC District. Existing Buildings are exempt from off street
parking requirements: Also see Section 17.53.14 Subd. 5.
C. Screening and Landscaping Requirements. See Section 17.5.03, 17.5.04 and
17.5.14 Subd. 7.
D. Storage – Displays. See Section 17.5.14, Subd. 7.
E. Performance Standards. All business operations and activities including but not
limited to, the production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of
materials, goods, or products shall conform to the performance standards set forth
in Section 17.4.02 of this Chapter.
17.6.13 CC - City Center District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The intent of the CC City Center District is to encourage and foster the
further development and enhancement of the downtown (city center) area. The district
requirements recognize the unique characteristics of the city center area as the heart of
the city. The city center provides a mix of traditional downtown uses that are consistent
with the vision for the area as expressed in the Comprehensive Plan, including retail,
entertainment, offices, services, government facilities, and a mixture of residential uses.
However, the district also includes a variety of industrial uses, some of which may not be
compatible with the City’s vision for the district. The general intent of the district is to
preserve and enhance those uses that are compatible with the vision of the area and to
encourage uses that are not compatible with the vision for the city center to relocate to
appropriate districts in the city. See Section 17.5.14 Design Standards for the West End
and Downtown Business Districts.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted herein, without special
application requirements or conditions attached:
A. Bank or financial institutions.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 188
B. Clinic.
C. Club or association.
D. Dwelling, combined with a permitted commercial or conditional use.
E. Eating and Drinking Places.
F. Government or community service use.
G. Office.
H. Open space: public or private.
I. Personal service.
J. Public park.
K. Religious institution.
L. Single-Family Residential Use - provided that the use was in existence prior to the
adoption of this Chapter.
M. Retail: convenience or general.
N. Seasonal market.
O. Theater.
P. Hotels and Tourist Homes (ie. Bed and Breakfast, pursuant to Section 17.5.09.)
Q. Veterinary clinic: small animal, except that no kennels nor outdoor runs shall be
allowed.
R. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent of permitted uses in this
district.
S. Sexually Oriented Businesses subject to the following:
(1) No sexually oriented business shall be located closer than five hundred (500)
feet from any other sexually oriented business. Measurements shall be made
in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest point of the actual business premises of the sexually oriented business
to the nearest point of the actual business of any other sexually oriented
business.
(2) No sexually oriented business shall be located closer than five hundred (500)
feet from any place of worship, school, public park, state licensed family day
care home, state licensed group family day care home, public library, or state
licensed child care center. Measurements shall be made in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point of
the actual premises used as a place of worship, school, park, or state licensed
family day care home, state licensed group family day care home, or state
licensed child care center.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 189
(3) No sexually oriented business shall be located closer than five hundred (500)
feet from any of the following residential use districts. Measurements shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures of objects,
from the nearest point of the actual business premises of the sexually oriented
business to the nearest boundary of the residential use district:
a. R-1, Single-Family Residence District;
b. R-2 One- and Two-Family Residence District; and
c. R-3, Multiple-Family Residence District.
(4) A sexually oriented business must also comply with existing licensing
requirements of the City of Cloquet.
(5) The operation or maintenance of more than one (1) of the following uses in
the same building or structure shall be prohibited:
Adult Body Painting Studio; Adult Book Store; Adult Car Wash; Adult
Companionship Establishment; Adult Entertainment Facility; Adult Modeling
Studio; Adult Oriented Cabaret; Adult Sauna; Adult Motion Picture Theater;
and, Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater.
(6) Sign Restrictions. In order to protect children from exposure to lurid signs
and materials and in order to preserve the value of property surrounding
sexually oriented businesses, the following sign regulations shall apply to all
sexually oriented businesses in the City in lieu of the provisions of Section
17.5.13 of the Cloquet Zoning Ordinance:
a. All signs shall be flat wall signs. No signs shall be freestanding,
located on the roof, or contain any flashing lights, moving elements, or
electronically or mechanically changing messages. No sign shall
contain any message or image which identifies specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein.
b. The amount of allowable sign area shall be one (1) square foot of sign
area per foot of lot frontage on a street, not to exceed eighty (80)
square feet.
c. No merchandise, photos, or pictures of the products or entertainment
on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any area where
they can be viewed from the sidewalk or public right-of-way adjoining
the building or structure in which the sexually oriented business is
located.
d. No signs shall be placed in any window. A one (1) square foot sign
may be placed on the door to state hours of operation and admittance
to adults only.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 190
T. Brew Pub, Brewery Taproom, Cocktail Room and Micro-Distillery.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses in the CC City Center
District subject to the special requirements of this section and to the issuance of a
Conditional Use Permit as specified in Section 17.2.6 and pursuant to all applicable
specific use standards:
A. Any industrial use (as determined) by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or
other Authorized Agent of the City) that was in existence on the subject parcel on
the date of adoption of this Chapter (and was a conforming use at that time) shall
be a conditional use on the subject parcel provided that the use has not lapsed for
more than twelve (12) consecutive months since the date of adoption of this
Chapter.
B. Car wash
C. Currency exchange, payday loan establishment, or title load agency.
D. Dwelling: multi-family, three (3) or more units per building not to exceed 20 units
per acre.
E. Parking lot as a principal use, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
F. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent of conditional uses in this
district.
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary to a
principal use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in their own stead:
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17 5.01.
B. Fence, pursuant to Section 17.5.05.
C. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
D. Patio, deck, terrace, and similar use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02, Subd. 3.
E. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13.
F. Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section
17.5.02, Subd. 4.
G. Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 17.5.10.
H. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations.
A. Minimum Parcel Area. Three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 191
B. Minimum Parcel Width. Twenty-five (25) feet.
C. Setback Requirements of a Principal Building from all Parcel Lines. None.
D. Setback from “R” District Boundary. Ten (10) feet.
E. Maximum Height of Principal Building. Forty-five (45) feet, except that the City
may allow the principal building to exceed forty-five (45) feet with the approval
of a Conditional Use Permit.
F. Setback and Height Requirements for Accessory Buildings.
(1) Minimum accessory building setback from interior side parcel line. Two
and one-half (2 ½) feet. Must meet Building Code.
(2) Minimum accessory building setback from rear parcel line. Two and onehalf
(2 ½) feet. Must meet Building Code.
(3) Maximum height of accessory building. Cannot be taller than the principal
building.
G. Buffer Requirements Between Different Uses. Wherever a more intense proposed
use (or expansion of a more intense use) in the CC City Center District abuts a
less intense existing use, the more intense use shall provide a landscaped buffer
pursuant to Section 17.5.04: Landscaping Requirements and Section 17.5.03:
Screening.
Subd. 6 Special District Provisions.
A. General Guidelines for Industrial Uses in the District. The City Council of the
City of Cloquet recognizes that a variety of industrial uses exists in the CC
District. Guidelines for continuation and / or expansion of industrial uses in the
district are as follows:
(1) Existing industrial uses that are not compatible with the vision of the area
as expressed in the City’s Comprehensive Plan (for example, a heavy
manufacturing use) should be encouraged to relocate to an appropriate
industrial district in the city. However, under unique conditions, expansion
or improvements to existing industrial uses may be considered pursuant to
the Conditional Use Permit procedures pursuant to Section 17.2.10.
(2) Existing industrial uses that are compatible with the city center area (for
example, a relatively clean and quiet light manufacturing use) may be
allowed to continue (and possibly expand) if the use does not adversely
affect the neighborhood and is consistent with the vision of the City as
expressed in the Comprehensive Plan).
(3) New industrial uses in the district are not anticipated. However, in unique
situations the City Council may find that it is in the best interest of the city
center and the overall community to allow the replacement of existing,
more intense industrial uses with appropriate light manufacturing, research
and development, or similar industrial uses that have less of an adverse
impact on the surrounding area.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 192
(4) In general, industrial uses should be limited to arterial or collector streets,
or to areas where there is a distinct cluster of appropriate industrial uses.
B. Parking. The parking provisions of this Chapter are modified as follows to carry
out the intent of the CC District. Existing buildings are exempt from off street
parking requirements: Also see Section 17.5.14 Subd. 5.
(1) Location of Parking on the Lot. Off-street parking shall not be located
between building façade and the front lot line or street right-of-way. Nor
shall off-street parking be located less than five (5) feet from any property
line except as provided through access drives or by shared or joint parking
agreements as permitted in this Chapter.
(2) Required Screening. Any off-street parking space or parking lot that abuts
a street right-of-way shall be buffered from the right-of-way by a
landscaped area no less than five (5) feet wide in which is located in a
continuous row of shrubs no less than three and one half (3 ½) feet high,
or by a wall no less than four (4) feet and no more than six (6) feet high, in
addition to any required shade trees.
(3) Exception and Alternatives to Off-Street Parking Requirements. The City
Council may allow exceptions and alternatives to the off-street parking
requirements as follows:
a. Parking Reduction. The City Council may allow a reduction in the
number of required parking stalls provided the property owner
enters into a development contract and the following criteria are
met:
1. Evidence is provided that demonstrates the proposed use
will have a peak parking demand less than the required
parking of this Chapter. Factors to be considered when
reviewing the proposed parking demand shall include, but
not limited to the following:
• Size of building.
• Type and use.
• Number of employees.
• Projected volume and turnover of traffic.
• Projected frequency and volume of delivery or
service vehicles.
• Number of company owned vehicles.
• Storage of vehicles on site.
2. The amount of reduced parking shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the amount of parking required by the
Chapter. However, parking spaces can be provided off-site
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 193
pursuant to the joint and off-site parking provisions of this
Chapter as described below.
3. The property owner can demonstrate that the site has
sufficient area to accommodate the parking required by the
Chapter if the parking demand exceeds on-site supply. The
property owner shall enter into a development contract with
the City guaranteeing that additional parking shall be
constructed in accordance with this Chapter if the actual
site parking demand exceeds on-site supply.
b. Joint Parking Facilities. The City Council may approve a
Conditional Use Permit for one or more uses to provide the
required off-street parking facilities by joint use of one or more
sites where the total number of spaces provided are less than the
sum of the total required for each business should they provide
them separately. Conditions to be considered when reviewing the
proposed joint parking facilities shall include, but not be limited to
the following:
1. The building or use for which the application is being made
to utilize the off-street parking facilities provided by
another building or use shall be located within three
hundred (300) feet of such parking facilities.
2. The application shall show that there is no substantial
conflict in the principal operating hours of the various
buildings or uses for which the joint parking is proposed.
3. A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties
involved in joint use of parking facilities, duly approved as
to form and manner of execution by the City Attorney,
shall be filed with the City Clerk and recorded with the
Carlton County Recorder.
c. Off-site Parking. The City Council may approve a conditional use
permit for off-site parking. Conditions for approving off-site
parking shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Off-site parking shall be developed and maintained in
compliance with all requirements and standards of this
Chapter.
2. Off-site parking for non-residential uses shall not be
located more than three hundred (300) feet from the main
public entrance of the principal use being served.
3. Any use which depends on off-site parking to meet the
requirements of the Chapter shall maintain ownership and
parking utilization of the off-site location until such time as
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 194
on-site parking is provided or a site located closer to the
principal use is acquired and developed for parking.
4. Compliance with off-street parking requirements provided
through leased off-street parking may be approved by the
City Council, subject to the following conditions:
• The lease shall specify the total number and
location of parking spaces under contract and this
number, when added to any on-site parking
provided, must be equal to the total number of
parking spaces required.
• The lease requirement shall legally bind all parties
to the lease and provide for amendment or
cancellation only upon written approval from the
City.
C. Landscaping. The landscaping provisions of this Chapter are modified as follows
to carry out the intent of the CC City Center District: Also see Section 17.5.14
Subd. 7.
(1) It is the intent of the CC District to provide an attractive downtown area
that includes landscaping. However, it is recognized that due to the
compact nature of the downtown area, many of the standard provisions for
landscaping described elsewhere in this Chapter cannot be reasonably
applied to this District. Therefore, the landscaping provisions of this
Chapter are modified as follows to carryout the intent of this District.
(2) The applicant shall submit to the City a landscape plan for all site work
requiring a building permit. The plan shall identify the location and size of
both existing vegetation to be retained and proposed new vegetation,
typical planting materials, the phasing of landscape installation, and
planting methods. There shall be no minimum amount of green,
landscaped area required. Nor shall there be a minimum amount of trees
required. However, the City shall approve the landscape plan before a
building permit can be issued.
(3) Parking lots larger than nineteen (19) spaces and / or six thousand (6,000)
square feet in size shall be provided with at least one shade tree for every
eight (8) parking spaces or fraction thereof, located in internal planting
islands and perimeter buffer strip(s) along the street edge(s) of the lot.
D. Conditional Use Permit for Adjustment to Standards. In cases where
extraordinary limitations are imposed on a lot due to topography, unusual lot
shape, placement of existing structures, and similar conditions, adjustments in the
standard regulations will be made by issuance of a conditional use permit.
17.6.14 LI - Light Industry District.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 195
Subd. 1 Intent. It is the intent of the LI Light Industry District to create industrial areas
that will be attractive and compatible within the City and will not adversely affect
adjacent business or residential neighborhoods. Industrial establishments should be either
a) ones whose operations are relatively free from objectionable influences or b) ones
whose objectionable features will be obviated by design and / or appropriate devices. In
the interest of general health and welfare, residential and certain institutional uses are not
permitted within this district.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted as regulated herein, without
special application requirements or conditions attached:
A. Manufacturing. Any light manufacturing use or process including repairs,
assembling, fabricating, altering, converting, finishing, processing, treating,
testing, packaging or bottling; except any use or process hereinafter specifically
excluded or which would not be in keeping with the purpose of the District as
stated above. Such determination shall be made by the City Planner/Zoning
Administrator upon review of the building permit application.
B. Warehousing, Storage and Wholesaling. The storage, handling, assembly and
distribution of goods and materials for retail, wholesale or on-site use, except for
the handling, in quantity of more than five thousand (5,000) gallons, of packaged
or bulk hazardous combustible materials and / or flammable liquids or gases or
more than four thousand three hundred (4,300) gallons of packaged or bulk
hazardous dry material. Any amount of liquid or dry material exceeding the
numbers listed above shall be classified as a HI- Heavy Industrial use, unless
authorized by the City Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission.
The determination of “hazardous” materials as defined in the International
Building Code as adopted by reference by the Minnesota State Building Code
shall be made by the Building Official.
C. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
D. Brew Pub, Brewery Taproom, Cocktail Room and Micro-Distillery.
Subd. 3 Prohibited Uses. No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged, intended or designed for
any of the following uses:
A. Residential. Dwellings, dwelling units and residences of any kind, including
hotels, motels, rooming houses and tourist homes.
B. Institutional. Schools, orphanages, child care centers, homes for the aged and
similar institutions for human care.
C. Industrial. Any use first listed as a conditional use in the HI Heavy Industrial
District.
Subd. 4 Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted only subject to the issuance
of a Conditional Use Permit as stipulated in Section 17.2.06. Additional uses itemized in
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 196
that Section may situate in the LI District in the same manner as if they were listed
hereunder:
A. General. Any use first listed as permitted use in the HI Industrial District,
provided that any objectionable features normally associated with these uses, such
as those deemed to be hazardous, offensive or objectionable by reason of odor,
dust, cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibration, radiation, refuse matter or watercarried
waste, shall be ameliorated, controlled or eliminated through design,
mechanical devices, screen planting and / or walls or other measures as specified
by the Planning Commission, and provided that the use and its day to day activity
will not be hazardous, noxious, or offensive.
B. Storage. The storage of any hazardous combustible material in excess of 5,000
gallons (if liquid), including, but not limited to, flammable liquids or gasses,
provided they are stored in containers not to exceed 25,000 gallons (if liquid) per
storage unit. All such storage containers shall be located at least 200 feet from any
Residential District if underground, and at least 400 feet from any Residential
District if above ground. Such storage shall comply in all respects with applicable
regulations of the State Fire Code, Life Safety Code, Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency, and any and all other applicable regulatory agencies or Codes.
C. Residential. Dwellings for families of watchmen, caretakers and operators, and
such sleeping and boarding accommodations as are customarily incidental and
necessary to a permitted use. Additions to such existing buildings may be
authorized where the number of families or the number of lodging
accommodations is not increased.
D. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 5 Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary to a
principal use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in their own stead:
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17.5.01.
B. Fence, pursuant to Section 17.5.05.
C. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
D. Patio, deck, terrace, and similar use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02, Subd. 3
E. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13.
F. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 6 Dimensional Regulations.
A. Parcel requirements. Parcel requirements shall be as follows except as may be
modified pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 197
(1) Minimum parcel area. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
(2) Minimum parcel width. One hundred (100) feet.
(3) Minimum parcel depth. One hundred fifty (150) feet.
(4) Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and
utility and communication, and public service uses shall be exempt from
the parcel requirements of this section.
B. Setback Requirements for Principal Building. Setback requirements for principal
buildings shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section
17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Twenty-five
(25) feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line.
Twenty-five (25) feet.
(3) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Fifteen
(15) feet.
(4) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Fifty (50) feet.
C. Setback from “R” District Boundary. Seventy-five (75) feet.
D. Setback Requirements for Accessory Buildings.
(1) Minimum accessory building setback from interior side parcel line. Five
(5) feet.
(2) Minimum accessory building setback from rear parcel line. Fifty (5) feet.
(3) Maximum height of accessory building. Twenty-five (25) feet.
E. Maximum Building Height.
(1) Principal building. No principal building shall exceed forty (40) feet in
height, as measured pursuant to Section 17.1.06: Definitions: Height of
Building except that buildings over forty (40) feet may be allowed
pursuant to the approval of a conditional use permit.
F. Maximum Building Coverage of the Parcel. The combined footprint of all
principal and accessory buildings on a parcel shall not exceed forty percent
(40%).
G. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage. Seventy percent (70%).
Subd. 7 Special District Provisions.
A. Landscaping. All open areas of any site, lot, tract or parcel shall be graded to
provide proper drainage, and except for areas used for parking, drives or storage,
shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs or planted ground cover. Such landscaping
shall conform to the planting plan approved at the time the building permit was
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 198
issued. It shall be the Owner’s responsibilities to see that this landscaping is
maintained in an attractive and well-kept condition. All adjacent vacant lots, tracts
or parcels under the same ownership shall also be property maintained.
B. Storage. All raw materials, supplies, finished or semi-finished products and
equipment shall be stored within a completely enclosed building or within the
confines of a 100 percent opaque wall or fence not less than five (5) feet high.
Provided, however, that motor vehicles necessary to the operation of the principal
use and of not more than three-quarter ton capacity may be stored within the
permitted parking lot areas.
C. Building Design and Construction. Any building or structure within the LI-Light
Industrial District shall meet the following design standards:
(1) All exterior wall finishes on any building shall be any single one or
combination of the following:
a. Face Brick.
b. Natural stone.
c. Specially designed precast concrete units if the surfaces have been
integrally treated with an applied decorative material or texture.
d. Factory fabricated and finished metal framed panel construction, if
the panel materials be any of those named above, glass, prefinished
metal (other than unpainted galvanized iron), or plastic.
e. Other materials as may be recommended by the Planning
Commission.
(2) All subsequent additions and accessory building constructed after the
erection of an original building or buildings shall be constructed of the
same materials as the original construction and shall be designed in a
manner conforming to the original architectural design and general
appearance.
D. Screening. All principal, accessory and conditional uses, except business signs,
which are situated with fifty (50) feet of a Residential District, shall be screened
and buffered from such district by a separation of open space which shall have a
minimum depth of thirty (30) feet and shall include a required fence or vegetative
screening of not less than ninety (90) percent opacity and not less than five (5) nor
more than seven (7) feet in height above the level of the Residential District
property at the district boundary. Walls or fences of lesser heights or planting
screens may be permitted by the Planning Commission if there is a finding that
the nature of extend of the use being screened is such that a lesser degree of
screening will as adequately promote and protect the use and enjoyment of the
properties within the adjacent Residential District, or there is a finding that a
screening of the type required by this Chapter would interfere with the provision
of adequate amounts of light and air to same said properties. Loading docks in the
LI Light Industry District shall be screened so as not to be visible form any public
street right-of-way within a Residential District. All required screening devices
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 199
shall be designed so that they are architecturally harmonious with the principal
structures on the site and they shall be properly maintained so as not to become
unsightly, hazardous, or less opaque than when originally constructed.
E. Performance Standards. All industrial operations within the LI Light Industry
District shall conform to the performance standards established in Section 17.4.02
of this Chapter.
17.6.15 HI - Heavy Industry District.
Subd. 1 Intent. It is the intent of the HI Heavy Industry District to create industrial areas
to accommodate a wide variety of industrial establishments which may operate to their
maximum advantage without adversely affecting other nearby similar or dissimilar uses
and activities.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted as regulated herein, without
special application requirements or conditions attached:
A. General. Any industrial use which is not specifically prohibited herein or any
industrial use not listed as a conditional use herein below may be permitted.
B. Brew Pub, Brewery Taproom, Cocktail Room and Micro-Distillery.
Subd. 3 Prohibited Uses. No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged which is arranged, intended or designed for
any of the following uses:
A. Residential. Dwellings, dwelling units and residences of any kind, including
hotels, motels, rooming houses and tourist homes.
B. Institutional. Schools, orphanages, child care centers, homes for the aged and
similar institutions for human care.
C. Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) Landfills, waste incinerators, hazardous or
infectious waste facilities.
D. Industrial Solid Waste Landfills.
E. Construction and Demolition (C&D) Landfills.
F. There shall be no expansions to existing landfills of any type within the City.
Subd. 4 Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted only subject to the issuance
of a Conditional Use Permit as stipulated in Section 17.2.06. Additional uses itemized in
that Section may situate in the HI Heavy Industry District in the same manner as if they
were listed hereunder:
A. Wrecking and Salvage Yards. Junk yards, including automobile wrecking and
industrial metal and waste salvage, but not including refuse of garbage disposal, if
located at least two hundred (200) feet from any Residence District; provided all
operations are conducted within an area enclosed with a solid wall or uniform
tight board fence, including gates, at least eight (8) feet in height and such
enclosure shall be property maintained.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 200
B. Crematory. If located not less than two hundred (200) feet from a Residence
District.
C. Railroad Stub Yard and Freight Station. If located not less than two hundred (200)
feet from any Residence District.
D. Other Uses. The following uses may only be authorized as a conditional use by
the City Council if located at least four hundred (400) feet from any Residence
District, and if the location of such use has been recommended by the Planning
Commission after receiving reports from the Acting Fire Chief, and the State
Pollution Control Agency.
(1) Acid manufacture.
(2) Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture.
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for conditional uses
in this district.
Subd. 5 Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary to a
principal use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in their own stead:
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17.5.01.
B. Fence, pursuant to Section 17.5.05.
C. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
D. Patio, deck, terrace, and similar use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02, Subd. 3.
E. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13.
F. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 6 Dimensional Regulations.
A. Parcel Requirements. Parcel requirements shall be as follows except as may be
modified pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum parcel area. Minimum area necessary to meet stipulated yard
setbacks and parking / loading, screening, etc. area requirements.
(2) Minimum parcel width. Minimum width necessary to meet stipulated yard
setbacks and parking / loading, screening, etc. requirements.
(3) Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and
utility and communication, and public service uses shall be exempt from
the parcel requirements of this section.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 201
B. Setback Requirements for Principal Building. Setback requirements for principal
buildings shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section
17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Twenty-five
(25) feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line.
Twenty-five (25) feet.
(3) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Each
side fifteen (15) feet.
(4) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Fifty (50) feet.
C. Setback from “R” District Boundary. Seventy-five (75) feet.
D. Setback Requirements for Accessory Buildings.
1. Minimum accessory building setback from interior side parcel line. Five
(5) feet.
2. Minimum accessory building setback from rear parcel line. Twelve (12)
feet.
3. Maximum height of accessory building. Twenty–five (25) feet.
E. Maximum Building Height.
1. Principal building. No principal building shall exceed seventy-five (75)
feet in height, as measured pursuant to Section 17.1.06: Definitions:
Height of Building except that buildings over seventy-five (75) feet may
be allowed pursuant to the approval of a conditional use permit.
F. Maximum Building Coverage of the Parcel. The combined footprint of all
principal and accessory buildings on a parcel shall not exceed sixty percent
(60%).
G. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage. Eighty percent (80%).
Subd. 7 Special District Provisions.
A. Landscaping. All open areas of any site, lot, tract or parcel shall be graded to
provide proper drainage, and except for areas used for parking, drives or storage,
shall be landscaped with appropriate dust free and attractive materials. Such
landscaping shall conform with the development plan approved at the time the
building permit was issued. It shall be the owner’s responsibility to see that the lot
area is maintained in a well-kept condition. All vacant lots, tracts or parcels
abutting and under the same ownership shall be properly maintained.
B. Storage. All raw materials, supplies, finished or semi-finished products and
equipment shall be stored within a completely enclosed building or within the
confines of a 100 percent opaque wall or fence not less than five (5) feet high.
Provided, however, that motor vehicles necessary to the operation of the principal
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 202
use and of not more than three-quarter ton capacity may be stored within the
permitted parking lot areas.
C. Performance Standards. All industrial operations within the HI Heavy Industry
District shall conform to the performance standards established in Section 17.4.02
of this Chapter.
D. Screening. All principal, accessory and conditional uses, except business signs,
which are situated with fifty (50) feet of a Residential District, shall be screened
and buffered from such district by a separation of open space which shall have a
minimum depth of thirty (30) feet and shall include a required fence or vegetative
screening of not less than ninety (90) percent opacity and not less than five (5) nor
more than seven (7) feet in height above the level of the Residential District
property at the district boundary. Walls or fences of lesser heights or planting
screens may be permitted by the Planning Commission if there is a finding that
the nature of extend of the use being screened is such that a lesser degree of
screening will as adequately promote and protect the use and enjoyment of the
properties within the adjacent Residential District, or there is a finding that a
screening of the type required by this Chapter would interfere with the provision
of adequate amounts of light and air to same said properties. Loading docks in the
HI Heavy Industry District shall be screened so as not to be visible form any
public street right-of-way within a Residential District. All required screening
devices shall be designed so that they are architecturally harmonious with the
principal structures on the site and they shall be properly maintained so as not to
become unsightly, hazardous, or less opaque than when originally constructed.
17.6.16 OM – Office/Manufacturing District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The intent of the OM Office/Manufacturing District is to establish a
suitable area or areas within the City in which light industrial and limited commercial
uses can co-exist in an attractive environment and be compatible with each other and with
adjacent business or residential neighborhoods. Such uses should be relatively free from
objectionable influences, or have those influences obviated by design or other appropriate
devices. In the interest of general health and welfare, residential and certain institutional
uses are not permitted within this district.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted as regulated herein, without
special application requirements or conditions attached except that where any use listed
herein is proposed to be developed abutting an urban primary arterial street as designated
on the approved City thoroughfares plan, and no frontage or service road is provided,
such use shall only be permitted by Conditional Use Permit, as specified in Section
17.2.10.
A. Office parks and complexes.
B. Nurseries, landscape, and garden stores.
C. Building materials retail outlets.
D. Retail sales outlets when associated with and when located on the same lot as, a
permitted manufacturing or warehousing use as specified in this section.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 203
E. Manufacturing: Any light manufacturing use or process including repairs,
assembling, fabricating, altering, converting, finishing, processing, treating,
testing, packaging or bottling; except any use or process hereinafter specifically
excluded or which would not be in keeping with the purpose of the District as
stated above.
F. Warehousing, storage, and wholesaling: The storage, handling, assembly and
distribution of goods and materials for retail, wholesale, or on-site use, except for
the handling, in quantity, of packaged or bulk hazardous combustible materials
and / or flammable liquids or gases. The determination of ‘hazardous’ materials
shall be made by reference to the latest edition of the International Building Code
as adopted by reference by the Minnesota State Building Code.
G. Brew Pub, Brewery Taproom, Cocktail Room and Micro-Distillery.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted only subject to the issuance
of a Conditional Use Permit as stipulated in Section 17.2.06. Additional uses itemized in
that Section may situate in the OM Office/Manufacturing District in the same manner as
if they were listed hereunder:
A. General. Any use first listed as permitted in the HI, Heavy Industrial District,
provided that any objectionable features normally associated with these uses, such
as those deemed to be hazardous, offensive, or objectionable by reason of odor,
dust, cinders, gas fumes, noise, vibration, radiation, refuse matter, or watercarried
waste, shall be ameliorated, controlled or eliminated through design,
mechanical devices, screen plantings and / or walls, or other measures as specified
by the Planning Commission, and provided that the use and its day to day activity
will not be hazardous, noxious, or offensive.
B. Commercial. Any use first listed as a permitted use in the NC, Neighborhood
Commercial, and RC, Regional (Highway) Commercial Districts provided such
use is in keeping with the intent of the District as stated in Subd. 1 of this Section.
C. Humane Societies and commercial kennels. A humane society of commercial
kennel shall be constructed of impervious materials and all structures, areas and
appurtenances shall be so designed as to facilitate thorough and convenient
cleaning. Commercial kennels shall be adequately ventilated, and all doors,
windows and other openings shall be screened. Commercial kennels shall be
provided with adequate water supplies and sanitary facilities for disposal of
wastes.
Subd. 4 Prohibited Uses. No building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged, which is arranged, intended, or designed
for any of the following uses:
A. Residential. Dwellings, dwelling units, and residences of any kind, including
hotels, motels, rooming houses, and tourist homes.
B. Institutional. Schools, orphanages, child care centers, homes for the aged, and
similar institutions for human care.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 204
C. Industrial. Any use first listed as a conditional use in the HI-Heavy Industrial
District.
Subd. 5 Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary to a
principal use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in their own stead:
A. Any accessory use, building, or structure customarily incidental to a principal use
permitted above, and located on the same lot therewith.
B. Specialized freight and yard equipment, private utility structures, secondary
processing structures, and similar specialized structures.
C. Enclosed equipment and vehicle storage areas for non-residential uses.
D. Parking and loading facilities as regulated in Section 17.5.11.
E. Signs as regulated in Section 17.5.13.
Subd. 6 Dimensional Regulations.
A. Parcel Requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the OM
Office/Manufacturing District shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum parcel area. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
(2) Minimum parcel width. One hundred-twenty (120) feet.
(3) Minimum parcel depth. One hundred-twenty (120) feet.
(4) Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and
utility and communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel
requirements of this section.
B. Setback requirements for principal building. The minimum setback requirements
for principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be
modified pursuant to 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Primary
arterials – One hundred (100) feet; all other streets – Thirty-five (35) feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line.
Primary arterials – One hundred (100) feet; all other streets – Thirty-five
(35) feet.
(3) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Twenty
(20) feet.
(4) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
(5) Setback from ‘R’ District boundary – Fifty (50) feet, or Thirty (30) feet
plus screening as specified in Subd. 7, A of this Section.
C. Maximum Height of Principal Building. Four (4) stories with maximum height of
sixty (60) feet.
D. Setback and Height Requirements for Accessory Buildings.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 205
(1) Minimum accessory building setback from interior side parcel line. Ten
(10) feet.
(2) Minimum accessory building setback from rear parcel line. Fifteen (15)
feet.
(3) Maximum height of accessory building. Twenty-five (25) feet.
E. Maximum Building Coverage of the Parcel. Forty percent (40%).
F. Maximum Impervious Coverage. Seventy percent (70%).
G. Performance Standards: Yes – Section 17.4.02.
H. Special Provisions – Signs – Section 17.5.13; Parking – Section 17.5.11; Street
access standards and designs – Section 17.5.11, Sud. 4.
Subd. 7 Special District Provisions.
A. Landscaping. All open areas of any site, lot, tract, or parcel shall be graded to
provide proper drainage, and except for areas used for parking, drives, sidewalks,
patios, storage, or other such uses, shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, or
planted ground cover. Such landscaping shall conform to the planting plan
approved at the time the building permit is issued. It shall be the owner’s
responsibility to see that this landscaping is maintained in an attractive and wellkept
condition. All adjacent vacant lots, tracts, or parcels under the same
ownership shall also be properly maintained. No landscaped area shall be used for
the parking of vehicles or the storage or display of materials, supplies, or
merchandise.
B. Storage – Displays. All materials, supplies, merchandise, finished or semifinished
products not on display for the direct sale, rental, or lease to the ultimate
consumer or user shall be stored within a completely enclosed building or within
the confines of a one-hundred (100) percent opaque wall or fence not less than
five (5) feet high. Provided, however, that motor vehicles necessary to the
operation of the principal use and not of more than one and one-half ton capacity
may be stored within the permitted parking lot areas. Merchandise which is
offered for sale as described heretofore may be displayed beyond the confines of a
building, but the area occupied by such outdoor display shall not constitute a
greater number of square feet than ten (10) percent of the ground floor area of the
building housing the principal use, unless such merchandise is of the type
customarily displayed outdoors such as garden supplies.
C. Building Design and Construction. Any building or structure within the OM
Office/Manufacturing District shall meet the following design standards:
(1) All exterior wall finishes on any building shall be any single or
combination of the following:
a. Face Brick.
b. Natural Stone.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 206
c. Concrete block with surfaces painted or treated with decorative
material or texture.
d. Specially designed concrete units if the surfaces have been
integrally treated with an applied decorative material or texture.
e. Factory fabricated and finished metal framed panel construction,
with the panel materials to include any of those named above,
glass, prefinished metal (other than unpainted galvanized iron), or
plastic, and which materials meet or exceed the minimum
standards of the Minnesota State Building Code.
f. Other materials as may be recommended by the Planning
Commission.
(2) Accessory buildings may be of materials other than those specified
heretofore, provided, however, that the design and material used shall be
architecturally harmonious with that of a principal building.
(3) All subsequent additions to any building constructed after the erection of
an original building or buildings shall be constructed of the same materials
as the original construction and shall be designed in a manner conforming
to the original architectural design and general appearance.
D. Traffic and Circulation. Traffic and circulation requirements for any and all
development in the IP District shall be in accordance with Section 17.5.11, Subd.
4 of this Chapter.
E. Screening. All principal, accessory, and conditional uses, except business signs,
which are situated within fifty (50) feet of a residential districts, shall be screened
and buffered from such district by a separation of open space which shall have
minimum depth of thirty (30) feet and shall include a required fence or vegetative
screening of not less than ninety (90) percent opacity and not less than five (5)
feet nor more than seven (7) feet in height above the level of the Residential
District property at the district boundary. Walls or fences of lessor heights may be
permitted by the Planning Commission if there is a finding that the nature or
extent of the use being screened is such that a lessor degree of screening will
adequately promote and protect the use and enjoyment of the properties within the
adjacent residential district, or there is a finding that a screening of the type
required by this Chapter would interfere with the provision of adequate amounts
of light, air to same said properties. Loading docks which are visible from any
public street right-of-way within a Residential District shall be screened as
specified above. All required screening devices shall be designed to be
architecturally harmonious with the principal structures on the site and they shall
be properly maintained so as not to become unsightly, hazardous, or less opaque
than when originally constructed.
F. Performance Standards. All operations and activities within the OM
Office/Manufacturing District shall conform to the performance standards
established in Section 17.4.02 of this Chapter.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 207
17.6.17 PI - Public / Institutional District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The intent of the PI Public / Institutional District is to accommodate a
variety of public, semi-public, and institutional uses in Cloquet. Although public and
institutional uses are allowed as permitted or conditional uses in many other districts in
the city, the PI Public / Institutional District is intended for the exclusive use of
significant public or institutional uses (including, but not limited to colleges, schools,
hospitals, and cemeteries). Public parks are intended to be included in the PP Public
Parks District.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted as regulated herein, without
special application requirements or conditions attached:
A. Cemetery.
B. Clinic and / or medical office.
C. College.
D. Convent, rectory or monastery.
E. Dormitory.
F. Fraternity or sorority.
G. Government or community service use.
H. Hospital.
I. Museum.
J. Nursing home.
K. Open space: public or private.
L. Public park.
M. Religious institution.
N. School: primary or secondary.
O. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commisson of the City has determined
that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in the district.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted only subject to the issuance
of a Conditional Use Permit as stipulated in Section 17.2.06.
A. Research and development facility.
B. School: specialty or special instruction.
C. Parking lot as a principal use, pursuant to Section 17.3.11.
D. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 208
determined that the use is consistent with the intent of the conditional uses in the
district.
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary to a
principal use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in their own stead:
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17.5.01.
B. Fence, pursuant to Section 17.5.05.
C. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
D. Patio, deck, terrace, and similar use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02, Subd. 3.
E. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13.
F. Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section
17.5.02, Subd. 4.
G. Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 17.5.10.
H. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations
A. Parcel Requirements. Parcel requirements shall be as follows except as may be
modified pursuant to Section 17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum parcel area. Twenty-one thousand, (21,000) square feet.
(2) Minimum parcel width. One hundred (100) feet.
(3) Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and
utility and communication, and public service uses shall be exempt from
the parcel requirements of this section.
B. Setback Requirements for Principal Building. Setback requirements for principal
buildings shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section
17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Twenty- five
(25) feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line.
Twenty-five (25) feet.
(3) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Fifteen
(15) feet.
(4) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Twenty-five
(25) feet.
C. Setback requirements for accessory buildings.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 209
(1) Minimum accessory building setback from interior side parcel line. Five
(5) feet.
(2) Minimum accessory building setback from rear parcel line. Five (5) feet.
(3) Maximum height of accessory building. Fifteen (15) feet.
D. Maximum Building Height. Thirty-five (35) feet, as measured pursuant to Section
17.1.06: Definitions: Height of Building except that a principal building height
between thirty-five (35) feet and sixty (60) feet may be permitted with the
issuance of a Conditional Use Permit as specified in Section 17.2.06.
E. Maximum Building Coverage of the Parcel. Fifty percent (50%).
F. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage. Seventy percent (70%).
17.6.18 PP - Public Parks District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The intent of the PP Public Parks District is to accommodate a variety of
public parks and public open spaces in Cloquet. Although public parks and public open
spaces are permitted uses in many other districts in the city, the PP Public Parks District
is intended for the exclusive use of public parks, significant public open spaces, and park
related accessory uses.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted as regulated herein, without
special application requirements or conditions attached:
A. Government or community service use.
B. Public festival grounds.
C. Public parks and recreation uses and related buildings and uses.
D. Open space: public.
E. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in the
district.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted only subject to the issuance
of a Conditional Use Permit as stipulated in Section 17.2.06.
A. Campground and / or recreational vehicle park.
B. Commercial or incidental to a public park use; for example seasonal food stand.
C. Dwelling that serves as a caretaker’s residence for a public park.
D. Parking lot as a principal use, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
E. Specialty school incidental to a public park use.
F. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 210
determined that the use is consistent with the intent of the conditional uses in the
district.
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted only when auxiliary to a
principal use permitted above; they may not exist as principal uses in their own stead:
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17.5.01.
B. Boathouses, docks and piers
C. Fence, pursuant to Section 17.5.05.
D. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
E. Patio, deck, terrace, and similar use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02, Subd. 3.
F. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13.
G. Sport court or play equipment for recreation use, pursuant to Section 17.5.02,
Subd. 4.
H. Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 17.5.10.
I. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations.
A. Parcel Requirements. There shall be no parcel requirements in the PP Public
Parks District.
B. Setback Requirements for Principal Building. Setback requirements for principal
buildings shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section
17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Thirty (30)
feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line.
Thirty (30) feet.
(3) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Eight
(8) feet.
(4) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Thirty-five (35)
feet.
C. Setback Requirements for Accessory Buildings.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Five
(5) feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Five (5) feet.
(3) Maximum height of accessory building. Fifteen (15) feet.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 211
D. Maximum Building Height. No principal building shall exceed two (2) stories or
thirty-five (35) feet in height, as measured pursuant to Section 17.1.06:
Definitions: Height of Building.
E. Maximum Building Coverage of the Parcel. There shall be no maximum building
coverage in the PP Public Parks District.
F. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage. Eighty-five (85) percent.
17.6.19 AIR - Airport District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The intent of the AIR Airport District is to accommodate the Cloquet
Carlton County Airport. The district is also intended to accommodate commercial and
industrial uses that have a synergistic and incidental relationship with the airport, such as
a flight school, an air cargo facility, an aviation repair and service shop, and retail uses
that serve air travelers and others at the airport. Also refer to the Zoning Ordinance for
Carlton County Airports on file with the City Planner/Zoning Administrator for more
information regarding the Airport District.
Subd. 2 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted as regulated herein, without
special application requirements or conditions attached:
A. Agriculture, excluding structures, provided that the agriculture use does not attract
wildlife that could constitute a hazard to air navigation or the safe operations of
the airport.
B. Airport terminal.
C. Airport hangar.
D. Other airport uses customarily provided in conjunction with an airport use.
E. Open space, provided that the open space does not attract wildlife that could
constitute a hazard to air navigation or the safe operations of the airport.
Subd. 3 Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted only subject to the issuance
of a Conditional Use Permit as stipulated in Section 17.2.06.
A. Accessory buildings, if the buildings exceed the pertinent standards specified in
Section 17.5.01.
B. Commercial and industrial uses that have a synergistic and incidental relationship
with the airport, such as a flight school, an air cargo facility, an aviation repair /
service shop, a car rental facility, or a retail store that serves the travelers and
others at the airport.
C. Communication equipment.
D. Parking lot as a principal use, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
E. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this
district.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 212
Subd. 4 Accessory Uses. The following are allowed as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the AIR Airport District, pursuant to all applicable specific use
standards and the requirement.
A. Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 17.5.01.
B. Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 17.5.11.
C. Signs, pursuant to Section 17.5.13.
D. Other uses not specifically listed in this Chapter, but for which the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission of the City has
determined that the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this
district.
Subd. 5 Dimensional Regulations.
A. Parcel Requirements. There shall be no parcel requirements in the AIR Airport
District.
B. Setback Requirements for Principal Building. Setback requirements for principal
buildings shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section
17.2.07: Variance.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Thirty (30)
feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line.
Thirty (30) feet.
(3) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Eight
(8) feet.
(4) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Thirty-five (35)
feet.
C. Setback from “R” District Boundary. Fifteen (15) feet.
D. Setback Requirements for Accessory Buildings.
(1) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Five
(5) feet.
(2) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Five (5) feet.
(3) Maximum height of accessory building. Fifteen (15) feet.
E. Maximum Building Height. No principal building shall exceed two (2) stories or
thirty-five (35) feet in height, as measured pursuant to Section 17.1.06:
Definitions: Height of Building.
F. Maximum Building Coverage of the Parcel. There shall be no maximum building
coverage in the AIR Airport District.
G. Maximum Impervious Surface coverage. There shall be no maximum impervious
coverage in the AIR Airport District.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 213
17.6.20 SG - Sand and Gravel Overlay District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The intent of the SG Sand and Gravel Overlay District is:
A. To provide for the economical availability and removal of sand, gravel, rock and
soil vital to the growth of the City and the region;
B. To establish regulations, safeguards and controls in the City regarding noise, dust,
traffic, drainage, groundwater quality, air quality and other factors which will
minimize the environmental and aesthetic impacts on mined or adjacent property;
C. To reduce the potential for pollution caused by wind and soil erosion and
sedimentation;
D. To establish the locations, orderly approval processes, and the operating
conditions under which sand and gravel extraction and processing will be allowed
in the City; and to establish conditions which ensure the restoration of mined
areas consistent with existing and planned land use patterns; and
E. To establish a “Sand and Gravel Overlay District’ as the only zoning district
where sand and gravel operations will be allowed, pursuant to City Council
approval of a Conditional Use Permit and annual Council approval of Excavation
Permits.
Subd. 2 Definitions. Whenever the following terms appear in this Section, they shall
have the meanings assigned to them in this Subdivision:
A. Abandonment. The actual vacancy of a site or portion of a site, for twenty-four
(24) consecutive months without completed grading and installed erosion controls
consistent with the approved end use plan. Such vacancy shall be conclusively
presumed as intent to abandon or vacate the site by the operator.
B. Asphalt Plant. Machinery and / or equipment used for the manufacture of
bituminous asphalt hot mix product using gravel material from the mine site. Such
equipment shall be portable only, and capable of operation without the use of
permanent foundations and / or footings. Asphalt / bituminous manufacture shall
be considered a temporary land use, subject to time and duration restrictions, as
specified in the Annual Excavation Permit, to mitigate objectionable influences
associated with such operations, and to safeguard the public health, safety and
welfare.
C. Borrow Pit. Temporary land use involving the excavation or removal of material
for fill at an adjacent or nearby site. Borrow pit operations shall require a Zoning
Permit as provided for in Section 17.2.02 of this Chapter, which shall be valid for
a period of one (1) year with a possible one (1) year extension, at the discretion of
the Zoning Administrator. All borrow pits under a valid Zoning Permit shall
comply with the same regulations as specified herein that govern all mining
activities. There shall be no processing of bituminous operations allowed in
borrow pits. Borrow pits that exceed two (2) acres in area, remove in excess of
35,000 cubic yards of total material, or are located more than five (5) miles from
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 214
the final point of use for such material thus removed, are prohibited and shall
require enactment of a Sand and Gravel Overlay District and issuance of a
Conditional Use Permit and Excavation Permit as specified herein.
D. Completion of Operations, Notice Thereof. A written notice filed with the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator eighteen (18) months prior to the completion of
excavation operations. After the 18-month period, active and substantial
excavation shall not occur on property so noticed and described. Completion of
operations may occur on any definable portion of the property.
E. Dust. Airborne, inorganic, particulate matter other than smoke or steam.
F. Excavation Permit. The annual permit required of all excavation sites / owners by
the Cloquet City Council, as specified in Subd. 8, herein.
G. Fiscal Impact Analysis. A comparative analysis provided by the petitioner (or
prepared by the City or its consultant and paid for by the petitioner) which
itemizes the fiscal impact of property taxes, land uses and public improvement
costs of the proposed mining operation and the proposed ‘end uses’ on the City,
County and School District in comparison to the fiscal impact property taxes, land
uses, and public improvement costs of development on the site if no mining
would occur. All projections should be at present dollar value, excluding inflation.
H. Minerals. Nonmetallic material found in the earth including, but not limited to,
sand, gravel, rocks and soil, which may be covered by overburden.
I. MSHA. The Mine Safety and Health Administration.
J. Operator. Any person or persons, partnership or corporation, or assignees or any
associations, or persons either natural or artificial, including every public or
governmental agency engaged in sand and gravel operations.
K. OSHA. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
L. Overburden. Those materials which lie between the surface of the earth and the
mineral deposit to be mined.
M. Processing. Any activity which may include the crushing, washing, stockpiling,
compounding, mixing, or treatment of sand, gravel, rocks, or similar mineral
products mined from the permitted site into consumable products such as
construction grade sand, gravel, asphalt, and other similar products.
N. Reclamation, Restoration, Rehabilitation. To renew land to a self-sustaining, long
term use which is compatible with contiguous land uses and which process shall
include the re-establishment of vegetation, soil stability and the establishment of
safe conditions appropriate to the intended use of the land in accordance with the
City’s Comprehensive Land Use Plan, the Conditional Use Permit conditions
allowing for excavation and / or processing on the site, and the most recent
edition of A Handbook for Reclaiming Sand and Gravel Pits in Minnesota,
published by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
O. Recycling / Recyclable Material. Shall include used concrete and / or blacktop
material only. Stockpiles of such material may be permitted for no more than two
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 215
(2) consecutive years, after which time such material must be processed into a
consumable product.
P. Sand and Gravel Operations. The removal, extraction, truck hauling, crushing,
processing, excavation and / or production of sand, gravels, rocks and similar
mineral products.
Q. Stockpiling. Storage of processed or raw materials on the site of the sand and
gravel operation. Such operations may continue or be sold from the site for up to
eighteen (18) months after official written notice of completion of operations has
been accepted by the City Council. (From the date of acceptance of the notice of
completion, up to 18 months of final excavation, and an additional 18 months of
processing or storage may occur on the site. In no case shall the period of final
excavation and storage / processing exceed 36 months after acceptance of notice
of completion.)
R. Topsoil. That portion of the overburden which lies within the “A” and “B”
horizon of soil closest to the surface and which supports the growth of vegetation.
Subd. 3 Criteria for Overlay Zoning District Approval. In establishing a Sand and
Gravel Overlay District, the City shall find that:
A. Consistency with City Plans and Policies. The proposed district is consistent with
the text and maps of the Cloquet Comprehensive Land Use Plan and the location
is suitable in that the excavation, mining, processing, stockpiling or hauling of
sand and gravel deposits will not create a public nuisance, as defined in Chapter 7
of the City Code, or exceed local, state or federal safety and environmental
standards on the adjacent properties. The petitioner for an ‘SG’ Overlay District,
at his sole cost, shall provide information to help determine said suitability,
including, but not limited to, a completed zoning amendment application; exhibits
illustrating adjacent and on-site buildings and land uses; existing elevations and
percent of slope within, and three hundred (300) feet beyond, the perimeter of the
site; environmental assessment worksheet or impact statements; and fiscal impact
analysis.
B. Fiscal Impact Analysis. Said fiscal impact analysis shall include two types of
projections:
(1) A land use development scenario based on existing Comprehensive Land
Use Plan and Zoning designations.
(2) An alternative scenario based upon the assumption that a new ‘SG’
Overlay District with a Planned Unit Development (PUD) end use is
approved.
Each fiscal projection shall include estimates of all known public
improvement costs; timing of development; new development valuations;
total annual property taxes per type of use; short term construction jobs,
mining jobs, and estimates of permanent jobs to be created based upon the
end uses proposed and the number of households, occupants and school
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 216
aged children that could occupy the site after completion of each phase of
end use development.
C. Size. The proposed ‘SG’ Overlay District shall cover an area of at least twenty
(20) acres. This limitation shall not apply when the tract of land is contiguous to
an active sand and gravel operation, provided that both tracts are being operated
by the same producer.
D. Access. The sand and gravel overlay district shall have direct access to nonresidential,
collector streets or county roads of sufficient load carry capacity to
serve traffic generated by the sand and gravel operation.
E. Environmental Impacts. An environmental assessment worksheet (as defined by
Minnesota Environmental Quality Board rules) shall be completed for each gravel
mining project proposed. The proposed project shall meet the recommended
standards provided by the mandatory environmental assessment worksheet. The
responses and recommendations of the environmental assessment worksheet shall
be considered by the City Council prior to any final action on a rezoning request.
The application for rezoning shall not be considered complete until such time as
the final comment has been received on the adequacy of the environmental
assessment worksheet.
Subd. 4 Permitted Uses. Within any ‘SG’ Overlay District, uses as permitted by the
underlying zoning district shall be deemed as permitted uses until such time as a
Conditional Use Permit for sand and gravel mining and / or processing has been applied
for and granted. At that time, the provisions of the approved Conditional Use Permit shall
govern all uses of land within the perimeter of said ‘SG’ Overlay District.
Subd. 5 Conditional Uses. Within any ‘SG’ Overlay District, the excavation, hauling,
mining, stockpiling or processing of sand and gravel deposits and such buildings and
equipment as are customarily incidental thereto, including temporary asphalt plants, may
be approved by the City Council through the issuance of a Sand and Gravel Conditional
Use Permit. Additional conditions regarding operations and reclamation / rehabilitation
may be attached to the Conditional Use Permit for the sand and gravel operation in order
to assure compatibility with present and future land uses. For purposes of enforcement,
conditions attached to said permit shall be considered a portion of this Chapter.
A. Within a sand and gravel overlay district, any processing, washing, or crushing
plant for materials such as sand and gravel, asphalt, recycled concrete or asphalt,
or others shall be allowed only as a portion of a Conditional Use Permit. Said
plant shall be located in a centralized location within the excavation site, and shall
be allowed to exist only in concert with concurrent mining operations.
B. Portable, pit face crushing equipment may be approved as a portion of a
Conditional Use Permit provided:
(1) The location of the portable crushing equipment meets all mining and / or
excavation setbacks for the area in which it is to be located.
(2) Portable crushing equipment and all conveyor systems shall be placed on
the excavation pit floor.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 217
C. Expansion of operating acreage beyond that in existence and legally permitted at
the time of passage of this Chapter may be permitted, if such expanded operations
are brought into compliance with these regulations and are compatible with the
purpose and intent of the ‘SG’ Overlay District.
Subd. 6 Notification Process.
A. In addition to the Zoning and Conditional Use Permit notification process
required elsewhere in this Chapter, notifications of the proposed Sand and Gravel
Overlay District rezoning and / or Conditional Use Permit hearing shall be
published once in the official newspaper of the City, and mailed by the City
Planner/ Zoning Administrator, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to all
City property owners within 1,320 feet of the property lines of the proposed
district and sand and gravel Conditional Use Permit. In addition, the City
Planner/Zoning Administrator shall notify all governmental units located within
1,320 feet of the property lines.
B. The applicant shall supply to the City Planner/Zoning Administrator a certified
list of all City property owners within 1,320 feet (one quarter mile) of the
property lines of the proposed district and Conditional Use Permit area at least
thirty (30) days prior to the hearing date.
Subd. 7 Performance Standards. In any ‘SG’ Overlay District, the following
performance standards shall be observed:
A. Permit Required. No sand and gravel operations shall occur except under the
terms of an approved sand and gravel Conditional Use Permit with a Planned Unit
Development agreement for phased reclamation and proposed end uses of the
land. After issuance of said permits, the applicant shall be subject to an annual
excavation permit issued by the City Council.
B. Slope Protection and Security Gates. All steep slopes (1:1 or greater) shall be
protected at the edge or rim by a fence, earth berm or other equally effective
means sufficient to prevent access, or easy approach, to said edge or rim. All pit
operations shall have a security gate at all access roads to the site.
C. Hours of Operation. Hours of operations for excavation, processing and truck
hauling, which may be amended by the City Council in conditions attached to the
Conditional Use Permit, shall be as follows:
(1) Areas less than three thousand six hundred (3,600) feet to R-1. R-2, and R-
3 zoned residential areas. The maximum hours of operations for
excavation, processing, and truck hauling equipment in a sand and gravel
overlay district where these activities are located closer than three
thousand six hundred (3,600) feet to the City’s, or adjacent City’s,
developed or zoned residential property which existed prior to the
effective date of this Chapter and Zoning Map amendment, shall be 7:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m. or daylight hours whichever is less, Monday through
Friday unless otherwise stipulated in the approved Conditional Use Permit
based upon noise and air pollution control mitigation measures.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 218
(2) Areas more than three thousand six hundred (3,600) feet from R-1, R-2,
and R-3 zoned residential areas. The maximum hours of operation for
excavation, processing and truck hauling equipment in a Sand and Gravel
Overlay District where these activities are located farther than three
thousand six hundred (3,600) feet to the City’s, or an adjacent City’s,
developed or zoned residential property which existed prior to the date of
this Chapter or Map Amendment, shall be 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday, unless otherwise stipulated in the approved Conditional
Use Permit based upon noise and air pollution control mitigation
measures.
D. Setback and Slopes to Adjacent Uses or Zones.
(1) Berm Heights, Setbacks from Property or Zoning District Boundaries and
Existing Buildings – Daytime and Nighttime. **
Operation
Zoned or used for housing,
school or park (feet)
Zoned and / or used for
Agricultural / Open
Commercial Industrial
(feet)
Maximum Stockpile
Height
40 40
Crushing Plant
(a) Temporary
Plant Must be located on the pit floor; operation and placement
of the crushing plant must be consistent with OSHA, MSHA,
or other applicable regulations.
Asphalt Plant
(a) Exterior
(b) Scrubber Ponds
2600
600
1000
600
Excavation / Mining
at Pit Face
Stockpiles
500
500
100
100
** Setback from R-O-W determined by land use and / or zoning on other side of
R-O-W; refer to column 1 or 2 for appropriate setback.
(2) In the last eighteen (18) months of operation, after filing and acceptance
by the City Council of a written notice of intent to complete operations,
the operator may complete excavation and reclamation operations to
within fifty (50) feet from any non-residential property line. For a
maximum of thirty-six (36) months after the acceptance of the notice of
intent, the operator may stockpile and process on the site, if not prohibited
by other sections of this Chapter.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 219
(3) All slopes during the operations shall be governed by applicable rules of
OSHA, MSHA, and / or other applicable regulatory agencies. All areas of
the pit not being actively mined shall be left in a neat and orderly
condition, with reasonable uniform slopes without overhang and without
vertical banks and with a near level bottom. Pit slopes for areas not being
actively mined shall be no more severe than the naturally assumed slope
for the material being processed (angle of repose). All steep slopes (1:1 or
greater) shall be protected at the top edge or rim by a fence or earth berm
or equivalent protection sufficient to prevent access, or easy approach, to
said edge or rim.
E. Slopes to Water Bodies. All ground water or storm water storage areas resulting
from excavation shall be rehabilitated as follows:
(1) Any storm water pond constructed for interim or final end uses shall have
a minimum one hundred (100) foot natural plant material shoreland buffer
zone setback constructed by the applicant as part of the reclamation of the
site.
(2) Storm water ponds shall have shallow water slopes of 10:1 to 20:1 in areas
with less than three (3) feet of water depth.
(3) In man-made groundwater lakes or wetlands, the bottom contour shall be
gradually sloping from the shoreline to the deepest portion of the water
body at a maximum slope of six (6) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical
(6:1) for at least one hundred (100) feet from the proposed shoreline
toward the center of the water body. Beyond one hundred (100) feet in
horizontal distance, the slope of the bottom contours may be steeper than
3:1 or as stipulated in the sand and gravel mining Conditional Use Permit.
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources guidelines for the
construction of wetlands may be used as an alternative method, if so
stipulated in the Conditional Use Permit.
(4) Shoreline slopes ascending from any water body shall not exceed one (1)
foot vertical to six (6) feet horizontal except as stipulated in the
Conditional Use Permit or excavation permit.
F. Setback Slopes Along Streets. Sand and gravel excavation shall not be conducted
closer than one hundred (100) feet to the right-of-way line of any existing or
platted street, road or highway except:
(1) Excavation may be conducted within such limits in order to reduce the
elevation thereof in conforming to a street grade established by the City
Engineer, as stipulated in the Conditional Use Permit for the operation.
(2) In the last eighteen (18) months of operation, after City Council
acceptance of a written notice of intent to complete operations, the
operator may complete reclamation grading operations within the one
hundred (100) foot required setback to any right-of-way property line. The
final graded slope to the bottom of the pit from the road right-of-way line
shall be no greater than three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 220
G. Setbacks of Access Roads. The mining setback area required may, in part, be used
for a central access road stipulated in the Conditional Use Permit.
H. Visual screening.
(1) The minimum required setback area along all exterior property lines shall
be bermed, landscaped and / or planted in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the sand and gravel Conditional Use Permit. Screening plans
shall be submitted with the Conditional Use Permit application.
(2) Processing plants and towers from crushing and asphalt plants shall be
located at the lowest or base elevation on the site. The height of the plant
and towers, and the base elevation shall be stipulated in the Conditional
Use Permit. Plants and towers shall be screened with secondary stockpile
berms not to exceed forty (40) feet.
I. Weed Control. Weeds and other unsightly or noxious vegetation shall be
controlled as necessary to preserve the appearance of the landscaped area.
Existing trees and topsoil along existing public rights-of-way shall be preserved,
maintained, and supplemented for the depth of the setback or as stipulated in the
Conditional Use Permit or excavation permit.
J. Location of Driveway Access. All means of driveway access to a sand and gravel
operation from any street shall be so located and designed as to avoid the routing
of vehicles from the property over streets that primarily serve abutting residential
development.
K. Paving Access Roads.
(1) All access roads from a sand and gravel operation to any paved public
roadway shall be paved with asphalt or concrete for a distance of at least
three hundred (300) feet, or the total length of the road, whichever is less,
to the intersection with a public roadway to minimize dust conditions.
During the annual excavation permit review, the City Council may require
additional paving length up to six hundred (600) feet on any access road, if
dust and truck tracking are identified as a problem by the City. All
unpaved access roads shall be treated with dust retardant on a regular basis
as stipulated in the annual excavation permit.
(2) Soil tracking from truck hauling onto public roads from the access road
may also be reduced through improvements required as part of the annual
excavation permit. These improvements may include but are not limited
to:
a. Extension of the pavement length or width on the access road;
b. Installation of a wash facility and wash rack.
L. Dust Control Standards. All stockpiles, internal roads and access roads within the
sand and gravel operations shall be treated to minimize dust conditions as
stipulated in the Conditional Use Permit or excavation permit.
M. Noise.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 221
(1) The maximum noise level at the property line of the site shall be within
the limit set by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency. In no case shall the noise level exceed
fifty (50) decibels measured at one thousand (1,000) feet from the noise
making equipment or activity or the ambient noise in the area.
(2) Noise levels at specific setbacks shall not exceed the following:
Equipment 100 feet 1000 feet
Centralized Crushers 88dBa 50dBa
Pit Face Crushers 83dBa 50dBa
Front End Loaders 81dBa 50dBa
All other Machinery 80dBa 50dBa
N. Water Pollution. Operators shall comply with all applicable Minnesota DNR and
Pollution Control Agency regulations and U.S. Corps of Engineers and
Environmental Protection Agency regulations for the protection of water quality.
No waste products or process residue, including untreated waste wash water, shall
be deposited in any lake, stream or natural drainage system except that lakes and
ponds wholly contained within the excavation site may be utilized. All human
waste materials shall utilize City central sewer disposal or sealed septic tanks with
monthly septic tank pumping, or portable sanitary facilities with weekly cleaning
or replacement.
O. Wastewater. Operators shall dispose of all wastewater used on the site in a
manner which will not adversely affect adjoining property and shall use silting
ponds or other means of disposing of the suspended solids in the waste water as
stipulated in the Conditional Use Permit or excavation permit.
P. Removal of Buildings. Within a period of eighteen (18) months after filing a letter
of intent to complete operations, or within six (6) months after determination by
the City Council that the site has been abandoned by the sand and gravel
operation, all buildings, structures and plants incidental to such operation shall be
dismantled and removed by and at the expense of the sand and gravel producer
last operating such building, structure or plant, or the owners of the property,
unless the structure or use is compatible with the anticipated ultimate use of the
property as determined by the City Council. All buildings, structures or plants not
removed as required by this section may be removed by the City with the costs for
said removal charged to the producer last operating on the property or the owner
of the property.
Q. Topsoil. Re-use of topsoil on the site and / or other soil retention methods must be
performed in accordance with either subparagraph 1 or 2 below.
(1) Stripping of topsoil from either ‘A’ or ‘B’ soil horizons shall be done only
as used in the excavation and mining operations (i.e. area-wide stripping
without vegetative replanting shall not be allowed). Graded or backfilled
areas (or banks in the case of excavation made to a water producing depth)
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 222
shall be covered with sufficient topsoil so as to be capable of supporting
the growth of vegetation. The operator shall guarantee that either:
a. All ‘A’ horizon topsoil scraped from the site shall be retained at
the site and used as surface soil in permanent berms or used for
restoration of the site; or
b. A performance bond or other guarantee stipulating that the
operator will replace all of the topsoil needed for reclamation of
the site is filed with the original Conditional Use Permit.
(2) Other soil retention methods may be stipulated in the Conditional Use
Permit or excavation permit. Methods identified in A Handbook for
Reclaiming Sand and Gravel Pits in Minnesota, most recent edition,
published by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, Division of
Minerals may be employed as part of the overall reclamation plan for the
site.
R. Landscaping. All landscaping and restoration of vegetative cover shall be
designed and performed in accordance with A Handbook for Reclaiming Sand
and Gravel Pits in Minnesota, most recent edition, published by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources, Division of Minerals.
Subd. 8 Excavation Permit. Permit required. All sand and gravel mining and processing
operations shall require an annual excavation permit as regulated by this subdivision. It
shall be unlawful for any person to remove, store, excavate or process rock, sand, dirt,
gravel, clay, or other like material as part of a gravel mining operation within the City
without first obtaining an Excavation Permit from the City Council. Permits for
commercial extraction of minerals shall only be issued for property lying within an ‘SG’
Overlay District, and for which a Conditional Use Permit has been issued by the City
Council. The Excavation Permit is an annual permit issued at the discretion of the City
and does not confer or grant a property right.
A. Exceptions. An Excavation Permit shall not be required for:
(1) The excavation, removal or storage of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or
other like material for the purpose of the foundation cellar or basement of
some immediately pending superstructure to be erected, built or placed
thereon contemporaneously with, or immediately following, such
excavation provided that a Building Permit has been issued.
(2) Such excavation, removal or storage of rock, dirt, gravel, sand, clay or like
material by the State, County, or City authorities in connection with the
construction or maintenance of roads or highways or utilities provided
such activity is conducted within said road or highway right-of-way.
(3) Curb cuts, utility hook-ups or street openings for which another permit is
required from the City.
(4) Excavation or installation of public utilities upon platted property within
two (2) years after an approved plat has been filed with the county.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 223
(5) Excavations less than one hundred (100) square feet in area or one foot in
depth.
(6) Excavating or grading for agricultural purposes.
(7) Grading of preliminary or final plats wherein a grading permit or final plat
has been approved in accordance with Chapter 13, Section 13.1.07 of the
Cloquet Subdivision Regulations.
B. Application. The application for the permit shall be made in writing to the City on
such form as the City may from time to time designate, and shall include such
information as may be required by the City and shall contain among other things:
(1) The correct legal description of the premises
(2) The name and address of the applicant, operator, and owner of the land
(3) The estimated time required to complete the work, and the amount of
material to be moved on the site, the amount to be removed from the
site, and the amount and type of material to be brought onto the site from
elsewhere.
(4) The highways, streets or other public roadways within the City upon or
along which the material shall be transported.
(5) Method and schedule for restoration and / or reclamation, consistent
with the Conditional Use Permit end use plan, and measures to control
erosion during and after the work.
(6) A map or plat of any proposed pit or excavation to be made showing the
stages or limits thereof together with the existing or proposed finished
elevations.
(7) A landscape plan showing visual screening from adjacent property as
required in the Conditional Use Permit for the project, and including all
excavation areas of the proposed permit which are within the required
setback areas.
(8) Location and surface of access roads.
(9) Method of controlling dust
(10) Method of controlling access to open excavation
(11) Method of maintaining security on premises.
(12) A restoration / reclamation grading plan designed to be compatible with
the Conditional Use Permit end use development plan. The plan shall
include:
a. Site analysis such as, but not limited to, trees, depth of topsoil,
adjacent and on-site buildings and land uses, flood levels,
elevation, public utilities, and percent of slope within and one
hundred (100) feet beyond the perimeter of the site and other
existing information necessary to analyze the site.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 224
b. An analysis of deposit information and cross sections indicating
the depth and quantities of existing sand and gravel deposits.
c. A plan indicating the operating pattern and staging or time
sequence schedule for excavation and restoration / reclamation of
the site, which may be revised from time to time based upon
current economic conditions.
d. Such geological and hydrological data as is necessary to determine
the feasibility of the proposed grading plan.
e. The contours at no greater than four-foot intervals of the land when
the mining operations are completed. Contours and grades shall
conform to the standards established as part of the end use plan in
the Conditional Use Permit, and shall be updated on an annual
basis in the area of mine operation.
C. Duration. The Excavation Permit shall run from January first through December
thirty-first (31) of each year, or for a lesser period of time as the City Council may
specify when the permit is issued.
D. Fees. A non-refundable application fee, established from time to time by the City
Council to cover administrative costs, shall accompany the application. No
application shall be processed or issued until payment of all fees due and payable
or due and unpaid, shall have been received by the City.
E. Operational Regulations.
(1) All commercial extraction and processing operations for which an
Excavation Permit has been issued shall comply with the performance
standards and reclamation, restoration and rehabilitation requirements of
the ‘SG’ Overlay District as set forth in this Chapter.
(2) Reclamation / restoration of an area where mining has been completed
shall be done in accordance with the approved end use plan within
eighteen (18) months of completion of mining in that area. Failure to
reclaim areas as approved in the annual Excavation Permit may be
considered grounds for termination of Excavation Permits.
(3) A reclamation / restoration area, as described in the annual Excavation
Permit, shall be considered a ‘Notice of Completion of Operations’
pursuant to this Section. Approval for opening of future mining areas
within the approved plan may be withheld pending completion of said
reclamation / restoration in accordance with the end use plan, if a ‘good
faith’ effort to complete such reclamation / restoration cannot be shown.
(4) The City Council, as a prerequisite to granting all permits, or after any
permit has been granted, may require the applicant, operator or owner of
the premises to:
a. Properly fence any pit or excavation
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 225
b. Slope the bank, fill, level off any pit or excavation or otherwise
place in such condition at any time so as not to be dangerous
because of sliding or caving banks; so as to minimize or stop
erosion or dust during or after excavation
c. Properly drain, fill or level off any pit or excavation so as to make
the same safe and healthful as the Council may determine
d. Reimburse the City for the cost of special street cleaning and
maintenance, and periodic additional inspections by City Staff or
consultant over and above the annual inspection, said inspections
being for the purpose of seeing that the terms under which the
permit has been issued are being complied with. Reimbursement of
such costs shall be paid by the operator within thirty (30) days of
being invoiced by the City.
f. Post a surety bond in such form and sum as the Council may
require, running to the City, conditioned to pay the City the cost
and expense of repairing any highways, streets or other public
ways within the City, made necessary by the special burden
resulting from the hauling and transporting thereon by the
applicant in the removal of rock, dirt, sand, gravel, clay or other
like material, the amount of such cost to be determined by the City
Council; and conditioned further to comply with all the
requirements of this Section and the particular permit, and to save
the City free and harmless from all suits or claims for damages
resulting from the negligent excavation, removal or storage of
rock, sand, gravel, dirt, clay or other like material within the City.
g. Post a surety bond in the amount of $5,000 plus $250 for each acre
being excavated at any time, running to the City, conditioned to
pay the City the cost and expense of restoration of any excavated
area and expense of grading, providing top soil and seeding where
the applicant, operator or owner shall fail to complete an
excavation or restoration within the conditions under which the
Excavation Permit was issued.
h. Comply with such other requirements as the Council shall from
time to time deem proper and necessary for the protection of the
citizens and the general welfare
i. Review the application with the Planning Commission for a
subsequent report to the City Council where the excavation may
affect existing trees, hills, views, ponds, lakes or similar natural
terrain features.
F. Inspections. At least once each year during the months of August through
October, or more often as necessary, the City Planner/Zoning Administrator shall
inspect, or instruct staff to inspect, all areas where a permit has been issued and
report such findings to the Planning Commission and City Council.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 226
G. Violations. In addition to being subject to punishment as provided in Section
17.4.05, any person who shall fail to obtain a permit as herein required, or who
shall fail to comply with any of the conditions upon which the same is issued, or
who fails to complete the filling, excavating or grading within the time prescribed
by the permit shall be enjoined from further work under the permit.
The City Council hereby reserves the right to revoke such permit upon a violation,
and upon revocation, the continuance of such work shall be a violation of this
Chapter. If the Council shall order any positive act to be done to conform the
work being done with that authorized by the permit, the same shall be completed
before any further filling, excavating or grading is done and within ten (10) days
after mailing a notice to do said acts to the person to whom the permit is issued.
Subd. 9 Reclamation, Restoration, Rehabilitation. The applicant shall comply with the
following time limits and standards during partial and complete reclamation of sand and
gravel site:
A. At the time of initial application, and as an annual update is necessary during the
review of the excavation permit, the applicant shall meet the requirements and
procedures for a Planned Unit Development (PUD) as described in 17.2.05,
illustrating all present and future staged uses proposed for a sand gravel site
undergoing reclamation. The City may combine public hearings for the
Conditional Use Permit and Planned Unit Development end use plan. Each annual
excavation permit shall be attached to the original Conditional Use Permit as an
amendment thereto. The City may required annual excavation permit applications
that differ from the initially approved operations and end use plans or from the
Conditional Use Permit, to be reviewed at a Conditional Use Permit amendment
public hearing. Each annual excavation permit shall contain an end use
reclamation / restoration / rehabilitation plan for the area in which mining has
been completed for that year.
B. All designated community collector streets, county roads, and utility corridors
approved as part of an end use Planned Unit Development shall be recorded with
the County Recorder as per the requirements of the official mapping statutes (M.S.
462.359) prior to issuance of the first excavation permit for the site. The approved
and recorded official map may be amended from time to time and re-recorded
after approval by the City Council.
C. Water Bodies and Drainage Plans.
(1) All proposed end use drainage, storage, surface run-off and man-made
groundwater lakes or wetland plans are subject to review by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources. All groundwater lakes and groundwater
wetlands created as part of the end use plan for a mined area shall be
subject to Section 17.5.18: Floodplain Regulations, Section 17.5.19:
Wetland Conservation Ordinance, and all applicable regulations of the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources and other applicable
regulatory agencies.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 227
(2) All drainage ways from impervious surfaces of the sand and gravel end
use plan shall be graded and drained in such a manner to direct such runoff
to surface water sedimentation and filtration ponds or wetlands prior to
release into any groundwater lake or wetland.
D. Grading. As a portion of the Planned Unit Development, the applicant shall
submit grading plans, including two-foot contour intervals, illustrating the
proposed final grades within the portion of the site rehabilitated each year with
the application for an annual excavation permit. All rehabilitation areas which are
planned for land and building uses (other than permanent open space or
agriculture) shall have a final elevation at least fifteen (15) feet above the normal
ordinary groundwater level; and such areas shall be planned for gravity
connection to the City’s municipal sanitary sewer or storm sewer system or as
approved by the City Engineer.
Subd. 10 Existing Operations.
A. Any sand and gravel operation existing and in compliance with previous City
Ordinances on the date of the adoption of this Chapter shall be permitted to
continue subject to the following:
(1) Such use shall not be permitted to expand its operation beyond the limits
of the permit under which it is presently operating.
(2) Such use shall be immediately subject to the final grading, landscaping,
slopes, utility, roadway and other performance standards, as specified in
Subd. 7 of this Section, and Section 17.4.02 of this Chapter, and shall
comply with all provisions within eighteen (18) months or upon City
Council acceptance of a notice of completion of operations, whichever
occurs first. If the completion of excavation and operation is not
completed by the operator, the City may complete the restoration and
utilize performance bond proceeds and assessment of additional costs to
pay for such work.
a. Exceptions. Hours of Operation and Setback requirements
specified in Subd. 7, C and D of this Section shall apply only to
new or expanded operations which are started after the effective
date of this Chapter. Operations existing prior to October 31, 1997
shall comply with applicable operating hours and setback
requirements as specified in their original permits.
Subd. 11 Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this Section or any permit
issued there from, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalties listed
in Section 17.4.05 of this Chapter and / or subject to revocation of all pertinent permits
after notice and hearing as specified below. Violations of conditions stipulated in a sand
and gravel mining Conditional Use Permit shall be considered as violations of this
Chapter.
The City Council may, in addition to any or all other remedies available for violations of
this Chapter, declare the premises a public nuisance and public hazard after a public
hearing held upon ten (10) days’ notice by registered mail to the last known address of
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 228
the owner or owners of the property and / or the operator or operators of said operation,
and may proceed to have the necessary work done to comply with the provisions of this
Chapter and assess all the costs and expenses thereof against said property in accordance
with this Chapter and applicable State Statutes.
17.6.21 PUD - Planned Unit Development Overlay District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District is intended to
encourage efficient use of land and provision of amenities by allowing, under certain
circumstances, a more flexible means of land development and redevelopment than is
otherwise permissible under the lot-by-lot restrictions of the standard or underlying
zoning districts of this Chapter.
Subd. 2 Applicability.
A. Ownership. The tract shall be a development of land under unified control at the
time of application, planned and scheduled to be developed as a whole. However,
no authorizations or permits shall be granted for such development unless the
applicant has acquired actual ownership of, or executed a binding sales contract
for all of the property comprising such tract. For purposes of this section,
ownership shall include a lease of not less than fifty (50) years duration. The term
‘single ownership’ shall include ownership of portions of such development by
two or more wholly owned subsidiaries of a single owner, or by such single
owner and one or more of its wholly owned subsidiaries..
B. Minimum Area. No planned unit development may include less than ten (10)
acres of contiguous land.
C. Comprehensive Plan. The development should be planned so that it is consistent
and harmonious with the Comprehensive Plan for the community.
D. Financing. The financing for the project should be proven to be available to the
applicant on conditions and in an amount which is sufficient to assure completion
of the planned unit development.
E. Conservation Subdivision development. Conservation subdivision developments
pursuant to Section 17.6.22 shall be processed in accordance with the planned unit
development provisions of this Section.
F. Density. In any PUD the maximum number of dwelling units allowed shall not
exceed those of the land use districts in the Comprehensive Plan.
(1) Density increases consistent with the Comprehensive Plan may be allowed if it
can be demonstrated to meet objectives of affordable housing or increased open
space identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Optional waiver of maximum residential density requirements. To assist in
providing low and moderately priced housing or to provide increased land for
open space corridors, park trails or natural resources preservation, certain zoning
and subdivision ordinance standards may be modified when a PUD is submitted
for approval. Land upon which the applicant agrees to build increased residential
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 229
densities, consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and/or retain as increased open
space, consistent with the Comprehensive Plan may also be subject to optional
zoning provisions.
Subd. 3 Administration. Refer to Section 17.2.05 of this Chapter for application and
administration of the Planned Unit Development provisions of this Section.
17.6.22 C - Conservation Subdivision Overlay District.
Subd. 1 Intent. The intent of this Section is to allow the optional development and
redevelopment of land in the City of Cloquet consistent with the principles of conservation
subdivision developments and in accordance with Planned Unit Development (PUD)
procedures. For the purpose of this Chapter, a conservation subdivision development is
intended to allow for a more compact layout of rural residential uses than is typically allowed
in conventional rural residential development in return for the conservation of a large
contiguous area of common open space that helps conserve rural character or significant
natural or cultural resources. More specifically, the intent of the Conservation Overlay
District is as follows:
A. Guide the future growth and development of the community consistent with the City
of Cloquet’s adopted Comprehensive Plan;
B. Guide the detailed analysis of land so as to locate and coordinate appropriate areas for
development and conservation;
C. Preserve rural character through the permanent preservation of meaningful open
space and sensitive natural resources;
D. Preserve scenic views by minimizing views of new development from existing roads;
E. Preserve agricultural land by concentrating housing on lands that have low
agricultural potential;
F. Provide commonly owned open space areas for passive and / or active recreational
use by residents of the development and, where specified, the larger community;
G. Provide for a diversity of lot sizes, housing choices, and building densities to
accommodate a variety of age and income groups;
H. Provide buffering between residential development and non-residential uses;
I. Protect and restore environmentally sensitive areas and biological diversity, minimize
disturbance to significant existing vegetation, and maintain environmental corridors;
J. Meet demand for housing in a rural setting.
Subd. 2 Applicability. A conservation subdivision development is allowed pursuant to the
following conditions:
A. Allowable Underlying Zoning District. A Conservation Subdivision Development
shall only be allowed in the FR Farm Residential District
B. Minimum Area. A conservation subdivision development shall have a minimum area
of twenty (20) acres or more;
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 230
C. Minimum of Four Residential Parcels. The conservation subdivision development
shall have at least four (4) residential parcels;
D. Planned Unit Development. A Conservation Subdivision Development shall be
designed and processed pursuant to the Planned Unit Development procedures
specified in Section 17.2.05 of this Chapter; and
E. Plat. The creation of a Conservation Subdivision shall require preliminary and final
plat approval pursuant to Chapter 13, Section 13.1.06 and Section 13.1.07 of the
Subdivision Regulations.
Subd. 3 Permitted Uses and Density.
A. Permitted Uses. Single-family detached residential dwellings, agriculture, parks, open
space, and similar and related uses are the only permitted uses in a Conservation
Subdivision Development. Commercial and industrial uses shall be prohibited.
B. Overall Density and Development Yield. The overall density for the parent parcel is
the same as would be allowed for a conventional development in the FR Farm
Residential Development District, except that the base development yield may be
increased if the development complies with one or more of the following standards.
The maximum bonus permitted is twenty (20) percent.
(1) Endowment. Creation of an endowment where the principal would generate
sufficient annual interest to cover the conservation easement holder’s yearly
costs relating to taxes, insurance, maintenance, enforcement, and similar
items.
(2) Public access. Provision of access by the general public to trails, parks, or
other recreational facilities, excluding golf courses.
(3) Affordable housing. Provision of affordable housing, to include a minimum of
twenty-five (25) percent of all units that would be affordable to moderate
income households, as defined by the United State Department of Housing
and Urban Development.
Subd. 4 Design Standards and Guidelines.
A. Design Theme. Conservation Subdivision Developments shall develop a conservation
theme or themes. This theme shall be identified at the time of the initial Planned Unit
Development (PUD) application. Conservation themes may include, but are not
limited to, forest stewardship, water quality preservation, farmland preservation,
natural habitat restoration, or viewshed preservation. The Planning Commission shall
have the ability to specify which areas shall be preserved.
B. Residential Parcel Requirements.
(1) Parcel size. The minimum parcel size with onsite septic shall be one (1)
acre.
(2) Setback requirements for principal buildings. The setbacks of underlying FR
Farm Residential Development District may be modified as follows for an
approved conservation subdivision development:
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 231
a. Minimum principal building setback from the front parcel line or
corner street side parcel line: Twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line:
Eight (8) feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line: Thirty-five
(35) feet.
(3) Height requirements for principal buildings. Principal buildings shall not
exceed two stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height.
(4) Size, height, and setback requirements of accessory buildings. The setbacks
of the underlying FR Farm Residential Development District shall apply for
all conservation subdivision developments.
(5) Maximum impervious coverage. Parcels shall be configured to minimize the
amount of impervious surfaces, but in no case shall the impervious coverage
of a parcel or lot exceed thirty-five (35) percent.
(6) Access. Most parcels shall take access from an interior local street.
(7) Streets. Parcels should, to the maximum extent practical, be configured to
minimize the amount of street length require for the development.
(8) Development envelopes. Development envelopes should, to the maximum
extent practical, be configured to minimize the loss of trees and other
significant resources. Development envelopes should not be located on
ridges, hilltops, along peripheral public roads, or in other visually prominent
areas.
(9) Agricultural uses. If agricultural uses are being maintained, parcels should
be configured in a manner that maximizes the usable area remaining for
such agricultural uses with appropriate buffers between agricultural uses and
residential structures.
(10) Common open space. All parcels within a neighborhood should abut
common open space on at least one side. A local street may separate parcels
from open space. Parcels should generally be oriented around a central
green square and / or a physical amenity such as a meadow, a stand of trees,
or some other natural or restored feature.
(11) Energy efficiency. Residential structures should be sited to maximize energy
efficiency.
C. Residential Cluster Siting Standards and Guidelines.
(1) Residential clusters. All residential parcels and dwellings shall be grouped
into clusters. Each cluster shall contain no less than four (4) dwelling units
and no more than twenty (20) dwelling units.
(2) Location of residential clusters. Residential clusters shall be located to
minimize negative impacts on the natural, scenic, and cultural resources of the
site and conflicts between compatible uses.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 232
(3) Encroachment on significant natural resources prohibited. Residential clusters
shall avoid encroaching on rare plant communities, sites with high
environmental or cultural qualities, or endangered species identified by the
Department of Natural Resources.
(4) Connections to adjacent open space. Whenever possible, open space shall
connect with existing or potential open space lands on adjoining parcels and
local or regional recreational trails.
(5) Siting criteria. Residential clusters should be sited to achieve the following
goals, to the extent practical:
a. Minimize impacts to agricultural uses and avoid interference with
normal agricultural practices;
b. Minimize disturbance to woodlands, wetlands, grasslands, and
specimen trees;
c. Prevent downstream impacts due to runoff through adequate onsite
storm water management practices.
d. Protect scenic views of open land from adjacent roads. Visual impact
should be minimized through use of landscaping or other features; and
e. Protect archaeological sites and existing historic buildings or
incorporate them through adaptive reuse.
(6) Landscape screening. Landscaping around the cluster may be necessary to
reduce off-site views of residence.
D. Common Open Space Design Standards and Guidelines.
(1) Ownership and use. The minimum common open space required shall be
owned and maintained under one of the alternatives listed in this Section and
as approved by the City Council. The uses within the open space shall be
accessible to residents of the development. These uses may also be available
to the general public providing the proper approvals are received. The
required common open space shall be undivided and restricted in perpetuity
from future development as specified in this Section.
(2) Minimum area. Common open space shall be designated as part of the
development. The minimum required common open space is sixty (60)
percent of the gross acreage.
(3) Priorities. The areas to be preserved as common open space shall be
identified on an individual basis in an effort to conserve and provide the best
opportunities to restore and enlarge the best quality natural features of each
particular site. In general, common open space priorities shall be as follows:
a. First priority should be given to intact natural communities, rare and
endangered species, environmental corridors, natural and restored
prairies, significant historic and archaeological properties, and steep
slopes.
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
17.6 Zoning Districts 233
b. Second priority should be given to areas providing some plant and
wildlife habitat and open spaces values.
c. Third priority should be given to areas providing little habitat, but
providing viewshed, recreation, or a sense of open space.
(4) Allowable structures. The following areas or structures may be located within
the common open space area and shall be counted toward the overall common
open space percentage required:
a. Parking areas for access to and use of the open space developed at a
scale limited to the potential users of the open space.
b. Privately held buildings or structures provided they are accessory to
the use of the common open space.
c. Shared septic systems and shared potable water systems.
(5) Street right-of-ways. Street right-of-ways shall not be counted toward the
required minimum common open space.
(6) Water bodies. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the required common
open space may consist of water bodies, ponds, floodplains, or wetlands.
(7) Plant and animal habitat. That portion of the common open space designed to
provide plant and animal habitat should be kept as intact as possible. Trails
should be designed to avoid fragmenting these areas.
(8) Recreational use. Accessible common open space in upland areas should be
available for recreational uses such as trails, play areas, or community
gardens, but should be designed in a manner that avoids adversely impacting
archaeological sites.
(9) Trails. A trail system connecting common open space areas accessible to
neighborhood residents, and connecting these areas to neighborhood streets
and to planned or developed trails on adjacent parcels shall be identified in the
conservation subdivision plan.
E. Sewage and Water Facilities.
(1) Drinking water. Unless municipal water service is readily available, water for
a conservation subdivision shall be provided by individual onsite wells.
(2) Sanitary sewer. Unless municipal sanitary sewer is readily available, sewer
for a conservation subdivision shall be provided with an onsite sewage system
that complies with the requirements of the State of Minnesota and the City of
Cloquet.
Section 17.6.23 Tabulation of Dimensional and Special Requirements for Zoning Districts
Requirement FR SR R-1 R-2 R-3 MHC MRC NC RC HC CC LI HI OM PI PP AIR
Building Height
Maximum
Height (feet) –
Principal
Structure
35 ft 35 ft 35 ft 45 ft 60 ft 25 ft
See Section
17.6.09 for
Regulations
35 ft 60 ft 40 ft 45 ft 40 ft 75ft
4 stories
with max
height
60 ft
35 ft 2 stories /
35 ft
2 stories /
35 ft
Maximum
Height (feet) –
Accessory
Structure
50 ft 15 ft 15 ft 15 ft 15 ft 1 story /
25 ft
See Section
17.6.10 for
Regulations
15 ft 15 ft 15 ft
Not taller
than
Principal
Building
25 ft 25 ft 25 ft 15 ft 15 ft 15 ft
Lot Area Requirements:
Minimum Lot
Area 5 acres 1 acre
See
Section
17.6.05 for
Regulations
8,700 sq.
ft. 6,000 sq. ft. 10 acres
See Section
17.6.09 for
Regulations
14,000 sq
ft
20,000 sq
ft 3,000 sq ft 3,500 sq ft 20,000 sq
ft
Minimum
area to meet
setback,
parking /
loading,
screening,
etc. requirements
20,000 sq
ft 21,000 sf N/A N/A
Minimum Lot
Width 200 ft 150 ft
See
Section
17.6.05 for
Regulations
60 ft 60 ft 50 ft
See Section
17.6.09 for
Regulations
100 ft 120 ft 25 ft 25 ft 100 ft
Minimum
width to meet
all setback,
parking /
loading,
screening,
etc. requirements
120 ft 100 ft N/A N/A
Minimum Lot
Depth 250 ft 200 ft
See
Section
17.6.05 for
Regulations
100 ft 100 ft 100 ft
See Section
17.6.09 for
Regulations
100 ft 120 ft 75 ft N/A 100 ft N/A 120 ft N/A N/A N/A
Allowable
Percentage of
Lot coverage
(all structures)
40% 40% 35% 30%
Building
height 40 ft.
or less –
30%;
building
height over
40 ft. –
25%
35% -
home
50 %
home and
accessory
buildings
combined
See Section
17.6.09 for
Regulations
50% 60% 100% 100% 40% 60% 40% 50% No Max No Max
Yard Setbacks: Minimum Requirements
Front: bldg.
line to Street
ROW line
65 ft 30 ft 25 ft 25 ft
25 ft plus 1
ft additional
for each 2
feet of
building
height over
40 ft
See
Section
17.6.08 for
Setback
Regulations
See Section
17.6.09 for
Regulations
25 ft
Primary
arterials –
100 ft;
other
streets –
35 ft
See
Section
17.6.12 for
Setback
Regulations
None 25 ft 25 ft
Primary
arterials –
100 ft;
other
streets 35
ft
25 ft 30 ft 30 ft
Side: bldg. line
to lot line 10 ft 15 ft
10% of lot
frontage
up to
maximum
of 10 ft
Total
20% of lot
frontage
up to
maximum
of 20 feet.
The
minimum
setback
allowed is
5 ft.
Each side:
12% of lot
frontage
plus 1 ft
additional
for each
2 ft of
building
height over
40 ft up to
max of 30 ft
See
Section
17.6.08 for
Setback
Regulations
See Section
17.6.09 for
Regulations
10 ft 20 ft
See
Section
17.6.12 for
Setback
Regulations
None 15 ft 15 ft 20 ft 15 ft 8 ft 8 ft
City of Cloquet: Chapter 17 Zoning
235
Requirement FR SR R-1 R-2 R-3 MHC MRC NC RC HC CC LI HI IP PI PP AIR
Detached
accessory 10 ft 10 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft
See
Section
17.6.08 for
Setback
Regulations
See Section
17.6.09 for
Regulations
5 ft 20 ft
See
Section
17.6.12 for
Setback
Regulations
2.5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 10 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft
Rear: bldg line
to lot line or
alley ROW line
40 ft 40 ft 30 ft 20 ft 20 ft
See
Section
17.6.08 for
Setback
Regulations
See Section
17.6.09 for
Regulations
15 ft 30 ft
See
Section
17.6.12 for
Setback
Regulations
None 50 ft 50 ft 30 ft 25 ft 35 ft 35 ft
Detached
accessory
structure
15 ft 10 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft
See
Section
17.6.08 for
Setback
Regulations
See Section
17.6.09 for
Regulations
5 ft 15 ft
See
Section
17.6.12 for
Setback
Regulations
2.5 ft 5 ft 12 ft 15 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft
Corner – bldg.
line to street
ROW line – all
structures
(principal &
accessory)*
65 ft 30 ft 25 ft 25 ft
25 ft plus 1
ft additional
for each 2 ft
of building
height over
40 ft
See
Section
17.6.08 for
Setback
Regulations
See Section
17.6.09 for
Regulations
25 ft
Primary
arterials –
100 ft;
other
streets –
35 ft
See
Section
17.6.12 for
Setback
Regulations
None 25 ft 25 ft
Primary
arterials
100 ft;
other
streets 35
ft
25 ft 30 ft 30 ft
Setback from
“R” district
boundary
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
See Section
17.6.09 for
Regulations
15 ft N/A
See
Section
17.6.12 for
Setback
Regulations
10 ft 75 ft 75 ft
50 ft or 30
ft plus
screening
(See
section
17.6.17,
Subd. 6,
A)
10 ft N/A 15 ft
Performance
Standards N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
See Section
17.6.09 for
Regulations
See
Section
17.4.02
See
Section
17.4.02
See
Section
17.6.12 for
Setback
Regulations
See
Section
17.4.02
See
Section
17.4.02
See Section
17.4.02
See
Section
17.4.02
N/A N/A See Section
17.4.02
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
50 % 50 % 50 % 50% 70% 70%
See Section
17.6.09 for
Regulations
70% 70% 100% 100% 70% 80% 70% 70% 85% No Max
* Corner Yard Setbacks: Minimum Requirements – front yard setback is required for both yards abutting streets (corner lots).
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Effective Date: March 7, 2006
Amendments: 03-04-08 348A / 07-21-15 450A
Section 18.1 General 1
Section 18.1: General
18.1.01. Purpose and Objectives. This Chapter sets forth uniform requirements for storm water management
systems and practices within the City of Cloquet. In the event of any conflict between provisions of this Chapter or
other regulations adopted by the City of Cloquet, the State of Minnesota, or Federal authorities, the more restrictive
standard shall prevail.
The objectives of this Chapter are as follows:
a) To promote, preserve, and enhance the natural resources within the City of Cloquet from adverse or
undesirable impacts occasioned by development or other activities.
b) To protect and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the people and property through effective storm
water quantity and quality management practices.
c) To regulate land development activity, land disturbing activity, or other activities that may have an adverse
and/or potentially irreversible impact on storm water quantity, water quality and/or environmentally
sensitive lands and to encourage compatibility between such uses.
d) To establish detailed review standards and procedures for land development activities, as they relate to
storm water management, throughout the City of Cloquet, thereby achieving a balance between urban
growth and development and the protection of water quality.
e) To provide for adequate storm water system analysis and design as necessary to protect public and private
property, water quality and existing natural resources.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.2 Definitions 2
Section 18.2: Definitions
18.2.01. Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meaning given. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include
the future tense. Words in the plural number shall include the singular number, and words in the singular number
shall include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
Subd. 1. Applicant. Any person or group that applies for a building permit, subdivision approval, zoning
change, approach, excavation or special use permit, storm water plan approval, or any other permit which
allows land disturbing activities. Applicant also means that person's agents, employees, and others acting
under this person's or group's direction. The term "applicant" also refers to the permit holder or holders and
the permit holder's agents, employees, and others acting under this person's or group's direction.
Subd. 2. Best Management Practices (BMP’s). Erosion and sediment control and water quality
management practices that are the most effective and practicable means of controlling, preventing, and
minimizing the degradation of surface water, including; construction-phasing, minimizing the length of
time soil areas are exposed, prohibitions, and other management practices published by federal, state, or
designated area-wide planning agencies.
Subd. 3. Buffer. The buffer strip begins at the delineated edge of delineated wetlands or the "ordinary
high water mark" for rivers and streams. This start point corresponds to the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources' definition of a "shoreline" in Minnesota Rules 6115.0030 (e.g. a stream 30 feet in width
between banks with 100 foot buffer strips has a total protected width of 230 feet).
Subd. 4. City. The City of Cloquet or the City Council of the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 5. City Engineer. The City Engineer of the City of Cloquet or authorized agent.
Subd. 6. Common Plan of Development or Sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct
land disturbing activities may be taking place at different times, or on different schedules, but under one
proposed plan. This item is broadly defined to include design, permit application, advertisement or physical
demarcation indicating that land disturbing activities may occur.
Subd. 7. Control Measure. A practice or combination of practices to control erosion and attendant
pollution, see also Best Management Practices.
Subd. 8. Council. The City Council of the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 9. Detention Facility. A natural or manmade structure, including wetlands, used for the temporary
storage of runoff and which may contain a permanent pool of water, or may be dry during times of no
runoff.
Subd. 10. Development. Any land disturbance activity that changes the site's runoff characteristics in
conjunction with residential, commercial, industrial or institutional construction or alteration.
Subd. 11. Developer. A person, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, federal or state
agency, or political subdivision thereof engaged in a land disturbance and/or land development activity.
Subd. 12. Discharge. The release, conveyance, channeling, runoff, or drainage, of storm water, including
snowmelt.
Subd. 13. DNR Catchment Area. The Hydrologic Unit 08 areas delineated and digitized by the
Minnesota DNR. DNR catchment areas may be locally corrected, in which case the local corrections may
be used.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.2 Definitions 3
Subd. 14. Drainage Easement. A right to use the land of another for a specific purpose, such as a rightof-
way for the movement of water across or under the land surface or the storage of water.
Subd. 15. Erosion. Removing the surface of the land by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. Erosion
can be accelerated by the activities of man and nature.
Subd. 16. Erosion Control. Refers to methods employed to prevent erosion. Examples include soil
stabilization practices, horizontal slope grading, temporary or permanent cover, and construction phasing.
Subd. 17. Erosion & Sediment Control Plan (E&S Control Plan). A written description and/or plan
indicating the number, locations, sizes, and other pertinent information about best management practice
methods designed to reduce erosion of the land surface and the deposition of sediment within a waterway.
An E&S Control Plan is required as part of a Storm Water Management Plan. Both the Storm Water
Management Plan and E&S Control Plans are used in developing the State mandated Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). An E&S Control Plan may be required for certain projects not
requiring a full Storm Water Management Plan, as outlined in this ordinance or determined necessary by
the City Engineer.
Subd. 18. Exposed Soil Areas. All areas of the construction site where the vegetation (trees, shrubs,
brush, grasses, etc.) or impervious surface has been removed, thus rendering the soil more prone to erosion.
This includes topsoil stockpile areas, borrow areas and disposal areas within the construction site. It does
not include temporary stockpiles or surcharge areas of clean sand, gravel, concrete or bituminous, which
have less stringent protection. Once soil is exposed, it is considered "exposed soil," until it meets the
definition of "final stabilization."
Subd. 19. Final Stabilization. Means that all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed,
and that a uniform (evenly distributed, e.g., without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a
density of seventy (70) percent of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures has been established, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been employed.
Simply sowing grass seed is not considered final stabilization. Where agricultural land is involved, such as
when pipelines are built on crop or rangeland, final stabilization constitutes returning the land to its
preconstruction agricultural use.
Subd. 20. Green Infrastructure. A wide array of practices at multiple scales that manage wet weather and
that maintain or restore natural hydrology by infiltrating, evapotranspiring, or harvesting and using storm
water. On a regional scale, green infrastructure is the preservation or restoration of natural landscape
features, such as forests, floodplains and wetlands, coupled with policies such as infill and redevelopment
that reduce overall imperviousness in a watershed. On the local scale, green infrastructure consists of site
and neighborhood-specific practices.
Subd. 21. Hydric Soils. Soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing
season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part of the soil profile.
Subd. 22. Hydrophytic Vegetation. Macrophytic (large enough to be observed by the naked eye) plant
life growing in water, soil, or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of
excessive water content.
Subd. 23. Impervious Area. A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards the entry of water
into the soil, and causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow
than existed prior to development. Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots,
storage areas; and concrete, asphalt, or gravel parking lots and roads.
Subd. 24. Illicit Connections. An illicit connection is either of the following: (1) Any drain or
conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm sewer
system including but not limited to any conveyances that allows any non-storm water discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm sewer system and any connections to the
storm sewer system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.2 Definitions 4
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the City OR, (2) any drain or conveyance
connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm sewer system that has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the City.
Subd. 25. Illicit Discharge. (See PROHIBITED DISCHARGE).
Subd. 26. Land Use Development. The act of subdivision or platting properties for
personal use, adding value or for the purposes of resale. This includes the construction and/or demolition of
buildings, structures, roads, parking lots, paved storage areas, and similar facilities.
Subd. 27. Land Disturbing Activity. Any land change that may result in soil erosion from water or wind
and the movement of sediments into or upon waters or lands within the City's jurisdiction, including
construction, clearing & grubbing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. Within the context
of this ordinance, land disturbance activity does not mean:
a) Minor land disturbance activities such as home gardens and an individual's home landscaping,
repairs, and maintenance work, which will not result in sediments entering the storm water
system.
b) Additions or modifications to existing single family structures that result in creating under
five thousand (5,000) square feet of exposed soil or impervious surface and will not result in
sediments entering the storm water system.
c) Construction, installation, and maintenance of trees, fences, signs, posts, poles, and electric,
telephone, cable television, utility lines or individual service connections to these utilities,
which result in creating under five thousand (5,000) square feet of exposed soil or impervious
surface and will not result in sediments entering the storm water system.
d) Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or silvicultural (forestry) crops.
e) Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property and emergency repairs, unless the land
disturbing activity would have otherwise required an approved erosion and sediment control
plan, except for the emergency. If such a plan would have been required, then the disturbed
land area shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the City's requirements as soon as
possible.
Subd. 28. Landowner. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity holding title to or having a divided
or undivided interest in land.
Subd. 29. Local Detention. Detention intended to serve only the developing area in question and no areas
outside of the development boundaries. As such it is under the control of one owner or group of owners.
This is also known as on-site detention.
Subd. 30. Local Drainage System. The storm drainage system which transports the minor and major
storm water runoff to the major storm water system serving only the property within the development
boundaries, under the control of one owner or group of owners. This is also known as the on-site drainage
system.
Subd. 31. Management Practice. A practice or combination of practices to control erosion and water
quality degradation.
Subd. 32. Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains:
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.2 Definitions 5
a) owned or operated by a state, city, town, county, district, association, or other public
body, created by or pursuant to state law, having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage,
industrial wastes, storm water, or other wastes, including special districts under state
law such as a sewer district, flood control district, or drainage district or similar
entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribe organization, or a designated
and approved management Agency under section 208 of the federal Clean Water Act,
United States Code, title 33, section 1288, that discharges into waters of the state
b) designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water
c) that is not a combined sewer; and that is not part of a publicly owned treatment works
as defined in 40 CFR § 122.2
Subd. 33. National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). Any permit or requirement
enforced pursuant to the Clean Water Act as amended for the purposes of regulating Storm Water
discharge.
Subd. 34. New Development. All construction activity that is not defined as redevelopment.
Subd. 35. Noncompliance Fee. The administrative penalty, or fee, for re-inspection of a property which
may be assessed to a Permittee, Land Owner, Developer or their Contractor(s) for noncompliance with the
provisions and/or conditions of an approved storm water plan and/or permit or the violation of any other
provisions contained in this storm water ordinance.
Subd. 36. Nationwide Urban Runoff Program (NURP). An urban runoff study by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
Subd. 37. On-Site Detention. (See Local Detention System).
Subd. 38. On-Site Drainage System. (See Local Drainage System).
Subd. 39. Outlet. Any discharge point, including storm sewers, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
Subd. 40. Owner or Occupant. Any person owning or using a lot, parcel of land, or premises connected
to and discharging Storm Water into the storm water system of the City, and who pays for and is legally
responsible for the payment of storm water rates or charges made against the lot, parcel of land, building or
premises, if connected to the Storm Water system or who would pay or be legally responsible for such
payment.
Subd. 41. Permanent Cover. Means "final stabilization." Examples include grass, gravel, asphalt, and
concrete. See also the definition of "final stabilization." Any buildings, structures, landscaping and related
features as part of a development project approved for construction or constructed prior to the passage of
this ordinance.
Subd. 42. Permanent Facilities. Those features of a storm water management plan which are part of any
natural or constructed storm water system that requires periodic maintenance to retain their operational
capabilities. This includes but is not limited to storm sewers, infiltration areas, detention areas, ponds,
channels, streets, etc.
Subd. 43. Permit. With in the context of this rule a "permit" is a written warrant or license granted for
construction, subdivision approval, or to allow land disturbing activities.
Subd. 44. Permittee. Any person who applies for and receives approval of a storm water plan and/or
permit from the City and/or State.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.2 Definitions 6
Subd. 45. Person. Any developer, individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchise, association,
owner, occupant of property, or agency, either public or private.
Subd. 46. Pollutant. Anything that causes or contributes to pollution, that when discharged, have the
potential to do any of the following:
a) Interfere with state designated water uses;
b) Obstruct or cause damage to Waters of the State;
c) Change water color, odor, or usability as a drinking water source through causes not
attributable to natural processes affecting surface water or groundwater;
d) Add an unnatural surface film on the water;
e) Adversely change other chemical, biological, thermal, or physical condition, in surface water
or groundwater;
f) Harm human life, aquatic life, or terrestrial plant and wildlife.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive
fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other
discarded or abandoned objects, ammunition ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or
contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues
that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Subd. 47. Prohibited Discharge. (Can also be referred to as Illicit Discharge.) A non-storm water
discharge into the storm water system or a natural water, including but not limited to:
a) Debris or other materials such as grass clippings, vegetative materials, tree branches, earth
fill, rocks, concrete chunks, metal, other demolition or construction materials, or structures.
b) The disposal or misuse of chemicals or any other materials that would degrade the quality of
waters within the system, including, but not limited to chemicals (fertilizers, herbicides,
pesticides, etc.) or petroleum based products (gasoline, oil, fuels, solvents, paints, etc.).
c) Erosion and sediment originating from a property and deposited onto City streets, private
properties or into the storm water conveyance system, including those areas not specifically
covered under an approved Storm Water Management Plan or Storm Water Permit.
d) Failure to remove sediments transported or tracked onto City streets by vehicles or
construction traffic within 24 hours of it being deposited on the street.
For the purposes of this ordinance, Prohibited Discharges do not include the following, unless
information is available to indicate otherwise:
Water line flushing;
Landscape irrigation;
Diverted stream flows;
Rising ground water;
Uncontaminated ground water infiltration;
Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
Discharges from potable water sources;
Foundation drains;
Air conditioning condensate;
Irrigation water;
Springs;
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.2 Definitions 7
Water from crawl space pumps;
Footing drains;
Lawn watering;
Individual residential car washing;
Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
De-chlorinated swimming pool discharges and
Street wash water
Subd. 48. Public Storm Sewer. A storm sewer that is owned and operated by the City and is located
entirely within publicly owned land or easements.
Subd. 49. Regional Detention. Detention facilities provided to serve an area outside the development
boundaries. A regional detention site generally receives runoff from multiple storm water sources and
serves an area of approximately one quarter section.
Subd. 50. Receiving Water. Any lake, river, stream or wetland that receives storm water discharges
Subd. 51. Redevelopment. Any construction activity where, prior to the start of construction, the areas to
be disturbed have 15 percent or more of impervious surface(s).
Subd. 52. Retention Facility. A natural or man-made structure that provides for the storage of all or a
portion of storm water runoff.
Subd. 53. Runoff. The rainfall, snowmelt, dewatering, or irrigation water flowing over the grounds
surface and into open channels, underground storm sewers, and detention or retention ponds.
Subd. 54. Saturated Oil. The highest seasonal elevation in the soil that is in a reduced chemical state
because of soil voids being filled with water. Saturated soil is evidenced by the presence of redoximorphic
features or other information.
Subd. 55. Sediment. Solid material or organic material that, in suspension, is being transported or has
been moved by air, water, gravity, or ice, and deposited at another location.
Subd. 56. Sediment Control. The methods employed to prevent sediment from leaving the development
site. Examples of sediment control practices include, but are not limited to silt fences, sediment traps, earth
dikes, drainage swales, check dams, subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, storm drain inlet protection, and
temporary or permanent sedimentation basins.
Subd. 57. Site. The entire area included in the legal description of the parcel or other land division on
which the land development or land disturbing activity is proposed in the storm water plan or permit
application.
Subd. 58. Stabilized. The exposed ground surface after it has been covered by sod, erosion control
blanket, riprap, pavement or other material that prevents erosion. Simply sowing grass seed is not
considered stabilization. Ground surfaces may be temporarily or permanently stabilized (also see Final
Stabilization).
Subd. 59. State. The State of Minnesota.
Subd. 60. Storm Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying storm waters, surface runoff, and drainage,
excluding sewage and industrial wastes.
Subd. 61. Storm Water. Means precipitation runoff, storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, and any other
surface runoff and drainage. Storm water does not include construction site dewatering.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.2 Definitions 8
Subd. 62. Storm Water Management. The planned set of public policies and activities undertaken to
regulate runoff and reduce erosion, and maintain or improve water quality under various specified
conditions within various portions of the drainage system. It may establish criteria for controlling peak
flows and/or runoff volumes, for runoff detention and retention, or for pollution control, and may specify
criteria for the relative elevations among various elements of the drainage system. Storm water
management is primarily concerned with limiting future flood damages and environmental impacts due to
development, whereas flood control aims at reducing the extent of flooding that occurs under current
conditions.
Subd. 63. Storm Water Management Criteria. Specific guidance provided to the engineer/designer to
carry out drainage and storm water management policies. An example might be the specification of local
design hydrology and use of the design storm.
Subd. 64. Storm Water Management Plan. (See STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION
PLAN (SWPPP).
Subd. 65. Storm Water Management Facilities. Physical facilities that collect, store, convey, and treat
storm water runoff in urban areas. These facilities normally include detention and retention facilities,
streets, storm sewers, inlets, open channels, and special structures, such as inlets, manholes, and energy
dissipaters.
Subd. 66. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). A joint storm water and erosion and
sediment control plan that is written as a prerequisite to obtaining an NPDES Storm Water Permit for
Construction Activity, that when implemented will decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land and off-site
non-point pollution. It involves both temporary and permanent controls. The SWPPP, which draws its
information from a Storm Water Management Plan and is typically condensed, must be incorporated into
the construction grading plans for the project.
Subd. 67. Storm Water Retention Structure. Storage designed to eliminate or reduce the frequency of
subsequent surface discharge. Wet ponds are the most common type of retention storage (though wet ponds
may also be used for detention storage). Anything manufactured, constructed, or erected for the purpose of
retaining storm water, which is normally attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures,
earthen structures, roads, parking lots, and paved storage areas.
Subd. 68. Structural Storm water BMP. Stationary and permanent BMPs designed, constructed and
operated to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants in storm water.
Subd. 69. Subdivision. Any tract of land divided into building lots for private, public, commercial,
industrial, etc. development for the purpose of sale, rent, or lease, including planned unit development."
Subd. 70. System Charge or Assessment. A charge for connecting an outlet to a regional storm water
management facility, typically a pond. The charge is normally assessed to recover the proportional cost of
constructing a regional pond or storm water treatment facility.
Subd. 71. Temporary Protection. Short-term methods employed to prevent erosion. Examples of such
protection are straw, mulch, erosion control blankets, wood chips, and erosion netting.
Subd. 72. Undeveloped Land. Land that in its current state has not been impacted by significant land
disturbance activities.
Subd. 73. User. Any person who discharges, causes, or permits the discharge of storm water into the
City's Storm Water management system.
Subd. 74. Violation. The willful or negligent act of noncompliance with the conditions attached to an
approved storm water plan and/or permit, or any other provisions contained in this ordinance, subject to
enforcement and penalty or noncompliance fees.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.2 Definitions 9
Subd. 75. Waters of the State. (as defined in Minn. Stat. 115.01, Subd. 22) means all streams, lakes,
ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public
or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
Subd. 76. Watercourse. The natural path for the flow of water where there is sufficient natural and
accustomed runoff to form and maintain a distinct and defined channel or an open channel facility that has
been constructed for such purpose. This shall include any easements obtained for the purposes of runoff
conveyance.
Subd. 77. Waterway. A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse, or to a storm sewer.
Subd. 78. Wet Pond or Wet Detention Facility. A Retention Facility which includes a permanent pool
of water used for the purposes of providing for the treatment of storm water runoff.
Subd. 79. Watershed Master Plan. A plan that an engineer/designer formulates to manage urban storm
water runoff for a particular project or drainage area. It typically addresses such subjects as characterization
of the existing and future site development, land use, and grading plan, peak rates of runoff, flow duration,
runoff volumes for various return frequencies, locations, criteria and sizes of detention or retention ponds
and conveyances; runoff control features; land parcels, easement locations, opinions of probable costs,
measures to enhance runoff quality, salient regulations, and how the plan addresses them, and consistency
with secondary objectives such as public recreation, aesthetics, public safety, and groundwater recharge. It
may be submitted to regulatory officials for their review for adoption.
Subd. 80. Wetland or Wetlands. (as defined in Minn. R. 7050.0130, Subp. F) and includes those areas
that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
Constructed wetlands designated for wastewater treatment are not Waters of the State. For purposes of this
definition, wetlands must have the following three attributes:
a) A predominance of hydric soils;
b) Are inundated or saturated by the surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions; and
c) Under normal circumstances support the prevalence of such vegetation.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.3 Waste Controls and Prohibited Discharges 10
Section 18.3: Waste Controls and Prohibited Discharges
18.3.01. Waste Controls and Prohibited or Illicit Discharges. It shall be considered an offense for any person to
cause or allow a Prohibited or Illicit Discharge into Waters of the State, including the City Storm Sewer System, or
any Natural Waterway.
Subd. 1. Illegal Disposal.
a) No person shall throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown, placed, left,
maintained or kept, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or any other discarded or abandoned objects,
articles, or accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin
conduit or drainage structure, business place, or upon any public or private plot of land in the City,
so that the same might be or become a pollutant, except in containers, recycling bags, or other
lawfully established waste disposal facility.
b) No person shall intentionally dispose of grass, leaves, dirt, or other landscape debris into a water
resource buffer, street, road, alley, catch basin, culvert, curb, gutter, inlet, ditch, natural
watercourse, wetland, flood control channel, canal, storm drain or any natural waterway.
Subd. 2. Prohibited or Illicit Discharges.
a) No Person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to
throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any materials, including but not limited to
Pollutants or waters containing any Pollutants, other than Storm Water, except for the Non-storm
Water Discharges identified in (1) below. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any
Illegal Discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as described as follows:
1) Certain categories of Non-storm Water Discharges are authorized under the City’s MS4
permit because they have been evaluated by the City and identified as not being significant
contributors of Pollutants: water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows,
rising ground waters, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR §
35.2005(b)(20)), uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from potable water
sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water
from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing,
flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, de-chlorinated swimming pool discharges, street
wash water, and discharges or flows from firefighting activities. These categories are hereby
exempt from the discharge prohibitions established by this ordinance
2) Discharges specified in writing by the City Engineer as being necessary to protect public
health and safety.
3) The prohibition shall not apply to any Non-storm Water Discharge permitted under an
NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered
under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), provided
that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order
and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the MS4.
Subd. 3. Illicit Connection.
a) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of Illicit Connections to the MS4 is
prohibited.
b) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, Illicit Connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.3 Waste Controls and Prohibited Discharges 11
c) A Person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the Person connects a line conveying
sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
d) Illicit Connections in violation of this ordinance must be disconnected and redirected, within the
timeframe specified in the Notice of Violation (NOV), to an approved onsite wastewater
management system or the Sanitary Sewer System upon approval of the City Engineer.
e) Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which
may be connected to the MS4, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon
receipt of written Notice of Violation from the City Engineer requiring that such locating be
completed. The Notice of Violation shall specify a reasonable time period within which the location
of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, and shall require that the drain or conveyance be
identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or other, and further require that the outfall location or
point of connection to the MS4, Sanitary Sewer System, or other discharge point be identified.
Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the City Engineer.
Subd. 4. Good Housekeeping Provisions. Any owner or occupant of property within the City shall
comply with the following good housekeeping requirements:
a) No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or otherwise expose any chemical, septic waste
or Prohibited Discharge in an area where discharge to streets, storm sewer systems, or natural
waterways may occur. This section shall apply to both actual and potential discharges.
b) Storage of Materials, Machinery, and Equipment:
1) Objects, such as motor vehicle parts, containing grease, oil or other hazardous substances,
and unsealed receptacles containing hazardous materials, shall not be stored in areas
susceptible to runoff or discharge to streets, storm sewer systems, or natural waterways.
2) Any machinery or equipment that is to be repaired or maintained in areas susceptible to
runoff shall be placed in a confined area to contain or collect leaks, spills, or discharges
without discharge to streets, storm sewer systems or natural waterways.
3) No machinery or equipment shall be pressure washed for the removal of grease, oil or
other hazardous substances, in an area susceptible to runoff or discharge to streets, storm
sewer systems, or natural waterways.
c) Removal and Disposal of Debris, Residue and Hazardous Wastes. All waste and unused
building materials (including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, animal wastes, wastewater,
petroleum based products, fuels, paints, toxic materials, or other hazardous materials) shall be
removed and properly disposed of off-site and shall not be allowed to be carried by runoff into a
receiving channel, storm sewer system, or wetland. Hazardous wastes shall not be placed in a
trash container.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.4 General Storm Water Practices 12
Section 18.4: General Storm Water Practices
18.4.01. General Storm Water Practices. The following general storm water management practices and erosion
control requirements shall apply to all land disturbing activities, regardless of project size and whether or not a
NPDES Permit or SWPPP is required.
Subd. 1. City Grading Permit Required. No grading or land disturbing activity shall be
performed without first having obtained a Grading Permit from the City Building Official, in
accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 2. Land Disturbing Activity Involving the Construction of Single-Family or Two-
Family Dwellings. Construction of single family or two family dwellings must comply with in
place approved BMPs and any existing permitted SWPPP for the subdivision, including NPDES
Permit requirements and Subdivision Agreements. Upon the sale of individual lots, the new
owners shall be required to file a Subdivision Registration Form with the MPCA, which allows
the original permittee to transfer the responsibilities of the project NPDES permit for a portion of
the site to another party without reapplying for permit coverage. Each new owner must complete
this form and submit it to the MPCA and provide the assigned registration number to the City. A
City issued Grading Permit shall also be required as provided for in Section 18.4.01, Subd. 1,
above.
Subd. 3. Utility Work or Any Other Work Within Street Right-of-ways. Utility contractors working in
a street right-of-way to repair existing or install new utilities, or any other work disturbing less than one
acre, are required to provide appropriate inlet protection and sediment control during the course of the work
so as to ensure the storm sewer system is protected from pollution. The utility contractor is also required to
provide street sweeping as necessary to insure that sediment resulting from their activity does not enter the
storm water system following construction. The street shall be swept within (1) working day of completion
of all work on the site. All disturbed vegetation shall be replaced with seed or sod within seven (7) days of
completion of utility installation on the site. The City will provide guidance regarding acceptable temporary
protection BMPs for inlets and methods to stabilize the exposed soil areas until they meet the definition of
final stabilization.
Subd. 4. Erosion or Sedimentation Related to Any Activity. Any land disturbing activity, regardless of
project size, and whether conducted pursuant to this Chapter or otherwise, shall be undertaken in a manner
designed to minimize surface runoff, and to prevent erosion and sedimentation. Whenever the City
determines that any land disturbing activity on any private property has become a hazard to life or limb,
endangers the property of another, adversely affects the safety, use, slope or soil stability of a public road,
publicly controlled wetland, or watercourse, or results in sedimentation to the same, then the owner of the
property upon which the land disturbance activity is located, or other person or agent in control of said
property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the City, shall within the period specified therein, repair or
eliminate such condition.
Subd. 5. Sedimentation From Existing Facilities. For all existing home sites, commercial or industrial
developments, that are susceptible to erosion and the discharge of sediment onto or into public streets or
storm sewers, the owner shall be responsible to provide for and pay for the cost of all necessary street
sweeping and/or the removal of all discharged sediment. Furthermore, if such erosion and sedimentation
continues to reoccur, the owner shall take such measures as may be necessary to stabilize the erosion or to
otherwise provide sedimentation basins to prevent the discharge of sediment offsite or to the stormsewer
system.
Subd. 6. All storm water must be discharged in a manner that does not cause nuisance conditions, erosion
in receiving channels or on downslope or adjacent properties, or inundation in wetlands causing an adverse
impact to the wetlands.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.4 General Storm Water Practices 13
Subd. 7. Land Alterations Not Permitted. The following land alterations shall not be permitted:
a) Any activities that cause unnecessary potential for soil erosion.
b) Any land alterations, filling or grading that significantly retard or severely impede the drainage of
adjacent properties or cause water to backup or pond on adjacent properties.
18.4.02. Management of Site Vegetation. Any Landowner shall provide for the installation and maintenance of
vegetation on their property in accordance with the following criteria, regardless as to whether or not a Storm Water
Management Plan or Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan has been approved or is necessary under this Chapter:
Subd. 1. Unimproved Land Areas. Except for driveways, parking lots, sidewalks, patios, areas occupied
by structures, landscaped areas, natural rock outcrop areas, or areas that have been otherwise improved, all
areas shall be covered by plants or vegetative growth.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.5 Construction Site Management and the NPDES Construction General Permit 14
Section 18.5: Construction Site Management and the National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Construction General Permit
18.5.01. NPDES Permit General Requirements. It is unlawful to initiate any land development activity, land
disturbing activity, or other construction activities which may result in an increase in storm water quantities,
degradation of storm water quality, or restriction of flow in any storm sewer system, open ditch or natural channel,
storm water easement, water body, or wetland outlet within the jurisdiction of the City, without having first
complied with the terms of this Chapter and the most current version of NPDES general permit for construction.
Subd. 1. For construction or development projects, or any land disturbing activity that disturbs one or
more acres of land, site owners and their construction operators must apply for coverage under the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s (MPCA’s) NPDES permit program.
Subd. 2. SWPPP Review by City of Cloquet. Prior to submitting any NPDES permit application to the
MPCA, and prior to conducting any construction activity, a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP) must be completed and submitted to the City of Cloquet for review and approval.
Subd. 3. Submission of SWPPP to State for Permit. Following review and approval of the SWPPP by
the City, the applicant shall make application to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) for
coverage under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit program and receive
a valid permit.
Subd. 4. Submission of NPDES Permit to City and Issuance of City Grading Permit. Following the
issuance of a NPDES Permit by the MPCA, the applicant shall provide a copy of the issued permit for the
project to the City. At this point the City shall issue a Grading Permit in accordance with by the Minnesota
State Building Code, as adopted by the City of Cloquet. No person shall commence construction activity
until a NPDES permit for the project is issued by the MPCA and a Grading Permit has been issued, as
required by the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 5. Other Required Permits. For certain construction or development projects, various other
permits may also be required. It shall be the Applicant's responsibility to obtain any required permits from
the City of Cloquet and other governmental agencies having any jurisdictional authority over the work to
be performed. Typically, such agencies may include, but are not limited to the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, the
Minnesota Department of Transportation, the State Historical Preservation Office, and others.
18.5.02. Storm water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) Requirements. Any person, firm, sole proprietorship,
partnership, corporation, state agency, or political subdivision proposing a subdivision of land, a subdivision plat, or
any type of construction project that results in a land disturbing activity involving 1 acre or more within the City,
must submit to the City a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for review and approval, unless an
exemption waiver is provided in accordance with this Section.
Subd. 1. The SWPPP shall be prepared in accordance with requirements of the MPCA’s NPDES permit
program. These requirements shall include a drawing or drawings delineating the features incorporated
into the SWPPP, including details of perimeter protection, construction phasing, storm drain inlet
protection, erosion control measures, temporary and final stabilization measures, drainage easements and
storm water management facilities, including all BMP's to be utilized. In addition any construction
specifications for the project shall contain technical provisions describing erosion, sedimentation, and water
control measures to be utilized during and after construction as well as to define the entities responsible for
the installation and maintenance of the BMP's. The project SWPPP must be incorporated into the
construction project’s specification documents.
Subd. 2. The SWPPP developed for all projects, including all plans, drawings, specifications, and
computations for storm water management facilities, shall be prepared, reviewed and signed by a
Professional Engineer registered in the State of Minnesota, except in the following cases:
All residential or non-commercial/industrial projects that include less than five acres of impervious
surface.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.5 Construction Site Management and the NPDES Construction General Permit 15
A) All residential development projects with an ultimate planned density of less than one-half
(0.5) units per acre.
Subd. 3. The provisions of this Section shall also apply to any project site that is part of a larger Common
Plan of Development or Sale that will disturb greater than or equal to one acre.
Subd. 4. Subdivision Plat Approval and Subdivision Registration Process. No subdivision approval,
plat approval or building permit shall be issued, nor shall any land be disturbed until the SWPPP has been
approved by the City and a copy of a State issued NPDES permit for the project has been provided to the
City. Upon the sale of individual lots, the new owners shall be required to file a Subdivision Registration
Form with the MPCA, which allows the original permittee to transfer the responsibilities of the project
NPDES permit for a portion of the site to another party without reapplying for permit coverage. Each new
owner must complete this form and submit it to the MPCA and provide the assigned registration number to
the City.
Subd 5. For sites or projects that are less than one acre, but are within 100 feet of Special Waters or
Protected Waters such as Otter Creek, Fond du Lac Creek, any protected wetlands, or are within an existing
subdivision or development with documented flooding problems associated with storm water runoff, a
SWPPP shall be provided to the City in compliance with the provisions of this Section to preserve or
protect the water quality of downstream resources. In addition, a Grading permit must be obtained for all
grading projects in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the City of Cloquet.
Subd. 6. Erosion and Sediment Control. Erosion and sediment control, at a minimum, shall meet the
requirements and provisions defined in the most current MPCA NPDES General Storm Water Permit for
Construction Activities, also referred to as the NPDES Construction Permit.
Subd. 7. Storm Water Detention/Retention/Treatment Facilities. Storm Water Detention, Retention or
Treatment facilities proposed to be constructed in the Storm Water Management Plan shall be designed and
maintained according to the most current practices as reflected in the Nationwide Urban Runoff Program
study and in accordance with the MPCA’s NPDES Permit requirements. All above ground Storm Water
Detention, Retention or Treatment Facilities shall have a minimum setback from all property lines as
established by the Cloquet Zoning Ordinance.
Subd. 8. Regional Ponds. Regional ponds may be used provided they are constructed ponds, (not a
natural wetland or water body) and designed in accordance with the NPDES permit program requirements
for all water from impervious surfaces that reach the pond. Permittees shall not construct regional ponds in
wetlands, regardless of their condition, quality or designation, unless such wetlands are mitigated in
accordance with applicable rules. The owner must obtain written authorization from the City or private
entity that owns and maintains the regional pond. If the City is the owner of the regional pond, the City
may apply a System Charge or Assessment that would cover a prorated share of the pond’s construction
and operation and maintenance costs.
Subd. 9. Adequacy of Outlets. The adequacy of any Outlet used as a discharge point for proposed Storm
Water Management Systems must be assessed and documented to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. To
the extent practicable, hydraulic capacities of downstream natural channels, storm sewer systems, or streets
shall be evaluated to determine if they have sufficient conveyance capacity to receive and accommodate
post-development runoff discharges and volumes. In addition, projected velocities in downstream natural or
manmade channels shall not exceed that which is reasonably anticipated to cause erosion.
Subd. 10. Storm Water Discharges to Trunk Highway Right-of-Way. For development projects which
lie adjacent to trunk highway right-of-ways and include Storm Water Management Systems that will
discharge storm water onto highway right-of-way, a drainage permit must first be obtained from the
Minnesota Department of Transportation (Mn/DOT) prior to the City approving any SWPPP for the
project.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.5 Construction Site Management and the NPDES Construction General Permit 16
Subd. 11. Drainage Easements and Discharges to Adjacent Property. No constructed Storm Water
Management Systems or Permanent Facilities, proposed as part of the SWPPP for a development, may
discharge storm water onto adjacent property unless a drainage easement is in place or the peak design flow
rate for the Permanent Facilities maintains the pre-development existing flow rates and hydrologic
conditions for the 2-year, 10-year, and 100-year rainfall events.
Subd. 12. Exemptions. Exemptions to the SWPPP requirements of this section include:
a) An individual SWPPP is generally not required for individual lots or properties located within
a subdivision or plat for which a SWPPP has already been approved. All construction,
however, must be in accordance with the previously permitted SWPPP for the subdivision,
including the NPDES Permit requirements and Subdivision Agreement. (See Section 18.4.02,
Subd. 4).
b) A parcel for which a building permit has been approved on/or before the effective date of this
Chapter and an NPDES permit was not required.
c) Any land disturbance activity not associated with building construction that will affect less
than 1 acre of undeveloped land.
d) Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property.
18.5.03. Plan Review.
Subd. 1. SWPPP Requirements. The SWPPP shall include all requirements of the most current NPDES
Construction Permit and address the applicable provisions of this ordinance.
a) Review and Approval of SWPPP. The City shall review and approve the proposed
development plan and SWPPP prior to the submission of an application to the MPCA for a
NPDES Permit.
b) Modification of Plan. Modifications to the SWPPP or plans shall be submitted to the City
for review and approval.
18.5.04. Inspections.
Subd. 1. Inspections By Owner, Owner’s Contractor or Owner’s Agent. In accordance with MPCA
requirements, the SWPPP for a project must identify the person responsible for the completion of routine
inspections of the site to insure compliance with the SWPPP and the effectiveness of all BMPs employed.
At a minimum, inspections of the site must take place once every seven (7) days during active construction
and within 24 hours after a rainfall event greater than 0.5 inches in 24 hours. A written record of rainfall
amounts received onsite, as well as a written record of all inspections and maintenance conducted during
construction must be maintained by the responsible person and be made available to the City upon request.
Subd. 2. City inspections. The City may conduct inspections on a regular basis to monitor erosion and
sediment control practices. In all cases the inspectors will attempt to work with the builder or developer to
maintain proper erosion and sediment control at all sites. In cases where cooperation is withheld,
construction stop work orders may be issued by the City until erosion and sediment control measures meet
the requirements of this ordinance. Inspections as defined in this provision do not fulfill the inspections
and maintenance requirements of the owner and/or contractor as required by the NPDES Construction
Permit Program and Subdivision 1 of this Section.
Subd 3. Notification of Failure of the SWPPP. The City may notify the permit holder of the failure of
the SWPPP’s measures.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.5 Construction Site Management and the NPDES Construction General Permit 17
a. Initial contact. The initial contact will be to the party or parties listed on the application
and/or the SWPPP as contacts. Except during an emergency action, forty-eight (48) hours
after notification by the City or seventy-two (72) hours after the failure of erosion control
measures, whichever is less, the City at its discretion, may begin corrective work. Such
notification should be in writing, but if it is verbal, a written notification should follow as
quickly as practical. If after making a good faith effort to notify the responsible party or
parties, the City has been unable to establish contact, the City may proceed with corrective
work. There are conditions when time is of the essence in controlling erosion. During such a
condition the City may take immediate action, and then notify the applicant as soon as
possible.
b. Erosion off-site. If erosion breaches the perimeter of the site, the applicant shall immediately
develop a cleanup and restoration plan, obtain the right-of-entry from the adjoining property
owner, and implement the cleanup and restoration plan within forty-eight (48) hours of
obtaining the adjoining property owner’s permission. In no case, unless written approval is
received from the City, may more than seven (7) calendar days go by without corrective
action being taken. If in the discretion of the City, the permit holder does not repair the
damage caused by the erosion, the City may do the remedial work required. When restoration
to wetlands and other resources are required, the applicant should be required to work with
the appropriate agency to ensure that the work is done properly.
c. Erosion into streets, wetlands or water bodies. If eroded soils (including tracked soils from
construction activities) enter or appear likely to enter streets, wetlands, or other water bodies,
cleanup and repair shall be immediate. The applicant shall provide all traffic control and
flagging required to protect the traveling public during the cleanup operations.
d. Failure to do corrective work. When an applicant fails to conform to any provision of this
policy within the time stipulated, the City may take the following actions.
1) Issue a stop work order, withhold the scheduling of inspections, and/or the issuance
of a Certificate of Occupancy.
2) Revoke any permit issued by the City to the applicant for the site in question or any
other of the applicant’s sites within the City’s jurisdiction.
3) If circumstances exist such that noncompliance with this ordinance poses an
immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare, as determined by the City,
the City may take emergency preventative action to correct the deficiency or hire a
contractor to correct the deficiency. The issuance of a permit constitutes a right-ofentry
for the City or its contractor to enter upon the construction site for the purpose
of correcting deficiencies in erosion control.
4) Require reimbursement to the City for all costs incurred in correcting storm water
pollution control deficiencies. If payment is not made within sixty (60) days after
costs are incurred by the City, then the City may assess the remaining amount against
the property. As a condition of the permit, the owner shall waive notice of any
assessment hearing to be conducted by the City, concur that the benefit to the
property exceeds the amount of the proposed assessment, and waive all rights by
virtue of Minnesota Statute 429.081 to challenge the amount or validity of such
assessment costs related to cleanup or corrective actions taken by the City.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.6 Post Construction Storm Water Management 18
Section 18.6: Construction Storm Water Management
Subd. 1. Applicability. Every applicant for subdivision approval or a permit to allow land disturbing
activities of one acre or greater, including projects that are less than one acre that are part of a larger
common plan of development or sale, must meet the requirements of this ordinance. No subdivision
approval or permit to allow land disturbing activities shall be issued until approval of the storm water
management plan in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. The provisions of this ordinance do
not apply to:
a) The plowing, tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or silvicultural
crops.
b) Site development of individual lots for which a storm water management plan was approved
as part of a larger common development plan in accordance with this ordinance.
c) Property for which a grading permit was approved by the city on or before the effective date
of this ordinance.
d) Subdivisions for which a preliminary plat was approved by the city council on or before the
effective date of this ordinance.
Subd. 2. Site Plan Submittal. Owners and/or operators of construction activity must submit site plans to
the city that meet the requirements of Subd. 3 of this Section (following), for review and approval prior to
start of construction activity.
Subd. 3. Calculations. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations must be submitted for the predevelopment
and post-development conditions for the two-, ten-, and 100-year events. Such calculations
shall include:
a) Description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration;
b) Time of concentration;
c) Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients;
d) Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area;
e) Infiltration rates, where applicable;
f) Culvert capacities;
g) Flow velocities;
h) Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms used; and
i) Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results.
Subd. 4. Volume Control and Pollutant Management. Storm water volume management practices shall
infiltrate or retain a runoff volume equal to one inch times the area of proposed increase of impervious
surface(s) on site. Green Infrastructure techniques and practices (including, but not limited to, infiltration,
evapotranspiration, reuse/harvesting, conservation design, urban forestry, and green roofs), shall be given
preference as design options consistent with zoning, subdivision and Planned Unit Development (PUD)
requirements.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.6 Post Construction Storm Water Management 19
a) New development projects (less than 15 percent existing impervious) shall achieve no net
increase from pre-project conditions (on an annual average basis) of:
1) Storm water discharge volume, unless precluded by the storm water management
limitations in c) below.
2) Storm water discharge of Total Suspended Solids (TSS).
3) Storm water discharge of Total Phosphorus (TP).
b) Redevelopment projects (15 percent or more existing impervious) shall achieve a net
reduction from pre-project conditions (on an annual average basis) of:
1) Storm water discharge volume, unless precluded by the storm water management
limitations in c) below.
2) Storm water discharge of TSS.
3) Storm water discharge of TP.
c) The use of infiltration techniques are prohibited when the infiltration structural storm water
BMP will receive discharges from, or be constructed in, the following areas:
1) Where industrial facilities are not authorized to infiltrate industrial storm water under
an NPDES/SDS Industrial Storm water Permit.
2) Where vehicle fueling and maintenance occur.
3) Where less than three (3) feet of separation from the bottom of the infiltration system
to the elevation of the seasonally saturated soils or the top of bedrock exists.
4) Where high levels of contaminants in soil or groundwater will be mobilized by
infiltrating storm water.
d) The use of infiltration techniques will be restricted when the infiltration device will be
constructed in areas:
1) With predominately Hydrologic Soil Group D (clay) soils.
2) Within 1,000 feet up-gradient, or 100 feet down-gradient of active karst features.
3) Within a Drinking Water Supply Management Area (DWSMA) as defined in Minn.
R. 4720.5100, subp. 13.
4) Where soil infiltration rates are more than 8.3 inches per hour.
In these restricted areas, the city engineer may request additional information and/or testing to
ensure that infiltration basins will perform properly and that groundwater is adequately protected.
e) Mill and overlay and other resurfacing activities are not considered fully reconstructed.
f) For linear projects a reasonable attempt must be made to obtain right-of-way during the
project planning process for volume control practices. Projects where the lack of right-of-way
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.6 Post Construction Storm Water Management 20
precludes the installation of volume control practices to meet a) or b) above, exceptions as
described in Subd. 5 below can be applied.
Subd. 5. Volume Control and Pollutant Management, Exceptions and Mitigation.
a) Exceptions. A lesser volume control standard on the site of the original construction activity
may be applied, at the discretion of the city, under the following circumstances:
1) The owner and/or operator of a construction activity is precluded from infiltrating
storm water due to limitations under Subd. 3. c), d) or f).
2) The owner and/or operator of the construction activity implements to the maximum
extent practicable volume reduction techniques, other than infiltration, on the site of
the original construction activity that reduce storm water discharge volume but may
not meet the requirements of post-construction storm water management .
b) Mitigation. If the owner and/or operator of a construction activity believes that the
requirements for TP and/or TSS cannot be met on the site of the original construction activity,
the owner and/or operator must provide appropriate documentation to the city as support.
Storm water discharges that do not meet the TP and/or TSS standards on the site of the
original construction activity may be mitigated off-site at the city’s discretion. The proposed
mitigation must meet the following criteria:
1) Mitigation project areas should be selected in the following order of preference and
in consultation and with approval by the city:
a) Locations that yield benefits to the same receiving water that receives
runoff from the original construction activity.
b) Locations within the same Department of Natural Resource (DNR)
catchment area as the original construction activity.
c) Locations in the next adjacent DNR catchment area up-stream.
d) Locations within the city.
2) Mitigation projects must involve the creation of new structural storm water BMPs,
the retrofit of existing structural storm water BMPs, or the use of a properly designed
regional structural storm water BMP.
3) Routine maintenance of structural storm water BMPs required by this section cannot
be used to meet mitigation requirements.
4) Mitigation projects must be completed within 24 months after the start of the original
construction activity.
c) If the mitigation project is a private structural storm water BMP and the city is not
responsible for long-term maintenance of the project, the city will require written and
recorded documentation of maintenance responsibilities.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.6 Post Construction Storm Water Management 21
Subd. 6. Maintenance of Structural Storm water BMPs. Maintenance of any structural storm water
BMP that the city determines to be private shall meet the following requirements:
a) A permanent public easement shall be provided to the city for access for inspection and/or
maintenance purposes. Costs incurred by the city for any maintenance of private systems will
be billed and/or assessed to the owner/operator.
b) Recorded inspection and maintenance agreements that define inspection and maintenance
responsibilities are required. A minimum annual inspection for private systems shall be
required. These requirements are transferrable to any party that becomes the owner/operator
of the site.
c) An inspection and maintenance plan shall be developed, approved and included as an
attachment to the maintenance agreement. At a minimum, maintenance plans must include
the following:
1) Responsible person(s) for completing inspections and conducting maintenance.
2) Frequency of inspections and maintenance.
3) Inspection checklist and type of maintenance anticipated.
d) If site configurations or structural storm water BMPs change, causing decreased BMP
effectiveness, new or improved structural storm water BMPs must be implemented to meet
the requirements of this section.
e) The property owner shall keep on file all structural storm water BMP annual inspection and
maintenance records for 5 years and submit to the City as requested.
Subd. 7. Financial Security. The City shall require the submittal of a letter of credit or other financial
security in a form acceptable to the city in the amount of $5,000 to ensure the storm water treatment
systems are installed correctly and in accordance with this ordinance.
Subd. 8. Impaired Waters and Total Maximum Daily Loads. If a site drains to a surface water that has
been listed as impaired pursuant to section 303(d) of the federal Clean Water Act more stringent water
quality measures may be required. If a total maximum daily load (TMDL) has been written for the impaired
water then all best management practices deemed necessary to comply with the requirements of the TMDL
must be implemented.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.7 Inspections 22
Section 18.7: Inspections
18.7.01. Powers and Authority of Inspectors.
Subd. 1. Right of Entry. The City Engineer and those individuals acting under his direction and control
are authorized to enter all properties at any reasonable time for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems
(MS4) as often as may be reasonably necessary to determine compliance with this Chapter 18 of the
Cloquet City Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entrance to or impede the City Engineer or an inspector acting
under his direction and control in the performance of his/her duties, and the City Engineer and every such
inspector shall have the right to enter all such properties and every part thereof necessary for the
performance of such inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing as authorized under this
section, upon display of proper identification.
Subd. 2. Indemnification. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
Section 18.7.01, Subd. 1, above, the City Engineer and those individuals acting under his direction and
control shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner, and the owner
shall be held harmless for injury or death to such employees, and the City respectively shall indemnify the
owner against loss or damage to its property by City employees and against liability claims and demands
for Personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner and growing out of the gauging and
sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence of the owner or the failure of the owner to
maintain safe conditions as required under this ordinance.
Subd. 3. Easements. The City Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the City have the right to
enter all private properties through which the City holds a utility easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the
storm water facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.8 Enforcement and Penalties 23
Section 18.8: Enforcement and Penalties
18.8.01. Enforcement and Penalties. Any person, or entity failing to comply with or violating any of these
regulations, may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine up to the maximum amount for a
misdemeanor offense as established under Minnesota Statutes. In addition, any such violation may be deemed to
create a public nuisance, and the City may seek abatement as provided in Chapter 7, and may seek reimbursement
for all costs necessarily incurred in abating the nuisance. Further, all land use and building permits may be
suspended until the applicant has corrected the violation. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
CITY OF CLOQUET - CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 18.9 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions 24
Section 18.9: Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
18.9.01. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions, however, where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this ordinance shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this ordinance are hereby repealed
to the extent of the inconsistency only. In the event that there is a governing entity that has a more restrictive
requirement, the more stringent requirement is required.