CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF CHANHASSEN, MINNESOTA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council, 1987 
Republished 2005 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CHANHASSEN 
____________ 
Elise Ryan 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dan Campion 
Jerry McDonald 
Bethany Tjornhom 
Julia Coleman 
City Council 
____________ 
Roger N. Knutson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Todd Gerhardt 
City Manager 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CHANHASSEN 
AT THE TIME OF CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Tom Hamilton 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dale Geving 
Clark Horn 
William Boyt 
Jay Johnson 
City Council 
____________ 
Roger N. Knutson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Don Ashworth 
City Manager 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Chanhassen, Minnesota. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1987 Code, as supplemented through April 14, 2003, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the governing body. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1987 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE CCT:1 STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE SRT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of A. Lawton Langford, President, and Bonnie Mitchell, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Scott Botcher, City Administrator, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Chanhassen, Minnesota. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Chanhassen, Michigan. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Chanhassen, Minnesota. 2005. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 83 
    AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF CHANHASSEN, MINNESOTA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE 
    THE CITY COUNCIL OF CHANHASSEN ORDAINS: 
    Section 1.  The Code entitled "Chanhassen City Code" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapter 1 through 20, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2.  All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 18, 1987, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
    Section 3.  The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4.  Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be a misdemeanor punishable to the maximum extent authorized in Minnesota Statute section 412.231. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisance, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5.  Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6.  Ordinances adopted after June 18, 1987, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7.  This ordinance shall become effective upon the date of official publication. 
    Passed and adopted by the Chanhassen City Council this 14th day of March, 1988. 
ATTEST: 
/s/ _____ /s/ _____  Don Ashworth, City Manager  Thomas L. Hamilton, Mayor  
Published in the Carver County Herald on April 7, 1988. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. 506  6-28-10 Include 6 507  6-28-10 Include 6 508  8- 9-10 Include 6 509  8- 9-10 Include 6 510  9-13-10 Include 6 511 10-11-10 Include 6 512 11-22-10 Include 6 513 11-22-10 Include 6 514 11-22-10 Include 6 515 12-13-10 Include 6 516 12-13-10 Include 6 517  1-10-11 Include 6 518  1-10-11 Include 6 519  1-10-11 Include 6 520  1-24-11 Include 6 522  5-23-11 Include 6 523  5-23-11 Include 6 524  6-27-11 Include 6 525  6-27-11 Include 6 526  7-11-11 Include 6 527  8-22-11 Include 6 528 12-12-11 Include 6 529 12-12-11 Include 6 533  5-29-12 Include 7 542  6-25-12 Include 7 543  6-25-12 Include 7 544  6-25-12 Include 7 545  6-25-12 Include 7 574 10-22-12 Include 7 576 12-10-12 Include 7 577 12-10-12 Include 7 578  3-11-13 Include 7 580  4- 8-13 Include 7 581  4- 8-13 Include 7 582  4-22-13 Include 7 583  5-13-13 Include 7 584 11-25-13 Include 7 588 12- 9-13 Include 7 589 12- 9-13 Include 7 591 12- 9-13 Include 7 595  5-12-14 Include 8 596  5-27-14 Include 8 598  7-14-14 Include 8 600 12- 8-14 Include 8 601 12- 8-14 Include 8 603  2-23-15 Include 8 605  6- 8-15 Include 9 610 12-14-15 Include 9 611 12-14-15 Include 9 612 12-14-15 Include 9 613  3-14-16 Include 9 614  8-22-16 Include 10 615 10-10-16 Include 10 617 12-12-16 Include 10 618  1-23-17 Include 10 619  2-27-17 Include 10 620  3-13-17 Include 10 621  5- 8-17 Include 11 626  7-24-17 Include 11 627 12-11-17 Include 11 628 12-11-17 Include 11 629 12-11-17 Include 11 632  6-11-18 Include 12 633  6-25-18 Include 12 634  6-25-18 Include 12 636 12-10-18 Include 12 637 12-10-18 Include 12 639  3-11-19 Include 12  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Chanhassen City Code" and shall be so cited. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to codify, M.S. § 415.021. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules and definitions set out in this section shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. The rules of construction and definitions set out herein, shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter of the context of such section may be repugnant thereto. Numbers in parenthesizes following a definition represent specific chapters of the Code in which a definition applies. 
    General. Words and phrases defined in this section have, when used in this chapter, the meanings given below. Any other word or phrase used in this chapter, and defined in regulations of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Noise Pollution Control Rules Chapter 7030, has the meaning given in those regulations. 
    Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Abandoned vehicle means a vehicle, as defined below, that has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on public property illegally or lacking vital component parts, or does not have a current license, or has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on private property without consent of the person in control of such property or in an inoperable condition such that it has no substantial potential further use consistent with its usual functions unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building. "Abandoned vehicle" also means a motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its owner to the city. A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. § 168.10, shall not be considered an abandoned vehicle. Vehicles on the premises of junkyards and automobile graveyards, which are defined, maintained and licensed in accordance with M.S. § 161.242, or which are licensed and maintained in accordance with local laws and zoning regulations, are not abandoned vehicles. (13) 
    Abnormal or excessive noise shall mean: (a) distinct and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort and repose of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their property's value; (b) noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. § 169.69, as it may be amended from time to time, which requires every motor vehicle to be equipped with a muffler in good working order; or (c) noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. § 169.693 and Minnesota Rules parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as this statute and these rules may be amended from time to time, which establish motor vehicle noise standards. (13) 
    Accessory structure or facility, water-oriented. See Water-oriented accessory structure or facility. 
    Accessory use or structure means a use or structure subordinate to and serving the principal use or structure on the same lot and clearly and customarily incidental thereto. Accessory agricultural buildings include structures such as barns and silos. (20) 
    Administrative wetland permit means authorization to perform an activity that is classified as a wetland management activity. Securing an administrative wetland permit does not exempt the permittee from obtaining any and all other necessary permits (e.g., United States Army Corps of Engineers, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency). (20) 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". See Sexually oriented business. (10) 
    Adult bookstore, adult video store, or adult store means a commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." Also see Sexually oriented business . (10) 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". See Sexually oriented business . (10) 
    Adult day care means a program operating less than 24 hours per day that provides functionally impaired adults with an individualized and coordinated set of services including health services, social services, and nutritional services that are directed at maintaining or improving the participants' capabilities for self-care. Adult day care does not include programs where adults gather or congregate primarily for purposes of socialization, education, supervision, caregiver respite, religious expression, exercise, or nutritious meals. 
    Adult massage parlor means a massage parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides, for any form of consideration, the rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or rolling of the body, if the service provided by the massage parlor is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". Also see Sexually oriented business . (10) 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. Also see Sexually oriented business . (10) 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". Also see Sexually oriented business . (10) 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities". Also see Sexually oriented business . (10) 
    Advertising sign. See Sign, advertising . 
    Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of defacing property. (13) 
    Agriculture means the commercial use of land for raising of livestock and poultry, growing and producing of fruits, vegetables, field crops and nursery stock, including tree farms and choose-and-cut Christmas tree sales. The term does not include the commercial raising of fur-bearing animals, nor the operation of riding academies, commercial stables or kennels. (20) 
    Air circulation device means a mechanism designed and used for the controlled flow of air used in ventilation, cooling, heating or conditioning, but not limited to, central and window air conditioning units. 
    Alarm system means any equipment or device which emits an audible, visual, or electric signal upon the detection of a potential burglary, robbery, fire, medical emergency, trespass or property intrusion. "Alarm system" does not include anti-theft or tampering alarms installed in any motor vehicle. "Alarm system" does not include smoke detectors which emit only an audible alarm signal and which are installed within individual dwelling units. (3) 
    Alarm user means any person in control of any building, structure, facility or tract of land wherein or whereon an alarm system is used or maintained within the city. (3) 
    Alarm, false. See False alarm . 
    Alley means a public right-of-way which is used primarily for secondary vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties abutting on a street. (18) (20) 
    Alteration means any change or rearrangement, other than incidental repairs, in the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns beams, girders or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors or windows, or any enlargement to or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another. (20) 
    Alternate system shall mean an individual sewage treatment system employing methods and devices presented in Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080.0172. (19) 
    Anatomical areas, specified. See Specified anatomical areas . 
    Animal feedlot means land or buildings used for the confined feeding, breeding, raising or holding of livestock and poultry where the concentration of animals is such that a vegetative cover cannot be maintained within the enclosure. Pastures are not considered animal feedlots. (20) 
    Animal, dangerous. See Dangerous animal . 
    Antenna means any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes and satellite dishes; and omni directional antennas, such as whip antennas. (20) 
    Applicable laws means any law, statute, charter, ordinance, rule, regulation, code, license, certificate, franchise, permit, writ, ruling, award, executive order, directive, requirement, injunction (whether temporary, preliminary or permanent), judgment, decree or other order issued, executed, entered or deemed applicable by any governmental authority. (7.5) 
    Approved. Approved by the code official. (7) 
    Approved firearms safety course means a program of instruction in the safe and proficient use of any firearm which is sponsored: 
(1)  By any accredited private or public school system; or 
(2)  By the commissioner of natural resources, pursuant to M.S. § 97B.015, subd. 1. 
    Arboretum means a place where plants, trees, and shrubs are cultivated for scientific and educational purposes. (20) 
    Area, buildable. See Buildable area . 
    Area, lot. See Lot area . 
    Arterial street. See Street, arterial . 
    Association, homeowner. See Homeowner association . 
    At large means off the premises of the owner and not under restraint. (5) 
    Attached structure . See Structure, attached. 
    Authority means the city or its agent or designee. (19) 
    Authority, delegation of. See Delegation of authority . 
    Authority, joint. See Joint authority . 
    Authority, platting. See Platting authority . 
    Automobile means a self-propelled, free moving vehicle with four wheels used to transport not more than seven passengers and licensed by the appropriate agency as a passenger vehicle. (20) 
    Automotive dealer means establishments primarily engaged in the retail sale of new automobiles or new and used automobiles, including trucks, boats and recreational vehicles. (20) 
    Automotive repair/body shop means an establishment engaged in performing major repairs and service to passenger automobiles, trucks, vans and motorcycles. Major repair may include all activities of repair or servicing allowed in a minor automobile repair establishment as well as major engine and transmission repair and replacement. Minor repairs may include emissions testing and car wash. Minor repair may include muffler replacement, oil and fluid changing and lubrication, tire repair and replacement, wheel alignment, brake repair, suspension repair, minor engine and transmission repair, flushing of radiators, servicing of air conditioners, and similar minor repairs and service. The rebuilding or reconditioning of passenger automobiles, body, frame or fender straightening, painting, rust-proofing, or other similar activity is not considered major vehicle repair and is defined separately. (20) 
    Awning sign. See Sign, awning . 
    Backstop, suitable. See Suitable backstop . 
    Balcony means a platform, minimum of 71/2 feet above the ground, that projects from the wall of a building and is surrounded by an open railing. (20) 
    Banner sign. See Sign, banner . 
    Base flood elevation means the elevation of the "regional flood." The term "base flood elevation" is used in the flood insurance survey. 
    Basement. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade. (7) 
    Basic cable service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. Basic cable service as defined herein shall not be inconsistent with 47 USC § 543(b)(7) (1993). (7.5) 
    Bathroom . A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower. (7) 
    Beach lot, recreational. See Recreational beach lot . 
    Bed and breakfast means an owner-occupied single-family home in which not more than five rooms are rented on a nightly basis for a period of seven or less consecutive days by the same person. Meals may or may not be provided to residents and overnight guests. (20) 
    Bedroom. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes. 
    Best available control technology (BACT) means the utilization of those technologies, processes, procedures, or operating methods or alterations by an industry or other source which results in the elimination or the maximum achievable reduction of odor pollution from an odor emission point source. (20) 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter, as prescribed in Standard Methods, current edition. (19) 
    Birds of prey means birds that hunt for food primarily on the wing, using their keen senses, especially vision. Their talons and beaks tend to be relatively large, powerful and adapted for tearing and/or piercing flesh. 
    Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or a combination of the above with a waterway or any other barrier to the continuity of development. (20) 
    Bluff means a natural topographic feature such as a hill, cliff or embankment having the following characteristics: 
(1)  The slope rises at least 25 feet above the toe of the bluff; and 
(2)  The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet or more above the toe of the bluff averages 30 percent or greater; and 
(3)  An area with an average slope of less than 18 percent over a distance for 50 feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff. (20) 
    Bluff impact zone means a bluff and land located within 20 feet from the top of a bluff. (20) 
    Bluff, side of means a point at which both conditions for a "bluff" no longer exist. The side of the bluff is delineated by a line connecting the top and toe of a bluff at a location in which the slope of the bluff is less than 30 percent or the change in elevation becomes smaller than 25 feet. (20) 
    Bluff, toe of means the point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from flatter to steeper slope above. If no break in the slope is apparent, the toe of the bluff shall be determined to be the lower end of a 50-foot segment, measured on the ground, with an average slope exceeding 18 percent. (20) 
    Bluff, top of means the point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from steeper to gentler slope above. If no break in the slope is apparent, the top of the bluff shall be determined to be the upper end of a 50-foot segment, measured on the ground, with an average slope exceeding 18 percent. (20) 
    Boarder means an individual other than a member of the family occupying the dwelling unit or part thereof who for a consideration is furnished meals or other services. (20) 
    Boardinghouse means a dwelling or part thereof in which lodging is provided by the owner or operator to three or more boarders. (20) 
    Boardwalk means a linear structure extending across wetlands or lakes that is not supported by posts or poles, but floats or rests upon floats without causing detrimental impacts to the wetland or lake. (20) 
    Boat trailer means any device used to transport any watercraft when pulled behind any motor vehicle. (12) 
    Boathouse means a structure designed and used solely for the storage of boats or boating equipment. (20) 
    Boulevard means that portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and the street boundary line. (12) (18) (20) 
    Brake, engine retarding. See Engine retarding brake . 
    Brew pub is a brewer who also holds one or more retail on-sale licenses and who manufactures fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year, at any one licensed premises, the entire production of which is solely for consumption on tap on any licensed premises owned by the brewer, or for off-sale from those licensed premises as permitted in M.S. § 340A.24, subd. 2. 
    Brewer is a person who manufactures malt liquor for sale. 
    Brewery is a location where malt liquor is manufactured for sale. 
    Broad-tipped marker means any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is not water soluble. See Graffiti implement . (13) 
    Buffer strip means an area of nondisturbed groundcover abutting a wetland left undisturbed to filter sediment, materials and chemicals. (20) 
    Buildable area means the area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard and open space requirements of chapter 20 have been met. (20) 
    Buildable land means all land except wetlands and public waters, and land dedicated for local, county and state roads. (18) 
    Building, conforming. See Conforming building or structure . 
    Building coverage means the horizontal area from the outside edge of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot. (20) 
    Building drain means that part of the horizontal piping of a building drainage system with receives the discharge from all other soil, waste and drainage pipes inside the walls of any building an conveys the same to the building sewer. (19) 
    Building height means the vertical distance between the highest adjoining ground level at the building or ten feet above the lowest ground level, whichever is lower, and the highest point of a flat roof or average height of the highest of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. (20) 
    Building line means a line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water level at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend. (20) 
    Building, principal means a building in which is conducted the primary or predominant use of the lot. (20) 
    Building setback line means a line on a lot, generally parallel to a lot line, high water mark, shoreline or roadway right-of-way line, located a sufficient distance therefrom to provide the minimum yards required by chapter 20. The building setback lines delimit the area in which buildings and other regulated structures are permitted subject to all applicable provisions of chapter 20. (20) 
    Building sewer. See Sewer, building . 
    Building, storage. See Storage building . 
    Bulletin board sign. See Sign, bulletin board . 
    Business directory sign. See Sign, business directory . 
    Business hours, normal. See Normal business hours . 
    Business sign. See Sign, business . 
    Cable Act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-549, 98 Stat. 2779 (1984) (codified at 47 USC §§ 521-611 (1982 and Supp. V 1987)) as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385; and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-458 and as the same may, from time to time, be amended. (7.5) 
    Cable service means: 
(1)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of: (i) video programming; or (ii) other programming service; and 
(2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. (7.5) 
    Cable service, basic. See Basic cable service . 
    Cable television system, or cable system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of 47 USC §§ 201-226, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 USC § 541) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
(4)  An open video system that complies with section 653 of the Cable Act; or 
(5)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. (7.5) 
    Caliper, tree. See Tree caliper . 
    Campaign sign. See Sign, campaign . 
    Candela (symbol: cd) is the International System (SI) base unit of luminous intensity (that is, power emitted by a light source in a particular direction, with wavelengths weighted by the luminosity function, a standardized model of the sensitivity of the human eye). (20) 
    Canopy coverage shall mean the area on a horizontal plane that is located under the crowns of all the trees on the site. (20) 
    Canopy sign. See Sign, canopy . 
    Carry means the handling or transportation of a firearm concealed or otherwise outside a person's domicile. (11) 
    Certificate of compliance shall mean a document written after a compliance inspection, certifying that a system is in compliance as specified in Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080.0060, and this article. A qualified employee or licensee must sign the document. (19) 
    Changeable copy sign. See Sign, changeable copy . 
    Channel or cable channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission. (7.5) 
    Church means a building or edifice consecrated to religious worship, where people join together in some form of public worship under the aegis and direction of a person who is authorized under the laws of the State of Minnesota to solemnize marriages. A church may include living quarters for persons employed on the premises and classroom facilities. The following are not considered as churches: camp meeting grounds, mikvahs, coffee houses, recreational complexes, retreat homes, sleeping quarters for retreatants during spiritual retreats extending for periods of more than one day. Bible camps with live-in quarters, publishing establishments, ritual slaughterhouses, radio or television towers and transmission facilities, theological seminaries, day care centers, adult day care, hospitals, and drug treatment centers are not churches. (10) (20) 
    City . The word "city" means the City of Chanhassen, Carver and Hennepin Counties, Minnesota. (1) (19) 
    City clerk. References to the "city clerk" or "clerk" are to the city clerk/manager. (1) 
    City council or council. The words "city council" or "council" mean the City Council of Chanhassen, Minnesota. (1) 
    City engineer. References to the city engineer, director of public works or public works director are to the director of public works/city engineer. 
    City manager means the City Manager of the City of Chanhassen. References to the "city manager" or "manager" are to the city clerk/manager. (1) (10) 
    City wetland inventory means the official city wetland inventory map depicting the approximate location and extent of wetlands within Chanhassen. A copy of this map shall be maintained on the city's GIS database, with both hard and electronic copies being made available for public review upon request. (20) 
    Clear-cutting means the removal of an entire stand of trees. (20) 
    Clearing vegetation, intensive. See Intensive vegetation clearing . 
    Clearing, vegetation. See Vegetation clearing . 
    Cluster development means a pattern of development that arranges the layout of buildings on a compact area of the site so as to reserve a portion of the site for common open space or green space that is protected in perpetuity. 
    Cocktail room is a location in or adjacent to a microdistillery where the owner of the distillery sells distilled spirits produced by the distiller for consumption on the premises or for off-site consumption, as provided for in M.S. § 340A.22. 
    Code means the Chanhassen City Code as designated in section 1-1. (1) 
    Code official means the official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code, or any duly authorized representative. 
    Collection means the aggregation of mixed municipal solid waste from the place at which it is generated and includes all activities up to the time the waste is delivered to a waste facility. (16) 
    Collector street. See Street, collector . 
    Combined sewer. See Sewer, combined . 
    Commercial establishments means any premises where a commercial, industrial or agricultural enterprise of any kind is carried on, and includes clubs, churches and schools. (16) 
    Commercial kennel. See Kennel, commercial . 
    Commercial stables. See Stables, commercial . 
    Commercial wireless telecommunication service means licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services, including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public. (20) 
    Commingled (e.g., dumpster-type) residential collection means collection from any building consisting of more than one dwelling unit wherein each unit has an individual kitchen and wherein the mixed municipal solid waste of each unit is mixed with the waste of other units prior to the collection efforts of licensed haulers. (16) 
    Commissioner means the state commissioner of natural resources acting directly or through his authorized agents. (6) 
    Community center means a place, structure, area, or other facility used for educational, social or recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve significant segments of the community, and may have outdoor recreational facilities. 
    Community sewer system. See Sewer system, community . 
    Compliance inspection shall mean any evaluation, inspection, or other process to make conclusions, recommendations or statements regarding an individual sewage treatment system to reasonably assure an individual sewage treatment system is in compliance with regulations. (19) 
    Compliance plan means an agreement between a significant odor generator and the city. (20) 
    Compliance, certificate of. See Certificate of compliance . 
    Condemn means to adjudge unfit for occupancy. 
    Conference/convention center means a preplanned, centrally managed development containing facilities for business or professional conferences and seminars and containing accommodations for overnight lodging, eating and recreation. The development is characterized by architecturally integrated buildings, common use of parking areas, and incorporation of passes recreational amenities into overall site design. (20) 
    Conforming building or structure means any building or structure which complies with all the regulations of chapter 20, or any amendment thereto. (20) 
    Conjunctions. "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. (1) 
    Conservation easement. See Easement, conservation . 
    Construction debris means waste building materials, packaging and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of buildings and roads. (16) 
    Construction sign. See Sign, construction . 
    Continuing care retirement facility means: 
(1)  An establishment providing sleeping accommodations to one or more adult residents, at least 80 percent of which are 65 years of age or older, and offering or providing, for a fee, one or more regularly scheduled health-related services or two or more regularly scheduled supportive services, whether offered or provided directly by the establishment or by another entity arranged for by the establishment; or 
(2)  An establishment that registers under M.S. § 144D.025. 
Continuing care retirement facility does not include: 
(1)  A nursing home licensed under M.S. ch. 144A; 
(2)  A hospital, certified boarding care home, or supervised living facility licensed under M.S. §§ 144.50 to 144.56; 
(3)  A board and lodging establishment licensed under M.S. ch. 157 and Minnesota Rules, parts 9520.0500 to 9520.0670, 9525.0215 to 9525.0355, 9525.0500 to 9525.0660, or 9530.4100 to 9530.4450, or under M.S. ch. 245B; 
(4)  A board and lodging establishment which serves as a shelter for battered women or other similar purpose; 
(5)  A family adult foster care home licensed by the department of human services; 
(6)  Private homes in which the residents are related by kinship, law, or affinity with the providers of services; 
(7)  Residential settings for persons with developmental disabilities in which the services are licensed under Minnesota Rules, parts 9525.2100 to 9525.2140, or applicable successor rules or laws; 
(8)  A home-sharing arrangement such as when an elderly or disabled person or single-parent family makes lodging in a private residence available to another person in exchange for services or rent, or both; 
(9)  A duly organized condominium, cooperative, common interest community, or owners' association of the foregoing where at least 80 percent of the units that comprise the condominium, cooperative, or common interest community are occupied by individuals who are the owners, members, or shareholders of the units; or 
(10)  Services for persons with developmental disabilities that are provided under a license according to Minnesota Rules, parts 9525.2000 to 9525.2140 in effect until January 1, 1998, or under M.S. ch. 245B. 
    Contractor means: 
(1)  Someone (a person or firm) who contracts to build things. 
(2)  (Law) a party to a contract. (17) 
    Contractor's yard means any area or use of land where vehicles, equipment, and/or construction materials and supplies commonly used by building, excavation, roadway construction, landscaping and similar contractors are stored or serviced. A contractor's yard includes both areas of outdoor storage and areas confined within a completely enclosed buildings used in conjunction with a contractor's business. (20) 
    Convenience store means a retail establishment which generally sells a limited range of food products, nonprescription drugs, candy and other perishable goods. This includes soda and similar beverage dispensing and food products, which can be heated and/or prepared on-site, and has over 400 square feet of floor area for retailing of nonautomotive goods. (20) 
    Convenience store with gas pumps means a retail establishment which generally sells gasoline from pump islands and a limited range of food products, nonprescription drugs, candy and other perishable goods. This includes soda and similar beverage dispensing and food products which can be heated and/or prepared on-site, and has over 400 square feet of floor area for retailing of nonautomotive goods. (20) 
    Cooking device means any barbeque, rotisserie, roaster, oven or similar equipment used in food preparation. (9) 
    Corner lot. See Lot, corner . 
    Corporation counsel or municipal counsel or city counsel means the city attorney. 
    Council means the City Council of the City of Chanhassen, Minnesota. Also see City council . 
    County board shall mean the Carver or Hennepin County Board of Commissioners. (19) 
    County. The word "county" means Carver County or Hennepin County, or both Carver and Hennepin Counties, as appropriate. (1) (9) 
    Coverage, building. See Building coverage . 
    Coverage, canopy. See Canopy coverage . 
    Coverage, lot. See Lot coverage . 
    Critical facilities means facilities necessary to a community's public health and safety, those that store or produce highly volatile, toxic or water-reactive materials, and those that house occupants that may be insufficiently mobile to avoid loss of life or injury. Examples of critical facilities include hospitals, correctional facilities, schools, daycare facilities, nursing homes, fire and police stations, wastewater treatment facilities, public electric utilities, water plants, fuel storage facilities, and waste handling and storage facilities. 
    Critical root zone means an area 12 times the tree diameter at DBH measured from the base of the tree. (20) 
    Cross bar means that portion of any seasonal dock or permanent dock which is approximately parallel in alignment to the abutting shoreline or abutting ordinary high water mark. See Dock cross bar. (6) 
    Cul-de-sac means a minor street with only one outlet and having an appropriate turn-around for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. (18) (20) 
    Dangerous animal means: 
(1)  Any animal with a known propensity or disposition to unprovoked attacks, to cause injury to or to otherwise endanger the safety of humans or other domestic animals. 
(2)  Any animal that has attacked or bitten any person, except a person that has tormented or abused it. 
    Dangerous weapons mean slingshots, clubs, blackjacks, spring guns, brass or metal knuckles or any knife with a switch blade which opens automatically under spring pressure with a button or release mechanism or by any other mechanical contrivance. (11) 
    Day care center means any facility or home where tuition, fees or other forms of compensation is charged for the care of children and which is licensed by the state as a day care center. (20) 
    DBH means diameter measured at breast height (4.5 feet above the ground). (20) 
    Debris, construction. See Construction debris . 
    Deck means a horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats, trellises or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal use or site. (20) 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. (1) 
    Delineation report, wetland. See Wetland delineation report . 
    Delineation, wetland. See Wetland delineation . 
    Density, gross. See Gross density . 
    Density, net means the quotient of the total number of dwelling units divided by the developable acreage of the site. Developable acreage excludes wetlands, lakes, roadways and other areas not suitable for building purposes. 
    Department of public works. The department of public works shall consist of both the public works department and engineering department. 
    Depth, lot. See Lot depth . 
    Designated woodland area means an area within a development that has been designated in the woodland management plan as a tree preservation, forestation or replacement planting area. (20) 
    Development means the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining excavation, landfill or land disturbance, and any use or extension of the use of land. (20) 
    Development identification sign. See Sign, development identification . 
    Development, cluster. See Cluster development . 
    Development, residential. See Residential development . 
    Direct glare means an excessive brightness contrast producing a sensation of visual discomfort resulting from insufficiently shielded light source in the field of view. (13) 
    Directional sign. See Sign, directional . 
    Dismantled firearm means any unloaded firearm or bow which is dismantled in such a manner so as to prevent shooting. 
    Display. The term "display" means the keeping, storing, or permitting to be kept or stored of an alcoholic beverage which has been poured, dispensed or has had its package seal broken on, in, or at any table, booth, bar or other area of a licensed premises accessible to the general public, except when the alcoholic beverage is stored in a normal storage area during nonsale hours. (10) 
    Display area, sign. See Sign display area . 
    Disposal system (SDS) permit, state. See State disposal system (SDS) permit . 
    Distilled spirits is ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, and other distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof, for non-industrial use. 
    Distiller is a person who manufactures distilled spirits for sale. 
    District, residential. See Residential district . 
    Diving tower means a floating or nonfloating structure designed for diving purposes and which projects over the surface or surrounding waters by more than five feet. (6) 
    Dock means a wharf, pier, or other structure constructed or maintained, whether floating or not, including all "L's", "T's" or posts which may be a part thereof, whether affixed or adjacent to the principal structure. (6) (20) 
    Dock cross bar means that portion of any dock which is approximately parallel in alignment to the adjoining shoreline or ordinary high water mark. See Cross bar. (20) 
    Dock setback zone means the area inside and running parallel to and ten feet from the extended lot lines of a lot abutting a lake. "Extended lot lines" means an extension of the side lot lines 100 feet into a lake from and at a right angle to a line drawn between the intersection of each side lot line and the ordinary high water mark. If the extended lot lines of adjoining lots overlap, then the common extended lot line between the lots shall be at an angle which equally divides the area of overlap. (6) (20) 
    Dock, permanent. See Permanent dock . 
    Dock, seasonal. See Seasonal dock . 
    Double frontage lot. See Lot, double frontage . 
    Drain, building. See Building drain . 
    Drive-in use means an establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicle. This term includes having "drive-thru" windows. (20) 
    Driver means every person who drives or is in physical control of a vehicle. (14) 
    Driveway means a private access from a street to an individual lot. (18) (20) 
    Drugs mean any controlled substance, as defined by M.S. ch. 152, the possession of which is a violation of M.S. § 152.021 et seq. (14) 
    Dwelling means a building or portion thereof designed, occupied or intended to be occupied exclusively for residential purposes, but not including hotels, motels, nursing homes, travel trailers, motorhomes or bed and breakfast tourist homes. (20) 
    Dwelling, manufactured, also called mobile or manufactured home, means a structure which is transportable in one or more sections on its own chassis, and which is equipped with necessary utility service connections and designed to be used for single-family occupancy with or without a permanent foundation when attached to required utilities. The terms "manufactured dwelling" or "manufactured home" does not include the term "recreational vehicle." (20) 
    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms which are connected together as a single unit constituting complete, separate and independent living quarters for one or more persons, physically separated from any other room or dwelling unit which may be in the same building and containing permanent cooking, eating, sleeping and sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of a single-family maintaining a household. (7) (20) 
    Dwelling, manufactured, also called mobile home, means a factory-built structure which is transportable in one or more sections on its own running gear or chassis, and which is equipped with necessary utility service connections and designed to be used for single-family occupancy with or without a permanent foundation. Such dwellings measure 20 feet or more in width and 40 feet or more in length, exclusive of supporting members or hitches. (20) 
    Dwelling, multifamily means a detached building containing three or more dwelling units. Apartment buildings, condominiums, manor homes, quad-duplexes, and cooperatively owned buildings containing three or more dwelling units are multifamily dwellings. (20) 
    Dwelling, residential means any single building consisting of two or less dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each. (16) 
    Dwelling, single-family means a building containing one dwelling unit. 
(1)  Dwelling, single-family attached. A residential building containing one dwelling unit, including detached, semi-detached and attached dwellings. 
(2)  Dwelling, single-family detached. One dwelling unit having open space on all four sides. (20) 
    Dwelling, townhouse means a single-family attached dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit and each unit is separated from the adjoining unit by one or more common fire-resistant walls having no openings and extending from the basement to the roof. (20) 
    Dwelling, two-family means a detached building containing two dwelling units. Two-family (attached) dwelling is a type of low density dwelling. (20) 
    Earth work or work the earth: Excavating, mining, filling or grading. (7) 
    Easement means a right afforded a person or governmental/public unit to use another's real property for a specific purpose. (18) (20) 
    Easement, conservation means an easement created where restrictions are imposed on the development or alteration of property to preserve natural features. (20) 
    Ecosystem means a community of interacting animals, plants and microorganisms and the physical and chemical environment in which they live. (20) 
    Educational or government access facilities or PEG access facilities, public. See Public educational or government access facilities or PEG access facilities . 
    Electric distribution substations are located above ground near to the end-users. Distribution substation transformers change the transmission or subtransmission voltage to lower levels for use by end-users. 
    Electrical substation means a subsidiary station is which electrical current is transformed. 
    Emission means a release of air contaminants causing an odor into the outdoor atmosphere. (20) 
    Encased firearm means any unloaded firearm or bow, placed in a case which is tied or otherwise secured in the manner provided, to prevent shooting it. (11) 
    Engine retarding brake shall mean a "Dynamic Brake, Jake Brake, Jacobs Brake, C-Brake, Paccar Brake, transmission brake" or other similar engine retarding brake system which alters the normal compression of the engine and subsequently releases that compression. (13) 
    Erosion control means best management practices employed to prevent erosion including, but not limited to, soil stabilization practices, limited grading, mulch, temporary or permanent cover, and construction phasing as defined in the MPCA general construction permit. (7) (19) 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. (10) 
    Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration. (10) 
    Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. (10) 
    Etching equipment means any tool, device or substance that can be used to make permanent marks on any natural or manmade surface. (13) 
    Excavation or mining means: 
(1)  The removal of the natural surface of the earth, whether sod, dirt, soil, sand, gravel, stone or other matter, creating a depression. 
(2)  Any area where the topsoil or overburden has been removed for the purpose of removing earthly deposits or minerals. 
(3)  Any area that is being used for stockpiling, storage and processing of sand, gravel, black dirt, clay and other minerals. (7) (17) 
    Expansion means an increase in the floor area or volume of an existing building (including deck additions), increase in the building occupancy, capacity or parking demand or increase in the degree or intensity of the nonconforming condition of the building, land area, site or use. (20) 
    Experimental system shall mean any system which is considered new technology with limited data on reliability. (19) 
    Exterior property. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. (7) 
    Extermination . The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods. (7) 
    Facade means that portion of any exterior elevation of a building exposed to public view extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation. (20) 
    Failing system shall mean a system that discharges sewage to a seepage pit, cesspool, drywell or leaching pit and any system with less than three feet of soil or sand between the bottom of the distribution medium and the saturated soil level or bedrock. In addition, any system posing an imminent threat to public health or safety shall be considered failing. (19) 
    Fallow land shall mean land that is uncropped and kept cultivated throughout a growing season. Vegetative cover is less than 25 percent. Any land that is uncropped and cultivated during the months of September through May where a crop will be grown the following season is not considered fallow land. (19) 
    False alarm means an alarm signal eliciting a response by public safety personnel when a situation requiring a response does not exist, and which is caused by the activation of the alarm system through mechanical failure, alarm malfunction, improper installation or the inadvertence of the owner or lessee of the alarm system or of his employees or agents. "False alarm" does not include an alarm caused by climatic conditions such as tornadoes, thunderstorms, utility line mishaps, violent conditions of nature or any other conditions which are clearly beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer, installer or alarm user. (3) 
    Family means one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single, relatively permanent housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house or a hotel. (7) (20) 
    Farm means a tract of land of more than ten acres in size, usually with a house and barn, plus other buildings on which crops and often livestock are raised for a principal source of livelihood. 
    Farm animals means cattle, hogs, bees, sheep, goats, chickens, turkeys, horses, llama, emu, and other animals commonly accepted as farm animals in the State of Minnesota. 
    Farm, petting. See Petting farm . 
    Fast-food restaurant. See Restaurant, fast-food . 
    Feedlot, animal. See Animal feedlot . (20) 
    Fence means a structure serving as an enclosure, barrier or boundary, usually made of posts, chain link, masonry, boards, rails or other materials. (20) 
    Festive flag/banner sign. See Sign, festive flag/banner . 
    Filling or grading . To change the contour of the land. 
    Fire chief or fire marshal means, respectively, the fire chief or fire marshal of the city. (9) 
    Fire department means the city's fire department. 
    Firearm means any gun, pistol, rifle, shotgun, B-B gun, pellet gun, bow, or any device capable of discharging arrows, slugs, or blanks, metal projectiles or paint. 
    Firearm, dismantled. See Dismantled firearm . 
    Firearm, encased. See Encased firearm . 
    Firearms safety course, approved. See Approved firearms safety course . (11) 
    Flag lot. See Lot, flag/neck . 
    Flag sign. See Sign, flag . 
    Flashing sign. See Sign, flashing . 
    Flood fringe means the portion of the special flood hazard area (one percent annual chance flood) located outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the flood insurance study for Carver County, Minnesota. 
    Flood, regional means a flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the one percent chance or 100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood" used in a flood insurance study. (20) 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map on which the federal insurance administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM). 
    Floodplain means the beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood. (20) 
    Flood-prone area means any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Floodproofing means a combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages. 
    Floodway means the bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood. (20) 
    Floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. The floor area of a building shall include basement floor area, penthouses, attic space having headroom of seven feet or more, interior balconies and mezzanines, enclosed porches and floor area devoted to accessory uses. However, any space devoted to mechanical equipment, stairwells, elevator shafts, parking or loading shall not be included in the floor area. (20) 
    Floor area ratio (F.A.R.) means the numerical value obtained by dividing the floor area of all buildings on a lot by lot area. (20) 
    Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system over publicly owned rights-of-way. 
    Franchise agreement means a franchise granted, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters. 
    Franchise fee means any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the city or any other governmental authority on a grantee or cable subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as such. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
(1)  Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers); 
(2)  Capital costs which are required by the franchise agreement to be incurred by the grantee for PEG access facilities; 
(3)  Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages; or 
(4)  Any fee imposed under 17 USC. 
    Free choice means the horse has a free and independent opportunity to access a structure without human intervention. A horse must be able to voluntarily enter and exit said structure. (5) 
    Freestanding/pole/pylon sign. See Sign, freestanding/pole/pylon . 
    Front lot line. See Lot line, front . 
    Front yard. See Yard, front . 
    Frontage, lot. See Lot frontage . 
    Frontage, street. See Street frontage . 
    Furnishings, site. See Site furnishings . 
    Garage means a structure which may or may not be attached to the principal structure used primarily for the enclosure of personal vehicles. (20) 
    Garbage means putrescible animal, vegetable and organic wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, service and consumption of food. (7) (16) (19) 
    Garbage and refuse collector. See Refuse and garbage collector . 
    Garden center means a place of business where retail and wholesale products and produce are sold to the retail consumer. These centers, which may include a nursery and/or greenhouses, import most of its items sold. These items may include paints, handicrafts, nursery products and stock, fertilizers, potting soil, hardware, lawn and garden power equipment and machinery, hoes, rakes, shovels and other garden and farm tools and utensils. (20) 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. (1) 
    Generator means any person who produces or causes the production of mixed municipal solid waste. (16) 
    GIS means geographic information system, such as ArcView. (20) 
    Glare means light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to reduce viewers' ability to see and, in extreme cases, causing momentary blindness. (20) 
    Glare, direct. See Direct glare . 
    Golf course, regulation or par-three. A facility other than a miniature golf course for the playing of golf at which there may be a clubhouse including restrooms and locker rooms. A golf course may provide additional services customarily furnished such as swimming, outdoor recreation, and related retail sales that may include a restaurant and cocktail lounge if approved as a part of the required use permit. 
    Golf driving range means an area equipped with distance markers, clubs, balls, and tees for practicing golf drives and putting, and which may include a snack-bar and pro-shop, but excludes miniature golf courses and "putt-putt" courses. (20) 
    Governmental authority means any court or other federal, state, county, municipal or other governmental department, commission, board, agency or instrumentality. 
    Governmental sign. See Sign, governmental . 
    Grade means the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building or structure or the degree of use or descent of a sloping surface, expressed in percentage terms. (20) 
    Grading or filling. See Filling or grading . 
    Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property, or despite advance authorization is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the city council. (13) 
    Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade surface. (13) 
    Graffiti stick, paint stick. See Paint stick or graffiti stick . 
    Grantee means any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this division and its agents, employees, officers, designees, or any lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
    Grantor or city means the City of Chanhassen, Minnesota as represented by the council or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. The city administrator shall be responsible for the continuing administration of the franchise. Also see Jurisdiction. 
    Greenhouse means a building used for the cultivation or protection of plants, flowers, vegetables and nursery stock for subsequent sale or for seasonable enjoyment. (20) 
    Gross revenues means all revenue received directly or indirectly by the grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents, or any person in which grantee has a financial interest of five percent or more arising from or attributable, to the provision of cable service by the grantee within the city including, but not limited to, monthly fees charged to subscribers for basic cable service; monthly fees charged to subscribers for any optional service; monthly fees charged to subscribers for any tier of service other than basic cable service; installation, disconnection and reconnection fees; leased channel fees; converter and remote revenues; advertising revenues; and revenues from home shopping channels. Gross revenues shall be the basis for computing the franchise fees imposed. Grantee shall not be required to pay a franchise fee on gross revenues derived from any person receiving free cable service pursuant to a franchise agreement. Gross revenues shall include franchise fees collected by grantee on behalf of the city. 
    Gross weight means the combined weight of a vehicle and load. Where licensing provisions require that the gross weight be printed on the truck, this printed weight shall be the gross weight. (12) 
    Ground low profile business sign. See Sign, ground low profile business . 
    Group home means a state-licensed residential facility where persons reside for purposes of rehabilitation, treatment or special care. Such persons may be orphaned, suffer chemical or emotional impairment, or suffer social maladjustment or dependency. (20) 
    Guardian, parent. See Parent or guardian . 
    Habitable space . Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
    Habitat evaluation procedures (HEP) is a species-habitat data management system for impact assessment developed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Its purpose is to document predicted impacts to fish and wildlife from proposed land and water resource development projects. Habitat quality for selected key species is described by an index, the Habitat Suitability Index (HSI). (20) 
    Habitat Suitability Index (HSI) is a fish or wildlife species-specific index value rating the ability of key habitat components to supply essential life requirements for the species. Index value ranges between 0 to 1.0. (20) 
    Habitat units (HU). Habitat suitability (HSI) multiplied by the area of habitat being evaluated. HU's are used for comparing habitat quality from one wetland to the next or for measuring the effectiveness of mitigation. HU's integrate both quality and quantity of habitat. (20) 
    Hardship means the same as that term is defined in M.S. ch. 462. (20) 
    Health care facility means a state-certified or licensed facility or institution, whether public or private, principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance, diagnosis or treatment of human disease, pain, injury, deformity or physical condition, including, but not limited to, a general hospital, special hospital, mental hospital, public health center, diagnostic center, treatment center, rehabilitation center, extended care facility, skilled nursing home, nursing home, intermediate care facility, tuberculosis hospital, chronic disease hospital, maternity hospital, outpatient clinic, dispensary, home health care agency, boarding home or other home for sheltered care, and bioanalytical laboratory or central services facility serving one or more such institutions, but excluding institutions that provide healing solely by prayer. (20) 
    Health-related services. "Health-related services" include professional nursing services, home health aide tasks, and home care aide tasks identified in Minnesota Rules, parts 4668.0100, subparts 1 and 2; and 4668.0110, subpart 1; or the central storage of medication for residents. 
    Health services means establishments primarily engaged in furnishing medical, surgical or other services to individuals, including the offices of physicians, dentists, and other health practitioners, medical and dental laboratories, out-patient care facilities, blood banks, and oxygen and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services. (20) 
    Height, building. See Building height . 
    Historic site, significant. See Significant historic site . 
    Holiday decoration sign. See Sign, holiday decoration . 
    Home improvement trades means carpenter shops, interior decorating, painting and paper hanging shops, furniture upholstering and similar enterprises; but not including contractor's yards. (20) 
    Home occupation means an occupation, profession, activity or use carried out for potential gain by a resident that is clearly a customary, incidental and secondary use of a residential dwelling unit and which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the neighborhood. (20) 
    Home occupation sign. See Sign, home occupation . 
    Home, group. See Group home . 
    Home, model. See Model home . 
    Home, nursing. See Nursing home . 
    Homeowner association means any private corporation, private club, unincorporated association or nonprofit organization, which owns, leases or operates a recreational beach lot, as that term is defined in the zoning ordinance, for the purpose of providing access to any lake for its members, shareholders, owners and beneficiaries. (6) 
    Horse includes horses, colts, ponies, mules, burros or llamas. 
    Hotel means a facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and which may provide additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms and recreational facilities and where access to individual rooms is provided through an indoor lobby or office. (20) 
    House pets means animals such as dogs, cats, birds (not including pigeons, chickens, geese, turkeys or other domestic fowl), gerbils, hamsters, rabbits (including those normally sheltered outside of the principal structure), and tropical fish, that can be contained within a principal structure throughout the entire year, provided that the containment can be accomplished without special modification to the structure that would require a building permit, excluding wild or domesticated wild animals. 
    Household pet means a dog or cat, regardless of weight, or an animal not exceeding 40 pounds in weight that is usually and customarily considered a pet. (20) 
    Housekeeping unit . A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. (7) 
    Illuminated sign. See Sign, illuminated . 
    Imminent danger. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time. (7) 
    Impact zone, bluff. See Bluff impact zone . 
    Impact zone, shore. See Shore impact zone . 
    Impervious surface means a surface that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to development. Examples include, but are not limited to, structures, storage areas, roads, sidewalks, patios, driveways, or parking lots made of concrete, asphalt, rock, or non-pervious pavement systems. (20) 
    Impoundment means the status of being in the physical custody of the police of any animal control officer of the city, including, without limitation, confinement in the city pound or in the animal control officer's vehicle. (5) 
    Incinerator means any device used for the destruction of refuse or waste materials by fire. (16) 
    Incorporation shall mean the mixing of septage with the topsoil by means such as disking, moldboard plowing or chisel plowing, to a minimum depth of six inches. (19) 
    Individual on-site sewer system means an alternative type sewer system for which the septic tank and drainfield are located entirely on the property being served. Also see Individual sewage treatment system. (19) 
    Individual (e.g., curbside) residential collection means collection from any building consisting of one or more dwelling units wherein each unit has an individual kitchen and wherein the mixed municipal solid waste of each unit is separately collected by licensed haulers. (16) 
    Individual sewage treatment system (ISTS) shall mean a sewage treatment system, or part thereof, serving a dwelling or other establishment, or group thereof, and using sewage tanks or advanced treatment followed by soil treatment and disposal. (19) 
    Indoor area means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is bound by walls, doorways or windows, whether open or closed. A wall, for the purpose of smoking shelters, includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent. (20) 
    Industrial heating equipment is an appliance, device or equipment used, or intended to be used, in an industrial, manufacturing or commercial occupancy for applying heat to any material being processed, but shall not include water heaters, boilers or portable equipment used by artisans in pursuit of a trade. 
    Industrial, light. See Light industrial . 
    Infestation. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests. (7) 
    Informational sign. See Sign, informational . 
    Initial service area means the area of the city which will receive cable service initially, as set forth in any franchise agreement. 
    Injection shall mean the process of directing the flow of septage under the surface of the soil. Septage shall flow from the storage container or tank directly into the soil profile and shall not be spread on the soil surface. (19) 
    Inspector shall mean the person or persons employed or engaged by the city and assigned the responsibility for the administration and implementation of chapter 19, article IV. (19) 
    Installation means the connection of the system to a subscriber and the provision of cable service. 
    Institutional sign. See Sign, institutional . 
    Integral roof sign. See Sign, integral roof . 
    Intensive vegetation clearing means the complete removal of trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row or block. (20) 
    Interest. The term "interest" as used in this article includes any pecuniary interest in the ownership, operation, management or profits of a liquor establishment, but does not include: Bona fide loans; bona fide fixed sum rental agreements; bona fide open accounts or other obligations held with or without security arising out of the ordinary and regular course of business or selling or leasing merchandise, fixtures or supplies to such establishment; or any interest of five percent or less in any corporation holding a city liquor license. A person who receives monies, from time to time, directly or indirectly from a licensee in the absence of a bona fide consideration therefore and excluding bona fide gifts or donations, shall be deemed to have a pecuniary interest in such retail license. In determining "bona fide", the reasonable value of the goods or things received as consideration for the payment of the licensee and all other facts reasonably tending to prove or disprove the existence of any purposeful scheme or arrangement to evade any prohibitions under this article shall be considered. (10) 
    Interim use means a temporary use of property until a particular date, until the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit it. (20) 
    Interior lot. See Lot, interior. 
    Intermittent light means any artificial light which flashes, revolves or fluctuates in such a manner that the variance is easily distinguished by personal observation. (13) 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. (1) 
    Junkyard means an area, lot, parcel, building or structure or part thereof where used, waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, abandoned, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, glass, paper, rags, rubber products, tires, bottles, building materials, vehicle parts, household appliances, brush and lumber. A junkyard includes an automobile wrecking dismantling yard, but does not include accessory uses established in conjunction with a permitted manufacturing process when conducted within an enclosed area or building. The storage of unlicensed and/or inoperable motor vehicles for a period in excess of 30 days shall also be considered a junkyard. (20) 
    Jurisdiction means the city. Also see Grantor or City . 
    Kennel, commercial means any place where a person accepts dogs and cats or other domesticated animals, more than one year of age, from the general public and where such animals are kept for the purpose of selling, boarding, breeding, training, treating or grooming. (5) (20) 
    Kennel, private means any place where more than two dogs, more than three cats or any combination of four or more dogs or cats over six months of age are kept or harbored, such animals being owned by the owner or lessee of the premises wherein or whereupon the animals are kept or harbored. (5) (20) 
    Kitchen. A room or an area equipped for preparing and cooking food. (7) 
    Labeled. Devices, equipment, appliances or materials to which has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards. (7) 
    Lake means any body of water lying wholly or partially within the city and all parts, bays and channels thereof. Lakes shall not include streams or rivers or other manmade waterbodies such as stormwater ponds. (6) 
    Lakeshore site means any lot of record which abuts any body of public water. (20) 
    Land spreading shall mean the placement, incorporation, or injection of septage onto or beneath the soil surface. (19) 
    Land spreading site shall mean any land used for septage land spreading. (19) 
    Land, fallow. See Fallow land . 
    Land, public. See Public land . 
    Landowner means any person, group, firm or corporation owning, leasing or legally controlling any lands within the territorial limits of the city. (11) 
    Landscape means all forms of planting and vegetation, ground forms, rock groupings, water features and patterns, and all visible construction except buildings and site furnishings. (20) 
    Legionnaire's Disease . The excess fluids from cooling towers are a known cause of Legionnaire's Disease. The cooling tower fluids shall be monitored and treated so as to prevent any health disease. (7) 
    Let for occupancy or let. To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land. (7) 
    License means the authentic state document used to designate the numbers assigned a watercraft and to renew the same. (6) 
    Licensed premises. The term "licensed premises" is the premises described in the approved license application. In the case of a restaurant, club or exclusive liquor store licensed for on-sales of alcoholic beverages and located on a golf course, "licensed premises" means the entire golf course except for areas where motor vehicles are regularly parked or operated. (10) 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. (10) 
    Light fixture, shielded. See Shielded light fixture . 
    Light industrial means the manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling, packaging or testing of goods or equipment or research activities entirely within an enclosed structure, with no outdoor storage. There shall be negligible impact upon the surrounding environment by noise, vibration, smoke, dust or pollutants. (20) 
    Light source means a device (such as a lamp) which provides visible energy. (13) 
    Light trespass means light emitted that is visible beyond the boundaries of the property on which the light source is located. (13) 
    Light, intermittent. See Intermittent light . 
    Line, building. See Building line . 
    Line, building setback. See Building setback line . 
    Line, lot. See Lot line . 
    Living area means the area of a dwelling including, but not limited to, bedrooms, bathrooms, kitchens, living rooms and dining rooms, but excluding garages. (20) 
    Loading space means an off-street space or berth designed and used for the loading or unloading of commercial vehicles. (20) 
    Local street. See Street, local . 
    Loss of trees. See Trees, loss of . 
    Lot means a separate parcel, tract, or area of land undivided by any public street or approved private street, which has been established by plat, metes and bounds subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, and which is occupied by or intended to be developed for and occupied by a principal building or group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, including such open spaces and yards as are designed and arranged or required by chapter 20 for such building, use or development. (18) (20) 
    Lot area means the area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side or rear lot lines, but not including any area occupied by the waters of lakes or rivers or by street rights-of-way. (20) 
    Lot coverage means that portion or percentage of a lot that is covered by impervious surfaces and pervious pavement. (20) 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot. The greater frontage of a corner lot is its depth, and its lesser frontage is its width. (20) 
    Lot frontage means the lot width measured at the front lot line. (20) 
    Lot line means a line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a roadway right-of-way or any other public space. (20) 
    Lot line, front means the lot line separating a lot from a roadway right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot it shall be the lot line with the shortest dimensions on the street. (20) 
    Lot line, rear means the lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the front lot line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line 20 feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front lot line. (20) 
    Lot line, side means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. (20) 
    Lot of record means any legally recorded lot which at the time of its recordation complied with all applicable laws and ordinances. (20) 
    Lot width means the shortest distance between lot lines measured at the midpoint of the building line. (20) 
    Lot, corner means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. (20) 
    Lot, double frontage means a lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. On a double frontage lot, both street lot lines shall be deemed front lot lines. 
    Lot, flag/neck means a lot that does not provide the full required frontage on a public right-of-way, but rather is served by a narrow "neck" of land that extends to the street. To meet the definition, the neck must be at least 30 feet wide. The lot width on neck or flag lots and lots accessed by private streets shall be 100 feet as measured at the front building setback line. Lots of this type existing before March 26, 1990 shall be classified as neck/flag lots for the purposes of determining lot area, lot coverage, and front yard setbacks even if they do not meet the stipulated neck width. The location of flag-neck lots is conceptually illustrated below. (18) (20) 

    Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot, nonconforming. See Nonconforming lot . (20) 
    Lot, parking. See Parking lot . 
    Lot, riparian means any lot abutting the ordinary high water mark of a lake, pond or wetland. (20) 
    Lot, zoning means a single tract of land which consists of one or more lots of record and which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a separate unit under single ownership or control. A zoning lot may or may not coincide with a single lot of record, but in no case shall a zoning lot include only a portion of a lot of record. (20) 
    Low profile business sign, ground. See Sign, ground low profile business . 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). 
    Malt liquor is any beer, ale or other beverage made from malt by fermentation and containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume. 
    Manage 1 wetlands means high quality wetlands that should be protected from development and other pressures of increased use, including indirect effects of development. Maintaining natural buffers will help to retain the significant function these wetlands provide. In the event that impacts to these wetlands cannot be avoided, replacement ratios for mitigation should exceed the state required minimums. (20) 
    Manage 2 wetlands means wetlands that provide medium functional levels and the wetland extent should be maintained. These wetlands often provide optimal restoration opportunity. (20) 
    Manage 3 wetlands means wetlands that have been substantially disturbed and have the lowest functions and values. (20) 
    Manufactured dwelling. See Dwelling, manufactured . 
    Manufactured home. See Dwelling, manufactured. 
    Marquee sign. See Sign, marquee . 
    May not, shall not. "May not", "shall not", and similar phrases have a mandatory negative effect and state a prohibition. (1) 
    May. The word "may" is to be construed as being permissive. (1) 
    Medium texture shall mean the USDA classification's sandy loam, silt, silt loam and sandy clay loam. Fine texture is USDA classification's clay loam, silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay and clay. (19) 
    Menu board sign. See Sign, menu board . 
    Merchant, transient. See Transient merchant . 
    Microdistillery is a distillery operated within the state producing premium distilled spirits in a total quantity not to exceed 40,000 proof gallons in a calendar year. 
    Mineral extraction. See Excavation or mining . 
    Mini-horse means a horse that is 34 inches or less in height at maturity. (5) 
    Mining or excavation. See Excavation or mining . 
    Mini-warehouse means a building or group of buildings in a controlled-access, screened and secured fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled-access storage spaces of varying sizes which are leased or rented on an individual basis. (20) 
    Minnesota Routine Assessment Method (or MnRAM) means Minnesota Routine Assessment Method for evaluating wetland functions (MnRAM Version 3.0), or future versions. (20) 
    Minor street means a street of limited continuity which is used primarily for access to abutting properties. (18) (20) 
    Mixed municipal solid waste means garbage, refuse and other solid waste from residential, commercial, industrial and community activities which is generated and collected in aggregate, but excluding, auto hulks or large auto parts, street sweepings, ash, construction debris, mining waste, sludges, household hazardous waste, tree and agricultural wastes, tires, lead acid batteries, motor and vehicle fluids and filters, yard waste, and other materials collected, processed and disposed of as separate waste streams. (16) 
    Mobile home. See Dwelling, manufactured . 
    Model home means a builder's home which remains open for a period of time designed to display the product. The home may also be used as a sales or real estate office for the development in which it is located. 
    Monitoring device, water. See Water monitoring device . 
    Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. (1) 
    Mooring means any buoy, post, boatlift, structure or device at which a watercraft may be moored which is surrounded by public waters. (6) 
    Mooring area means an area located upon any body of public water used for the mooring of watercraft. Docks are not considered mooring areas. (20) 
    Motel means a commercial establishment providing transient accommodations to the general public containing rooms having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building. (20) 
    Motion sign. See Sign, motion . 
    Motor freight terminal means a building or area in which trucks, including tractor or trailer units, are parked, stored or serviced, including the transfer, loading or unloading of goods. A terminal may include facilities for the temporary storage of loads prior to transshipment. (20) 
    Motor fuel and service station means a retail place of business engaged in the sale of motor vehicle fuels and services, but may also engage in supplying a limited amount of related goods. In no case shall the space for the retailing of related goods exceed 400 square feet. All services are to be performed within enclosed service bays. (20) 
    Motorboat means any watercraft propelled in any respect by machinery, including watercraft temporarily equipped with detachable motors. (6) 
    MPCA means the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
    Multifamily dwelling. See Dwelling, multifamily . 
    Multiuser tower. See Tower, multiuser . 
    Municipality means the city. Also see City . (9) 
    Must. The word "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. (1) 
    Nameplate sign. See Sign, nameplate . 
    Native vegetation. See Vegetation, native . 
    Natural features means any slope (12 percent slope or greater), forested areas, lakes, streams and wetlands, areas of unique vegetative cover, scenic views, natural habitat areas, or historic archeological areas, buildings or features. (20) 
    Natural habitat area means an area that is characterized by being primarily in a natural state, with only minor evidence of disturbance from modern human activity. Natural habitat areas may include forests, wetlands or endangered or threatened species habitat. (20) 
    Neck lot. See Lot, flag/neck . 
    Neighborhood commercial means a use which involves convenience grocery stores, or those uses that meet the daily needs of the residents. Buildings may be multi-tenant and shall not exceed a maximum of 20,000 square feet of building area. The districts should reflect the character of the neighborhood through design. 
    Net density. See Density, net . 
    Nit is defined as a unit of luminance equal to one candela per square meter (cd/m 2 ). It is often used to quote the brightness of computer displays, which typically have a luminance of 200 to 300 nits, and LED displays, which have a typical luminance between 1,000 nits (indoor) and 5,000 nits (outdoor). (20) 
    Noise, abnormal or excessive. See Abnormal or excessive noise . 
    Nonconforming lot. A lot that does not comply with the requirements of chapter 20, but which did comply with applicable ordinance requirements at the time the lot was created. (20) 
    Nonconforming structure. Any building or structure that does not comply with the requirements of chapter 20, but which did comply with applicable ordinance requirements at the time it was constructed or put in place. (20) 
    Nonconforming use. A use of land that does not comply with the requirements of chapter 20, but which did comply with applicable ordinance requirements at the time the use was established. (20) 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; however, technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. (1) 
    Normal business hours means those hours (8:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m. Monday-Friday) during which most similar businesses in the city are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours. (7.5) 
    Normal domestic strength waste means water carried domestic waste, exclusive of footing and roof drainage. Domestic waste includes, but is not limited to, liquid waste produce by bathing, laundry, culinary operations and liquid waste from toilets and floor drain. Domestic waste contains approximately 270 mf/1 BOD5 and approximately 300 mg/1 suspended solids, consistent with that emanating from a typical household. (19) 
    Normal operating conditions means those service conditions which are within the control of the grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the system. (7.5) 
    NPDES permit means the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's (MPCA's) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) permit. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. (10) 
    Nudity or state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or areola of the female breast. (10) 
    Nuisance means a thing, act or use of property that: 
(1)  Annoys, injures or endangers the health, safety, comfort or repose of the public; 
(2)  Offends public decency; 
(3)  Unlawfully interference with the use of or obstructs, or tends to obstruct or render dangerous for passage a lake, stream, navigable river or public water, park, square, sidewalk, street, alley or highway; 
(4)  Depreciates the value of the property of the inhabitants of the city; 
(5)  In any manner renders the inhabitants of the city insecure in life or in use of property. (13) 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person or thing. A word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as several persons or things. (1) 
    Nursery means an enterprise which conducts the retail and wholesale sale of plants grown on the site or imported to the site, as well as accessory items directly related to their care and maintenance. Accessory items may include fertilizer, potting soil, garden tools, seed, pesticides, pots, and other gardening supplies. The retail sale of hardware, paint pet supplies, power equipment, and farm implements shall be prohibited. "Nursery" may include greenhouses. (20) 
    Nursing home means an extended or intermediate care facility licensed by the state to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity are unable to care for themselves. (20) 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear and sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed". (1) 
    Obstacle, water. See Water obstacle . 
    Occupancy. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied. (7) 
    Occupant. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. (7) 
    Odor means that which produces a response of the human sense of smell to an odorous substance. (20) 
    Odor generator, nonsignificant means an industry or other source which has not been designated as a significant odor generator as defined in this section. (20) 
    Odor generator, significant means an industry, facility or other source which has been identified by the environmental health officer as the cause of three odor alerts in a 90-day period inclusive of industries, facilities or sources previously found to be in compliance which, through changes in processes, technologies, growth, or from other causes, has begun to generate odors which result in three odor alerts in a 90-day period. (20) 
    Odor pollution means an odor emitted to the atmosphere by an industry or other source which is determined by the enforcement official to be the cause of an odor alert. (20) 
    Office means professional and business office, nonretail activity. Used for conducting the affairs of a business profession, service, industry or government. (20) 
    Officer, properly designated. See Properly designated officer . 
    Officials, officers, departments, employees, boards, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city by title only, i.e., "mayor", "city manager", "clerk", "chief of police", etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, officers, departments, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of this city. (1) 
    Off-premises sign. See Sign, off-premises . 
    On-premises sign. See Sign, on-premises . 
    Open fences are decorative fences such as wrought iron fences, cement block column or rock-type posts, split rail and other open style fences. Open fences may not have more than 20 percent opacity. Picket fences and privacy type fences are not open fences. 
    Open flame fire means any burning of fuel, and includes any torch, flare, decorative light, fondue or other heating, burning or lighting equipment or device having an open flame. (9) 
    Open porch means a roofed, open area, attached to or part of, and with direct access to or from a building. An open porch may be surrounded by a railing but must not be enclosed with screen, mesh, glass or similar material. (20) 
    Open space, parks. See Parks/open space . 
    Openable area. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. (7) 
    Operate means to navigate or otherwise use a watercraft. (6) 
    Operating conditions, normal. See Normal operating conditions . 
    Operating manager. The term "operating manager" as used in this article means a person designated by the license holder who works full-time at the licensed premises and is in charge of day-to-day liquor sales. (10) 
    Operation and maintenance means activities required to provide for the dependable and economical functioning of the treatment system, throughout the useful life of the treatment works, and at the level of performance for which the treatment works were constructed. Operation and maintenance includes replacement. (19) 
    Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. (7) 
    Ordinance or city ordinance. The unqualified use of the term "ordinance" or "city ordinance" shall be construed to be followed by the phrase "of the City of Chanhassen, Minnesota". (1) 
    Ordinary high water mark for lakes and wetlands. The highest water level that has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape. The ordinary high water mark is commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominately aquatic to predominately terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool. (6) (20) 
    Organized race means a race sponsored and conducted by the park and recreation commission, the chamber of commerce, Jaycees, American Legion or similar council-recognized civic groups or associations. (12) 
    Outdoor sales, temporary. See Temporary outdoor sales . 
    Outdoor storage means the storage of any goods, junk equipment, fuel, materials, merchandise, supplies or motor vehicles not fully enclosed in a building for more than a 24-hour period. (20) 
    Outlot means a platted lot to be developed for a use which will not involve a building or which is reserved for future replatting before development. (20) 
    Outstanding wetlands means wetlands that are classified as outstanding resource value waters by the State of Minnesota. (20) 
    Overburden. Those materials which lie between the surface of the earth and material deposit to be extracted. (7) 
    Overnight means any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. (6) (20) 
    Owner means: 
(1)  In the case of a watercraft, means a person, other than a lien holder having the property in or title to a watercraft; the term includes a person entitled to the use or possession of such craft, subject to an interest in another person, reserved or created by agreement and securing payment or performance of any obligation. 
(2)  In the case of a lakeshore site, means any natural person who is either the record owner of a fee simple interest, or the record owner of a contract for deed vendee's interest, or the holder of a possessory leasehold interest, in the whole of any lakeshore site, including authorized guests, and immediate family member of such person. (6) 
(3)  Any person who owns, harbors or keeps or has custody of a dog or cat, or the parents or guardians of a person under 18 years of age who owns, harbors, keeps or has custody of a dog or cat. (5) 
(4)  Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. (7) 
(5)  The word "owner" shall, when applied to a building or land, include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Paint stick or graffiti stick means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least one-fourth of an inch in width. (13) 
    Parent or guardian means the natural or adoptive parent of a person, the legal guardian of such person, or any other person over 18 years of age who has been selected by the natural or adoptive parent or legal guardian to supervise the person under 16 years of age while the person has in his/her possession or under his/her control any firearm. (11) 
    Park, private means a tract of land presently owned or controlled and used by private or semi-public persons, entities, groups, etc., for active and/or passive recreational purposes. 
    Parking lot means an approved off-street, ground level area, usually surfaced and improved, designed and intended for vehicular access to and from a parking area and for parking of motor vehicles. (20) 
    Parking ramp means a building, garage or structure or part thereof in which a structural level other than a slab on grade is used for parking, storage or maintenance of motor vehicles. (20) 
    Parks/open space shall mean parks, parkways, ice skating rink, playgrounds, public accesses, recreation fields, recreation buildings, beaches and water surrounded by parks, including, but not limited to waters adjacent to beaches, which are delineated as swimming areas by the placement of marker buoys. (14) 
    Pasture means a fenced area of real property for the grazing or keeping of horses, cattle, goats, or sheep. A pasture may be grassed which means that it provides sufficient and suitable vegetation for the feeding of a horse during the growing season or a "dry lot" which does not provide sufficient and suitable vegetation for the feeding of a horse. In a "dry lot" the horse must be fed to meet its minimum daily nutritional needs. (5) 
    Peddler means any person, firm, corporation, or other business organization that goes from dwelling to dwelling, business to business, place to place, or from street to street, carrying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise or services and offering or exposing the same for sale. (10) 
    Pedestrian ways. See Sidewalk . (18) (20) 
    Permanent dock means any dock other than a seasonal dock. (6) 
    Permission, written. See Written permission . 
    Permitted cooking device means a cooking device fueled by briquettes or electricity or a permanently mounted natural gas cooking device as described in section 9-44 of Chanhassen City Code. (9) 
    Permittee means any person to whom a permit issued. 
    Person means any human being and may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate, and to partnerships and other unincorporated associations. (1) (7) (7.5) (13) (10) (16) (19) 
    Person, underage. See Underage person . 
    Personal service means an establishment or place of business primarily engaged in providing individual services generally related to personal needs, such as a tailor shop. (20) 
    Pervious pavement allows stormwater runoff to filter though surface voids into an underlying stone reservoir where it is temporarily stored and/or infiltrated. Examples of this technology include, but are not limited to, porous pavers and permeable interlocking concrete pavers (PICP). 
    Petting farm means any activity whereby Shetland ponies, miniature donkeys (Equus asinus), miniature horses (Equus caballus), potbellied pigs, feeder pigs (young swine), sheep (ovis), pygmy goats (capra), milking goat, rabbits (leporidae), chinchillas (Chinchilla laniger), red foxes (vulpes), hedgehogs (Earinaceus europaeus), young cows (bos), geese (anser), ducks (anatinae), chickens (Gallus gallus), exotic white peafowl (pavo), red golden pheasants (Chrysolophus pictus), and prairie dogs (Cynomys ludovicianus) are exhibited, regardless of compensation. (20) 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. (19) 
    Photometrics means the quantitative measurement of light level and distribution. (20) 
    Pickup signs. See Sign, Pickup. 
    Pickup, special. See Special pickup . 
    Platting authority means the city council. (20) 
    Pole sign. See Sign, freestanding/pole/pylon . 
    Police agency means the Carver County Sheriff's Department or such other law enforcement agency designated by the city council to provide regular public safety services to the city. (2) 
    Pollution, odor. See Odor pollution . 
    Pool, swimming. See Swimming pool . 
    Porch, open. See Open porch . 
    Portable sign. See Sign, portable . 
    Power substation means a facility comprising of transmission towers, transformers, power equipment and structures necessary to house such equipment. (20) 
    Premises means a lot, parcel, plot, tract or plat of land, easement of public way together with the building and structures thereon. (7) (20) 
    Premises, licensed. See Licensed premises . 
    Preserve wetlands means exceptional and highest functioning wetlands, or those sensitive wetlands receiving conveyed stormwater runoff that have yet retained a medium level of vegetative diversity/integrity. These wetlands are those that should be preserved in (or improved to) their most pristine or highest functional capacity with wide, natural buffers, in perpetuity. (20) 
    Primary zone means the buffer zone that directly impacts Bluff Creek and/or its tributaries. The primary zone, which is generally delineated in the Bluff Creek Watershed Natural Resources Management Plan, is intended to be preserved as permanent open space. (20) 
    Principal building. See Building, principal . 
    Principal structure. The main building as distinguished from an accessory building or structure. (20) 
    Private kennel. See Kennel, private . 
    Private park. See Park, private. 
    Private sale or event sign. See Sign, private sale or event . 
    Private stables. See Stables, private . 
    Private street. See Street, private . 
    Processing means the crushing, washing, compounding or treating of rock, sand, gravel, clay, silt or other like material. (20) 
    Projecting sign. See Sign, projecting . 
    Properly designated officer. The term "properly designated officer" means and includes: 
(1)  The city fire inspector; 
(2)  The city building official; and 
(3)  The health inspectors employed by Carver or Hennepin County or the state acting in the course of the scope of their employment. 
    Property. The word "property" includes real, personal and mixed property. (1) (10) 
    Property, exterior. See Exterior property . 
    Property, public See Public property . 
    Property, semi-public. See Semi-public property . 
    Public educational or government access facilities or PEG access facilities means: 
(1)  Channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental use; and 
(2)  Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. (7.5) 
    Public land means land owned and/or operated by a governmental unit. (20) 
    Public property shall mean any public street, highway, school ground, playground, or other publicly owned property within the city except parks and lakes. (11) 
    Public safety communications center means the central facility used to receive emergency requests for public safety services and general information from the public to be dispatched to public safety personnel. (3) 
    Public safety personnel means all personnel employed by any law enforcement agency, and any fire-fighting personnel and any ambulance personnel. (3) 
    Public sewer. See Sewer, public . 
    Public transportation means public means of transportation, including light and commuter rail transit; buses; enclosed bus and transit stops; taxis, vans, limousines, and other for-hire vehicles other than those being operated by the lessee; and ticketing, boarding and waiting areas in public transportation terminals. (20) 
    Public utility means persons, corporations or governments supplying gas, electric, transportation, water, sewer or land line telephone service to the general public. For the purpose of chapter 20, personal wireless services shall not be considered public utility uses, and are defined separately. (20) 
    Public waters means and shall be limited to the following waters of the state: 
(1)  All water basins assigned a shoreland management classification by the commissioner of natural resources; 
(2)  All waters of the state which have been finally determined to be public waters or navigable waters by a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(3)  All meandered lakes, except for those which have been legally drained; 
(4)  All water basins previously designated by the commissioner of natural resources for management for a specific purpose such as trout lakes and game lakes pursuant to applicable law; 
(5)  All water basins designated as scientific and natural areas; 
(6)  All water basins located within and totally surrounded by publicly owned lands; 
(7)  All water basins where the state or the federal government holds title to any of the beds or shores, unless the owner declared that the water is not necessary for the purposes of the public ownership; 
(8)  All water basins where there is publicly owned and controlled access which is intended to provide for public access to the water basins; and 
(9)  All natural and altered natural watercourses with a total drainage area greater than two square miles, except that trout streams officially designated by the commissioner of natural resources shall be public waters regardless of the size of their drainage area. 
The public character of water shall not be determined exclusively by the proprietorship of the underlying, or surrounding land or by whether it is a body or stream of water which was navigable in fact or susceptible of being used as a highway for commerce at the time this state was admitted to the union. (20) 
    Public works director. References to the city engineer, director of public works or public works director are to the director of public works/city engineer. 
    Pylon sign. See Sign, freestanding/pole/pylon . 
    Ramp, parking. See Parking ramp . 
    Real estate office, temporary. See Temporary real estate office . 
    Real estate sign. See Sign, real estate . 
    Real property. The words "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. (1) 
    Rear lot line. See Lot line, rear . 
    Rear yard. See Yard, rear . 
    Recreational beach lot means land abutting public water which serves as a neighborhood recreational facility for the subdivision of which is a part. (20) 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle or vehicular unit that is built on a single chassis, is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and which is primarily designed as a temporary living accommodation for recreational camping, seasonal, and travel use. Recreational vehicles include travel trailers, travel vehicle, camping trailers, truck campers and self-propelled motor homes. (20) 
    Recyclables means materials which can be separated from the mixed municipal solid waste stream for collection and preparation for reuse in their original form, or for other uses in manufacturing processes that do not cause the destruction of the recyclable materials in a manner that precludes further use. (16) 
    Refuse means putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes of all kinds, combustible and noncombustible, resulting from the operation of a household, including, but not limited to, garbage or any other discarded or unusable materials. "Refuse" does not include: 
(1)  Construction materials resulting from the construction or reconstruction of buildings or other improvements by contractors; or 
(2)  Trees in excess of six inches in diameter; or 
(3)  Yard waste; or 
(4)  Recyclables. (16) 
    Refuse and garbage collector means any person holding a valid license from the village for the purpose of collecting refuse and garbage. (16) 
    Regulatory flood protection elevation (RFPE) means an elevation not less than three feet above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway. 
    Rehabilitation means to renew the land to a self-sustaining, long-term use which is compatible with contiguous land uses in accordance with the standards set forth in chapter 20. (20) 
    Repair shall mean the act or process of restoring or replacing a defective element of an individual sewage treatment system to approximately its original function without altering its original location, capacity or operating characteristics. Only repairs or replacement performed downstream of the inlet of the distribution device or replacement of the septic tank, pump tank or dosing chamber shall be considered repairs requiring a permit under this article. (19) 
    Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Replacement means the obtaining and installing of equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the wastewater treatment facilities to maintain the capacity and performance for which such facilities were designed and constructed. The term operation and maintenance includes replacement. (19) 
    Residential development shall mean ten or more places of habitation concentrated within ten acres of land. The term also includes schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes, businesses, offices, and apartment buildings or complexes having ten or more units. (19) 
    Residential district means that area of the city zoned as RR, RSF, R-4, RLM, R-8, R-12, R-16 or PUD-R by the City Code. (10) 
    Residential dwelling. See Dwelling, residential . (16) 
    Restaurant, fast-food means an establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverages in a ready-to-consume state for consumption: 
(1)  Within a restaurant building; 
(2)  Within a motor vehicle parked on the premises; or 
(3)  Off the premises as carry-out orders; and whose principal method of operation includes the following characteristics: 
a.  Food and/or beverages are usually packaged prior to sale and are served in edible containers or in paper, plastic or other disposable containers; 
b.  The customer is not served food at his table by an employee, but receives it at a counter window, or similar facility and carries it to another location on or off the premises for consumption. (20) 
    Restaurant, standard means an establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverages, including alcohol, to customers in a ready-to-consume state, and whose principal method of operation includes one or both of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served their food and beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which food and beverages are consumed; 
(2)  A cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages generally are consumed within the restaurant building. (20) 
    Restoration. To renew land to self-sustaining, long-term use which is compatible with contiguous land uses, present and future, in accordance with the standards set forth in this article. (7) 
    Restraint, under. See Under restraint . 
    Retail sales means establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. (20) 
    Revenues, gross. See Gross revenues . 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land intended to be occupied by a roadway, sidewalk, trail, and/or other utilities or facilities. A right-of-way includes the land between the right-of-way lines, whether improved or unimproved. "Right-of-way" includes arterial, collector and local streets. (1) (7.5) (12) (18) (20) 
    Riparian lot. See Lot, riparian . 
    Roadside stand means a stand located adjacent to public right-of-way for the sale of agricultural produce. (20) 
    Roadway means that portion of the right-of-way improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, including the shoulder. (12) (18) (20) 
    Rodent. Any animals or insects commonly seeking to make their home within the interior of a permanent structure, including birds, bats, bees, wasps, moths, squirrels, mice and rats. (7) 
    Roof sign. See Sign, roof . 
    Roof sign, integral. See Sign, integral roof . 
    Roof, standing seam. See Standing seam roof . 
    Rooming house. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling. (7) 
    Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes. (7) 
    Root zone, critical. See Critical root zone . 
    Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include, the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. (7) 
    Safety or deadman throttle means a device which, when pressure is removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged from the driving track. (12) 
    Sales, small vehicle. See Small vehicle sales . 
    Sanitary sewer. See Sewer, sanitary . 
    Satellite dish means a combination of: 
(1)  Antenna or dish antenna whose purpose is to receive communication or other signals from orbiting satellites and other extraterrestrial sources; 
(2)  A low-noise amplifier (LNA), which is situated at the focal point of the receiving component and whose purpose is to magnify and transfer signals; and 
(3)  A coaxial cable whose purpose is to carry the signals into the interior of the building. (20) 
    Satellite dish height means the height of the antenna or dish measured vertically from the highest point of the antenna or dish when positioned for operation, to ground level. 
    Saturated soil shall mean the highest elevation in the soil where periodically depleted oxygen levels occur because of soil voids being filled with water. Saturated soil is evidence by the presence of soil mottling or other information. (19) 
    School, vocational. See Vocational school . 
    Seasonal dock means any dock designed and constructed so that it may be removed from a lake on a seasonal basis; all components such as supports, legs, decking and footing must be capable of removal by nonmechanized agents. (6) 
    Secondary zone means the buffer zone that contains habitat areas that are valuable to the delicate balance of the Bluff Creek ecosystem. The secondary zone, which is generally delineated in the Bluff Creek Watershed Natural Resources Management Plan, is subject to development limitations (bluffs, step slopes, wetlands etc.) in order to minimize the impact of new development on the primary zone. (20) 
    Section means any section, subsection or provision of this article. (7.5) 
    Sediment control means best management practices employed to prevent sediment from leaving site including, but not limited to, silt fence, sediment traps, earth dikes, check dams, subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, storm drain inlet protection and temporary or permanent sediment basins as defined in the MPCA general construction permit. (7, 19) 
    Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. (10) 
    Semi-public property shall mean any parking lot operated incident to any commercial use of land, any auto service station, or any parochial or private school ground for which no special on-sale nonintoxicating malt liquor permit has been issued by the city. (11) 
    Semi-public use means the use of land by a private, nonprofit organization to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the regular constituency of the organization. (20) 
    Senior citizen housing means housing designed and intended to be occupied principally by persons 55 or older. 
    Separated materials, source. See Source-separated materials . 
    Septage shall mean solids and liquids removed during periodic maintenance of an individual sewage treatment system, or solids and liquids which are removed from toilet waste treatment devices or a holding tank. (19) 
    Septic system. See Individual sewage treatment system (ISTS). 
    Service area or franchise area means the entire geographic area within the city as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. (7.5) 
    Service center, auto. See Auto services center. 
    Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. (7.5) 
    Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between a structure and the nearest property line or right-of-way; and, within shoreland areas, setback also means the minimum horizontal distance between a structure or sanitary facility and the ordinary high water mark. (19) (20) 
    Setback line, building. See Building setback line . 
    Setback zone, dock. See Dock setback zone . 
    Sewage treatment system means a septic tank and soil absorption system or other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system as described and regulated in chapter 19, article IV, of the City Code. (20) 
    Sewage treatment works means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. (19) 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. (19) 
    Sewer system means pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main, and all other construction, devices, appliances or appurtenances used for conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal. (20) 
    Sewer system, community means an alternative type sanitary sewer system which utilizes one septic tank per each dwelling unit or commercial unit, and small diameter sewer pipe to convey septic tank effluent to a central location for treatment through soil absorption. (19) 
    Sewer, building means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer. (19) 
    Sewer, combined means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. (19) 
    Sewer, public means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights or is controlled by public authority or both. Where an individual septic tank is part of the system, that septic tank and the pipe leading out of the tank shall be considered part of the public sewer. (19) 
    Sewer, sanitary means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. (19) 
    Sexual activities, specified. See Specified sexual activities . 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. (10) 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult massage parlor, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult store, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
    Sexually oriented business, substantial enlargement of a. See Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business. 
    Sexually oriented business, transfer of ownership or control of a. See Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business . 
    Shall. The word "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. (1) (10) 
    Sheriff means the Carver County Sheriff or his designee. (3) (6) 
    Shielded light fixture means a light fixture with cutoff optics that allows no direct light emissions above a vertical cutoff angle of 90 degrees. (20) 
    Shooting means the firing or discharge of any firearm. (11) 
    Shopping center means an integrated group of commercial establishments planned, developed and managed as a unit, with off-street parking facilities provided on-site. (20) 
    Shore impact zone means land located between the ordinary high water level of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50 percent of the structure setback. (20) 
    Shoreland means land located within the following distances from public waters: 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a floodplain designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances and when approved by the commissioner. (20) 
    Shrub means a woody plant that remains low and produces several erect, spreading, or prostrate stems from the base, and is not usually tree-like or single-stemmed. (20) 
    Side lot line. See Lot line, side . 
    Side of bluff. See Bluff, side of . 
    Side yard. See Yard, side . 
    Sidewalk. The word " sidewalk " means a pedestrian way, public or private, designed or intended for the principal use of pedestrians. "Sidewalk" also includes that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. (1) (18) (20) 
Sight distance triangle means the area of a corner lot bounded by the right-of-way lines and a line connecting the two points on the property lines 30 feet from the intersection of the property lines or within 45 feet of the intersection of two improved street surfaces (roadway) or driveway edges, whichever is greater. No sign or sign structure shall be located within the sight distance triangle. No sign or sign structure shall be located within the sight distance triangle from any private drive or access intersecting a public street. Signs shall be setback a minimum ten feet from any property line. (20) Sight Distance Triangle  
    Sign means any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof situated outdoors, or visible through a window or door, which is used to advertise, announce, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, commodity, product, service, event or location, by means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, pictures, illumination or projected images. (20) 
    Sign, advertising means any sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, activity or entertainment not conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where such a sign is located. (20) 
Sign, awning means a temporary hood or cover that projects from the wall of a building, and which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of the supporting building. Awning may extend in any required yard setback a maximum of five feet (2.6 feet in the supplementary regulations). (20) Awning Sign  
    Sign, banner means a sign which is made out of a paper, cloth or plastic-like consistency, affixed to a building, vehicle, poles or other supporting structures by all four corners. (20) 
    Sign, bulletin board means a sign which identifies an institution or organization on the premises of which it is located and which contains the name of the institution or organization, the names of individuals connected with it, and general announcements, of events or activities occurring at the institution or similar messages. (20) 
    Sign, business means a sign which directs attention a business or profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold, offered or manufactured, or to an entertainment offered on the premises where the sign is located. 
Sign, business directory means a sign which identifies the names of specific businesses located in a shopping center, medical center or commercial, industrial or office development project which is located on the premises or entrance of the center or development so identified. (20) > Business Directory Sign  
    Sign, campaign means a temporary sign announcing, promoting or supporting political candidates or issues in connection with any national, state or local election. (20) 
Sign, canopy means any sign that is affixed to a projection or extension of a building or structure of a building, erected in such a manner as to provide a shelter or cover over the approach to any entrance of a store, building or place of assembly. Plastic or structural protective cover over a door entrance, window or outdoor service area. (20) Canopy Sign  
    Sign, changeable copy means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. (20) 
    Sign, construction means a temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the situation or project. (20) 
    Sign, development identification means a permanent ground, low profile sign which identifies a specific residential, industrial, commercial or office development and which is located on the premises of the development which it identifies. (20) 
Sign, directional means a sign erected on private property for the purpose of directing pedestrian or vehicular traffic onto or about the property upon which such sign is located, including signs marking entrances and exits, circulation direction, parking areas and pickup and delivery areas. (20) Directional Sign Sign, display area means the area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits or the actual sign message surface, including any structural elements outside the limits of each sign forming an integral part of the sign. The stipulated maximum sign display area for a sign refers to a single facing. (20)  
    Sign, electronic message center (EMC) means a sign or portion of a sign that displays electronic, nonpictorial text information in which each alpha-numeric character or symbol is defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LED's), fiber optics or other illumination devised within the display area. The characters for the copy or script shall be only that available on a standard word processing keyboard, and shall not include graphics, pictures or other items. Electronic changeable copy signs include computer programmable, microprocessor-controlled electronic displays and messages that are projected onto building or other objects. Motor fuel price signs are not considered to be EMC signs. (20) 
Sign, festive flag/banner means a flag or banner constructed of cloth, canvas or light fabric that is hung from a light pole. The flag/banner shall contain no advertising except for cultural events, special holidays/seasons, etc. (20)  
    Sign, flag means any fabric banner used as a symbol of a government, political, subdivision or other identity. Corporation flags shall not exceed 12 square feet and may be flown in tandem with the state or national flag. The size of the state or national flag shall not exceed 100 square feet. (20) 
    Sign, flashing means any directly or indirectly illuminated sign which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever. (20) 
    Sign, freestanding/pole/pylon means any nonmovable sign not affixed to a building but erected upon a pole, post or other similar support so that the bottom edge of the sign display area is eight feet or more above the ground elevation. (20) 
    Sign, governmental means a sign erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental functions, or required by law, ordinance or other governmental regulation. (20) 
    Sign, ground low profile business means a business sign affixed directly to the ground, which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or product offered on the premises. (20) 
    Sign, holiday decoration means a temporary sign in the nature of decorations, clearly incidental to and customarily and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday. (20) 
    Sign, home occupation means a sign containing only the name and occupation of a permitted home occupation not to exceed two square feet. This is also a nameplate sign. (20) 
    Sign, illuminated means a sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting, either by lights on or in the sign or directed towards the sign. (20) 
    Sign, informational means a sign containing descriptions of major points of interest, government institutions or other public services such as hospitals, sports facilities, etc. (20) 
    Sign, institutional means a sign which identifies the name and other characteristics of a public or private institution of the site where the sign is located. (20) 
    Sign, integral means a sign constructed as to be an integral portion of the building of which it forms a part. (20) 
Sign, integral roof means any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. (20)  
    Sign, marquee means a sign which is mounted, painted on, or attached to any projection or extension of a building that is designated in such a manner as to provide shelter or cover over the approach to any entrance of the building. (20) 
    Sign, menu board means a sign located adjacent to the drive-through lane that is used to advertise the product available at a fast-food restaurant. (20) 
    Sign, motion means any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by any movement or rotation of which gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation. (20) 
    Sign, nameplate means a sign, located on the premises which bears the name and/or address of the occupant of the building or premises. (20) 
    Sign, nonconforming means a sign that does not conform to the requirements of chapter 20 of this Code. (20) 
    Sign, off-premises means an advertising sign which directs attention to a use, product, commodity or services not related to the premises on which it is located. (20) 
    Sign, on-premises means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, product, use, service or other activity which is sold, offered or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located. (20) 
    Sign, pickup means a sign not attached to a building that designates a specific area of a parking lot for the pickup and loading of goods purchased in advance. 
    Sign, portable means a sign designed so as to be movable from one location to another, and that is not permanently affixed to a building, structure, or the ground including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels, sign converted to A-Frames, menu and sandwich board signs, and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations. (20) 
    Sign, private sale or event means a temporary sign advertising private sales or personal property such as a house sale, garage sale and the like or private nonprofit events such as picnic, carnival, bazaar, game night, art fair or craft show. (20) 
    Sign, projecting means a sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and which projects more than 12 inches from such building. (20) 
    Sign, real estate means a sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located. (20) 
Sign, roof means a sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and which projects above the roof line of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof. (20)  
    Sign, temporary means a sign designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of time. This includes items such as banners, pennants, flags, beacons, sandwiches or balloons or other air- or gas-filled figures. (20) 
    Sign, wall means a sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately parallel to the face of the wall, and which does not project more than 12 inches from such building or structure. Wall signs shall not include product advertising. Wall signs shall include tenant identification, tenant logo, center name, or any combination of the three. (20) 
    Sign, window means sign, pictures, symbols, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. (20) 
    Signature, subscription. A signature or subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write, provided that the person's name is written near such mark and is witnessed by a person who writes his own name as witness. (1) 
    Significant historic site means any archaeological site, standing structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the state register of historic sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of M.S. § 307.08. A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the Minnesota State Archaeologist or the Director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant historic sites. (20) 
    Significant tree means any healthy tree species measuring 12 inches or more DBH; or any health coniferous tree measuring 12 feet in height or more. (20) 
    Single-family dwelling. See Dwelling, single-family . 
    Single-user tower. See Tower, single-user . 
    Site distance triangle means no sign or sign structure shall be closer to any lot line than a distance equal to one-half the minimum required yard setback. No sign shall be placed within any drainage or utility easement. Sign shall not block site distance triangle from any private drive or access. Signs shall not be located in any site distance triangle 30 feet from the point of intersection of the property line. (20) 
    Site furnishings means any structure, other than buildings, visible from any public way, and any street hardware located in streets and public ways and outside of buildings. Site furnishings include, but are not limited to, signs, decorative paving treatments, fences, walls, railings, artwork, transformers, utility access boxes, lighting standards and arrays, and other visible site appurtenances. (20) 
    Slope, steep. See Steep slope . 
    Slow-No wake means operation of a watercraft at the slowest possible speed necessary to maintain steerage and in no case greater than five miles per hour. (6) 
    Small brewer is a brewery that produces less than 20,000 barrels of malt liquor in a year. 
    Small vehicle sales means any motor vehicle having an engine cubic centimeter displacement of less than 1,000 cc, including, but not limited to, riding lawn mowers, farm equipment, motorcycles, minibikes, all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles. 
    Smoking means inhaling or exhaling smoke from any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted tobacco or plant product. Smoking also includes carrying a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted smoking tobacco or plant product equipment intended for inhalation. (20) 
    Snowmobile means a self-propelled vehicle which is designed for travel on snow or ice steered by skis or runners. (14) 
    Soil textural classification shall mean the soil particle size or textural classification as specified in the Soil Survey Manual, Handbook No. 18, United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) 1993, incorporated by reference. (19) 
    Soil, saturated. See Saturated soil. 
    Soil, suspended. See Suspended soil . 
    Solicitor means any person, firm, corporation or other business organization who goes from dwelling to dwelling, business to business, place to place, or from street to street, soliciting donations other than political campaigns, or taking or attempting to take orders for any goods, wares or merchandise, including books, periodicals, magazines, or personal property of any nature whatever for future delivery. (10) 
    Solid waste, mixed municipal. See Mixed municipal solid waste . 
    Source-separated materials means those elements of a waste stream which are separated by the generator for reuse in their original form or for use in manufacturing processes. (10) 
    Special flood hazard area means a term used for flood insurance purposes synonymous with "one hundred-year floodplain." 
    Special pickup means any collection of materials other than garbage, refuse, recyclables or yard waste, including white goods (e.g., large appliances), furniture, oversized materials, construction debris, and other materials collected, processed, and disposed of as separate waste streams. (16) 
    Special trees mean any large broadleaf trees at least 30 inches DBH, any large conifer trees at least 20 inches DBH, any medium broadleaf trees at least 20 inches DBH, any small broadleaf trees at least 12 inches DBH, rare or unusual tree species, or trees of exceptional quality. (20) 
    Specified anatomical areas means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. (10) 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in paragraphs (1) through (3) above. (10) 
    Stables, commercial means any place where a person accepts horses, colts, ponies, mules, burros or llamas from the general public and where such animals are kept for the purpose of selling, boarding, breeding, training, treating or grooming. (5) (20) 
    Stables, private means any place where a horse, colt, pony, mule, burro or llama is kept or harbored, such animal being owned by the owner or lessee of the premises wherein or whereupon the animal is kept or harbored. 
    Standard restaurant. See Restaurant, standard . 
    Standing seam roof is a deck roof consisting of flat metal joined by vertical or overlapping seams. (20) 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Minnesota. (1) (7.5) 
    State disposal system (SDS) permit means any permit including any terms, conditions and requirements thereof issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. § 115.07, for a disposal system as defined by M.S. § 115.01, subd. 5. (19) 
    Statutes. References to "statutes" or to "M.S.", are to the Minnesota Statutes unless otherwise specified. (1) 
    Steep slope means land where agricultural activity or development is either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site's soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of chapters 18 and 20. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are lands having average slopes over 12 percent, as measured over horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, that are not bluffs. (20) 
    Sterilized means neutered in the case of male dogs or cats, or spayed in the case of female dogs or cats. 
    Storage building means any structure used for the storage of materials and accessories used and normally associated with the principal use of the property. (20) 
    Store, convenience. See Convenience store . 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excluding sewage and polluted industrial wastes. (19) 
    Storm sewer connection means the installation of a hookup or connection from the municipal storm sewer line in a street or easement to the structure to be served thereby or to any inlet or catch basin on the property drained by the storm sewer. (19) 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) means a plan for stormwater discharge that includes erosion prevention measures and sediment controls that, when implemented, will decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land and decrease off-site nonpoint pollution, as defined in the MPCA general construction permit. 
Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it. Or if there is not floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it and including a basement used for the principal use. If the height (H) of the basement is more than 12 feet at any point, or if the height (H) is more than six feet for more than 50 percent of the perimeter of the building then it is considered a story. This definition refers to nonresidential properties only. (20)  
Street means a public right-of-way or a private right-of-way occupied by a roadway. (1) (7.5) (12) (18) (20)  
    Street frontage means that portion of a parcel of land abutting one or more public streets. (20) 
    Street width means the shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a roadway. (20) 
    Street, arterial means a street or highway with access restrictions designed to carry large values of traffic between various sectors of the city or county and beyond. (18) (20) 
    Street, collector means a street that carries traffic from minor streets to arterial streets. (18) 
    Street, local means a street of limited continuity which is used primarily for access to abutting properties. (18) 
    Street, minor. See Minor street . 
    Street, private means a street serving as vehicular access to two or more parcels of land which is not dedicated to the public but is owned by one or more private parties. (18) (20) 
    Strip, buffer. See Buffer strip . 
    Structure means anything manufactured, built, constructed, erected, or a portion thereof which is normally attached to or positioned on land, whether temporary or permanent in character, including, but not limited to, buildings, fences, sheds, advertising signs, dog kennels, hard surface parking areas, boardwalks, playground equipment, patios, or concrete slabs. (7) (20) 
    Structure, accessory. See Accessory use or structure . 
    Structure, attached means any structure that is attached to another structure by a common wall. 
    Structure, conforming. See Conforming building or structure . 
    Structure, nonconforming. See Nonconforming structure . 
    Structure, principal. See Principal structure . 
    Structure, temporary. See Temporary structure . 
    Subdivision means the separation of an area, parcel, or tract of land under single ownership into two or more parcels, tracts, lots or long-term leasehold interests, where the creation of the leasehold interest necessitates the creation of streets, or alleys, for residential, commercial, industrial, or other use or any combination thereof, except those separations: 
(1)  Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots or interests will be 20 acres or larger in size and 500 feet in width for residential uses and five acres or larger in size for commercial and industrial uses; 
(2)  Creating cemetery lots; 
(3)  Resulting from court orders, or the adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a common boundary. (18) (20) 
    Subscriber means any person who or which lawfully elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system whether or not a fee is paid for such service. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor area existed on the effective date of this article. (10) 
    Substantial improvement means within any consecutive 365-day period, any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." For the purpose of the ordinance from which this definition derived, "historic structure" is as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1. 
    Substation, electrical. See Electrical substation . 
    Substation, power. See Power substation . 
    Suitable backstop means any natural or manmade barrier of sufficient mass, size or construction to wholly contain the projectile being discharged. (11) 
    Supportive services. "Supportive services" means help with personal laundry, handling or assisting with personal funds of residents, or arranging for medical services, health-related services, social services, or transportation to medical or social services appointments. Arranging for services does not include making referrals, assisting a resident in contacting a service provider of the resident's choice, or contacting a service provider in an emergency. 
    Surface water management plan (SWMP) means the most recently adopted version of the Chanhassen Surface Water Management Plan. 
    Surface waters shall mean any water basins or watercourses defined as natural watercourses or public waters in M.S. §§ 103G.005 and 645.44, subd. 8a. (19) 
    Suspended soil means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in waste and which are removable by laboratory filtration; the quantity being determined by a test as described in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, latest edition. (19) 
    Swimming area means an area immediately adjacent to the shoreline which is marked in accordance with the applicable regulations of the state department of natural resources and which is used solely for recreational swimming. (6) 
    Swimming pool means any manmade structure for holding water, intended for swimming by human beings, excluding portable and inflatable structures. 
    Swimming raft means a small floating structure designed exclusively for swimming and sunbathing. (6) 
    System, alternate. See Alternate system . (19) 
    System, experimental. See Experimental system . 
    System, failing. See Failing system . 
    System, wind energy conversion. See Wind energy conversion system . 
    Table, water. See Water table . 
    Tap room is a location in or adjacent to a brewery where the owner of the brewery sells malt liquor produced by the brewery for consumption on the premises or for off-site consumption as provided for in M.S. §§ 340A.28 and 340A.285. 
    Targeted recyclables means newspaper; clear, brown and green glass containers; tin cans; aluminum beverage cans; cardboard; plastics; magazines; phonebooks; high grade paper and or other materials that may be designated by resolution of the city council. (16) 
    Telecommunication service, commercial wireless. See Commercial wireless telecommunication service. 
    Temporary mobile tower. See Tower, temporary mobile . 
    Temporary outdoor display means a temporary outdoor display of merchandise, products or models for promotional or sales purposes. 
    Temporary outdoor sales means and is defined as "sales activities characterized by their short-term or seasonal nature, require an outdoor location, and by the fact that permanent improvements are not made to the site". (20) 
    Temporary real estate office means a unit or trailer within a development which may be used as a sales or real estate office for the development in which it is located. 
    Temporary sign. See Sign, temporary . 
    Temporary structure means a structure without any foundation or footings and which shall be removed when the designed time period, activity, or use for which temporary structure was erected has ceased. (20) 
    Temporary trailer. See Trailer, temporary . 
    Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant", and "occupant", applied to a building or land mean any person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. (1) (7) 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. (1) 
    Terminal, truck. See Truck terminal . 
    Toe of the bluff. See Bluff, toe of . 
    Toilet room. A room containing a water closet or urinal, but not a bathtub or shower. (7) 
    Top of the bluff. See Bluff, top of . 
    Topsoil. That portion of the overburden which lies closest to the earth's surface and supports the growth of vegetation. (7) 
    Tower means any ground-mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade. (20) 
    Tower, multi-user means a tower designed for the antennas of more than one commercial wireless telecommunication service provider or governmental agency. (20) 
    Tower, single-user means a tower designed for only the antennas of a single user. (20) 
    Tower, temporary mobile means any mobile tower, pole or structure located on a trailer, vehicle or temporary platform intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna or similar apparatus for personal wireless services, also commonly referred to as cellular on wheels (COW). (20) 
    Townhouse dwelling. See Dwelling, townhouse . 
    Townhouse. See Dwelling, townhouse . 
    Trade, wholesale. See Wholesale trade . 
    Trades, home improvement. See Home improvement trades . 
    Trail means a travel way designed for and used by pedestrians and cyclists using nonmotorized bicycles. (18) 
    Trailer, boat. See Boat trailer . 
    Trailer, temporary means a trailer or mobile home for construction purposes, the display or sale of real estate, or major durable goods or as a temporary form of residential dwelling on lot on which a house is being constructed. (20) 
    Trailer, travel means a vehicle or movable structure which is designed, intended or used for temporary human habitation during recreational or vacation activities. The term includes, without limitation, recreational vehicles, campers, camper trailers and tents, and house travel and tent trailers, but does not include mobile homes. (20) 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. (10) 
    Transient merchant means any person, firm, corporation or other business organization, who engages temporarily in the business of selling and delivering goods, wares or merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any vacant lot, parking lot, motor vehicle or trailer. (10) 
    Travel trailer. See Trailer, travel . 
    Tree means a woody plant which at maturity is 13 to 20 feet or more in height, with a single trunk, unbranched for at least several feet above the ground, and having a more or less definite crown. (20) 
    Tree caliper means diameter of a tree measured at six inches above ground. (20) 
    Tree trunk means the stem portion of a tree from the base to the first branch thereof. (20) 
    Tree, significant. See Significant tree . 
    Trees, loss of means that any of the following may have happened: 
(1)  Grade change or land alteration, whether temporary or permanent, of greater than one foot, measured vertically from the existing grade, affecting 40 percent (as measured on a horizontal plane) or more of a tree's critical root zone; or 
(2)  Utility construction resulting in the cutting of 40 percent or more of the tree's roots within the critical root zone; or 
(3)  Mechanical injury to the tree trunk causing loss of more than 40 percent of the bark; or 
(4)  Compaction to 90 percent of standard proctor to a depth of six inches or more of 40 percent or more of the surface of the soil within the tree's critical root zone; or 
(5)  The pruning of a tree which eliminates 40 percent or more of the canopy area of a tree; or 
(6)  The complete removal of a tree. (20) 
    Trees, special. See Special trees . 
    Truck means any vehicle, the gross weight of which exceeds 7,000 pounds. (12) 
    Truck terminal means any use, area or building where cargo, trucks, truck parts, loading equipment, and the like is stored or where trucks load and unload on a regular basis. (20) 
    Trunk, tree. See Tree trunk . 
    Two-family dwelling. See Dwelling, two-family . 
    Under restraint means under control by means of a leash not exceeding six feet in length, or within the property of the owners premises. 
    Underage person. The term "underage person" means a person who is under the legal drinking age, as provided by M.S. ch. 340A. (10) 
    Underground electric distribution substations are located underground near to the end-users. Distribution substation transformers change the subtransmission voltage to lower levels for use by end-users. 
    Underway or in use means any watercraft in operation or use when not securely fastened to a dock or other permanent mooring or at anchor. (6) 
    Unit means one complete single-family household. (19) 
    Unit, housekeeping. See Housekeeping unit . 
    Use, accessory. See Accessory use or structure . 
    Use, nonconforming. See Nonconforming use . 
    Use, semi-public. See Semi-public use . 
    Utility services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, communication, including poles, wire, mains, drains, sewers, pipe, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, that is reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or governmental agencies or for the public health, safety or general welfare. This term does not imply overhead transmission lines in excess of 69 kv. (20) 
    Utility, public. See Public utility . 
    Variance means permission to depart from the requirements of chapters 18 and 20. (20) 
    Vegetation clearing means the complete removal of existing vegetative cover in such a manner as to expose the soil to air and water erosion. (20) 
    Vegetation, native. Native vegetation is the presettlement group of plant species native to the North American Continent which were not introduced as a result of European settlement. (20) 
    Vegetation, unacceptable means nonnative species that may pose a threat to native vegetation and native plant communities within a wetland and wetland buffer. This includes, but is not limited to, nonnative vegetation, invasive vegetation, agricultural weeds and those listed on the state noxious weed list. (20) 
    Vehicle means any machine as defined under M.S. § 169.01, and includes any bicycle, gocart, minibike, motorcycle, snowmobile, trailer, recreational vehicle, all terrain vehicles or self-propelled instruments which carry or may carry an occupant or occupants upon land or water. "Vehicle" includes every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moved exclusively upon stationary rails or tracts. (13) (14) 
    Vehicle, abandoned. See Abandoned vehicle . 
    Vehicle, recreational. See Recreational vehicle . 
    Vehicle sales, small. See Small vehicle sales . 
    Vehicular use area (V.U.A.) means any open or unenclosed area containing more than 1,800 square feet of area and/or used by six or more, of any type of vehicle, whether mooring or at rest, including, but not limited to, parking lots, loading and unloading areas, and sales and service areas. Driveways are considered to be vehicular use areas whenever they are adjacent to public streets or other vehicular use elements described previously in this paragraph (and intervening curbs, sidewalks, landscape strips, etc., do not eliminate adjacency). (20) 
    Ventilation. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from any space. (7) 
    Vocational school means establishments primarily engaged in offering specialized vocational courses, including schools such as banking, commercial art, construction equipment, correspondence schools, nursing schools, real estate schools, restaurant operation, trade schools and truck driving schools. (20) 
    Wall sign. See Sign, wall . 
    Warehouse, mini. See Mini-warehouse . 
    Warehousing means the commercial storage of merchandise and personal property. (20) 
    Waste, normal domestic strength. See Normal domestic strength waste . 
    Waste, yard. See Yard waste . 
    Water monitoring device shall mean equipment which measures the amount of liquid which enters the sewage treatment system. (19) 
    Water obstacle means any ski jump, slalom course, diving tower or other structure upon the water of any lake. "Water obstacle" does not include any dock or swimming raft or watercraft. (6) 
    Water table shall mean the highest elevation in the soil where all the voids are filled with water, as evidence by the presence of water or soil mottling or other evidence. (19) 
    Watercraft means any contrivance used or designed for navigation on water other than a duck boat during the duck hunting season, a rice boat during the harvest season, or a seaplane. (6) (12) 
    Water-oriented accessory structure or facility means a small, above ground building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and retaining walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface water feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the normal structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses and detached decks. 
    Waters, public. See Public waters. 
    Waters, surface. See Surface waters . 
    WCA agent means the city staff member responsible for the administration of the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act. (20) 
    Weapons, dangerous. See Dangerous weapons . 
    Week. The word "week" means seven days. (1) 
    Weight, gross. See Gross weight . 
    Wetland means land transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. For purposes of this definition, wetlands must have the following three attributes: 
(1)  Have a predominance of hydric soils; 
(2)  Are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and 
(3)  Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation; and 
(4)  Wetlands does not include types 3, 4 and 5 wetlands, as defined in United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition), not included within the definition of public waters, that are 21/2 or more acres in size. (19) (20) 
    Wetland alteration means draining, grading, excavating, filling, removing healthy native vegetation, or otherwise altering or destroying a wetland. (20) 
    Wetland Conservation Act (or WCA) means the Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, as amended (M.S. § 103F.612 et seq.), and the accompanying rules of the Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources (Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420, as amended). (20) 
    Wetland delineation means a boundary between jurisdictional wetland and nonwetland based on the 1987 Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual. Acceptable wetland delineations shall be no more than three years old, unless accompanied by documentation demonstrating: 
(1)  The delineation has been reviewed in the past three years by a person trained and experienced in the application of the 1987 Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual; and 
(2)  The delineation is still accurate or has been revised to reflect existing site conditions. 
    Wetland delineation report means a report containing a brief site narrative, maps of the site and all pertinent data sheets that document the establishment of a wetland delineation. 
    Wholesale nursery means an enterprise which conducts the wholesale of plants grown on-site as well as accessory items directly related to their care and maintenance (but not including power equipment such as gas or engine lawnmowers and farm implements). (20) 
    Wholesale trade means an establishment or place of business engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to such individuals or companies. (20) 
    Width, lot. See Lot width . 
    Width, street. See Street width . 
    Wild animal means any animal that is wild, ferocious or vicious by nature, habit, disposition or character. Animals in this category include, but are not limited to, any ape, [including chimpanzee, gibbon, gorilla, orangutan, or siamang], baboon, bear, bison, bobcat, cheetah, crocodile, coyote, deer, [including all members of the deer family such as elk, antelope and moose], elephant, fox, hippopotamus, hyena, jaguar, leopard, lion, lynx, monkey, puma, also known as cougar, mountain lion or panther, rhinoceros, any snake which is poisonous or any constrictor snake, snow leopard, tiger, wolf, or hybrid mix of any of the wild animals such as wolf/dog mixes. 
    Wind energy conversion system or (WECS) means any device that is designed to convert wind power to another form of energy such as electricity or heat (also referred to by such common names as wind charger, wind turbine and windmill). (20) 
    Window sign. See Sign, window . 
    Woodland area, designated. See Designated woodland area . 
    Woodlands shall mean any groupings of significant trees with a canopy coverage of one acre or more, any groupings of ten or more significant trees, or any grouping of trees with at least one special tree and where 25 percent or more of other trees are significant trees. (20) 
    Work the earth. See Earth work. 
    Workman-like. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work. (7) 
    Written permission requires that the following information must be included: The full name, address, date of birth and signature of the person authorized to hunt or shoot; the full name, address and signature of the landowner. (11) 
    Written, in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. (1) 
    Yard means any open space that lies between the principal or accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided in chapter 20. (20) 
    Yard waste means organic materials consisting of grass clippings, leaves weeds and other forms of organic garden waste, but excluding bushes, fibrous brush, woody materials, or other materials that are not readily compostible within a calendar year. (16) 
    Yard, front means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between any building and the front lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building from the closest point of the building to the front lot line. (20) 
    Yard, rear means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building from the closest point of the building to the rear lot line. (20) 
    Yard, side means a yard extending form the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the side lot line, measured perpendicular to the building from the closest point of the building to the side lot line. (20) 
    Year. Unless otherwise designated, the word "year" means a calendar year. (1) 
    Zone, primary. See Primary zone . 
    Zone, secondary. See Secondary zone . 
    Zoning administrator means the community development director or designee. (20) 
    Zoning lot. See Lot, zoning . 
(Ord. No. 234, § 1, 2-27-95; Ord. No. 324, § 1, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 355, § 1, 11-8-03; Ord. No. 390, § 1, 3-14-05; Ord. No. 395, §§ 1, 2, 5-9-05; Ord. No. 405, § 1, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 413, § 1, 2-13-06; Ord. No. 427, §§ 1-3, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 440, § 1, 2-12-07; Ord. No. 448, §§ 1, 2, 5-14-07; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 6-22-09; Ord. No. 481, § 1, 8-10-09; Ord. No. 506, §§ 1, 2, 6-28-10; Ord. No. 512, § 1, 11-22-10; Ord. No. 574, § 1, 10-22-12; Ord. No. 595, §§ 1, 2, 5-12-14; Ord. No. 611, § 1, 12-14-15; Ord. No. 619, § 1, 2-27-17; Ord. No. 621, § 1, 5-8-17; Ord. No. 628, § 1, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 632, § 1, 6-11-18; Ord. No. 636, § 1, 12-10-18) 
State Law reference- Interpretation of statutes generally, M.S. § 645.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Computation of time. 
(a)  When the term "successive weeks" is used in any ordinance providing for the publishing of notices, the word "weeks" shall be construed as calendar weeks. The publication upon any day of such weeks shall be sufficient publication for that week, but at least five days shall elapse between each publication. At least the number of weeks specified in "successive weeks" shall elapse between the first publication and the day for the happening of the event for which the publication is made. 
(b)  When, in any ordinance, the lapse of a number of months before or after a certain day is required, such number of months shall be computed by counting the months from such day, excluding the calendar month in which such day occurs, and including the day of the month in the last months so counted having the same numerical order as the day of the month from which the computation is made, unless there be not so many days in the last month so counted, in which case the period computed shall expire with the last day of the month so counted. 
(c)  Where the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter, payment, or thing is ordered or directed, and the period of time or duration for the performance or doing thereof is prescribed and fixed by law, the time, except as otherwise provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period or duration of time. When the last day of the period falls on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be omitted from the computation. 
(d)  When an application, payment, return, claim, statement or other document is to be delivered to or filed with a department, agency or instrumentality of this city on or before a prescribed date and the prescribed date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holidays, it is timely delivered or filed if it is delivered or filed on the next succeeding day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. §§ 645.13-645.151. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines, history notes and references of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section. Catchlines shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article or division. The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the sections. The editor's notes, cross references and state law references in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the user of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 234, § 2, 2-27-95; Ord. No. 349, § 1, 11-24-03) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 645.49. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Appropriating funds or establishing or relating to the annual budget; 
(3)  Imposing taxes which are not inconsistent with this Code; 
(4)  Establishing positions, classifying employees or setting salaries; 
(5)  Granting a franchise; 
(6)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, or vacating any street or public way; 
(7)  Establishing or prescribing street grades; 
(8)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefore; 
(9)  Prescribing through streets, parking prohibitions, parking limitations, one-way streets, speed limits, load limits or loading zones not inconsistent with this Code; 
(10)  Dedicating, accepting or rejecting any plat or subdivision; 
(11)  Annexing or de-annexing property; 
(12)  Providing for a survival plan or relating to civil defense or civil defense emergencies; 
(13)  Rezoning specific property; 
(14)  Whose purpose has been accomplished; 
(15)  Which is special although permanent in effect; 
(16)  Which is temporary although general in effect. 
    All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to he same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 2, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or allowing any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. §§ 645.35, 645.36. 
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    Whenever in this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in this Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code shall be a misdemeanor punishable to the maximum extent authorized in M.S. § 412.231, as modified by M.S. § 609.034. Each day of any violation continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 1, 8-18-69; Ord. No. 349, § 3, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability. 
    It is declared to be the intent of the city council that if any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Code or any ordinance is held or declared to be unconstitutional, inoperative or void, such holding or invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions of this Code or any ordinance, and it shall be construed to have been the legislative intent to pass this Code or the ordinance without the unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative part therein, and the remainder of this Code or the ordinance after the exclusion of such part or parts shall be deemed and held to be valid as if such part or parts had not been included herein, unless the court finds the valid provisions of the law are so essentially and inseparably connected with, and so dependent upon, the void provisions that the court cannot presume the legislature would have enacted the remaining valid provisions without the void one; or unless the court finds the remaining valid provisions, standing alone, are incomplete and are incapable of being executed in accordance with the legislative intent. If this Code or any ordinance or provision thereof is held inapplicable to any person, group of persons, property of kind of property, or circumstances or set of circumstances, such holding shall not affect the applicability hereof to any other person, property or circumstance. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 4, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 1-10.5. - Amendments to Code. 
    Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such a form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make such additions or amendments a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
    Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "The section _______ of the City Code, City of Chanhassen, Minnesota, is hereby amended to read as follows: . . . ." The new provisions shall be then set out in full. 
    If a new section not then existing in the Code is added, the following language may be used: "That the City Code, City of Chanhassen, Minnesota, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered _______, which shall read as follows: . . . ." The new section may then be set out in full. 
    All chapters, sections, subdivision, paragraphs or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by chapter, section, subdivision or paragraph number, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 5, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements of this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter", "this article", "this division", etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code. 
In no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption of optional plan of government by statutory city, M.S. § 412.541 et seq.; plan B form of government, M.S. § 412.601 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Compensation of city council. 
(a)  City council members shall receive a salary of $600.00 per month. The mayor shall receive a salary of $750.00 per month. 
(b)  The mayor and council members shall also receive $50.00 for each meeting, other than regularly scheduled council meetings, that they attend on behalf of the city, but not more than $150.00 per calendar month. 
(c)  Salary review. On September 1 of even numbered years beginning in 2018, the salaries in subsections (a) and (b) of this section must be adjusted with an effective date of the following January 1. The salaries must equal the limit for the prior year, increased by the percentage increase contained in the Compensation Limit for Local Government Employees, annually published by the Minnesota Office of Management and Budget, pursuant to M.S. § 43A.17. 
(Ord. No. 52-C, § 1, 10-17-83; Ord. No. 228, § 1, 10-24-94; Ord. No. 333, § 1, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 601, § 1, 12-8-14) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 601 states: "This ordinance shall be effective after the next succeeding municipal election on January 1, 2017." 
State Law reference- Authority of city council to establish salaries of mayor and councilmembers, M.S. § 415.11. 
Sec. 2-2. - Receipt of gifts. 
    Gifts to the city with a monetary value of $500.00 or greater may only be accepted with the approval of the city council. The city council shall consider the cost of operation and maintenance before it accepts a gift. Gifts with a monetary value of less than $500.00 may be accepted on behalf of the city by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 1, 3-27-89) 
Sec. 2-3. - Rules of procedure. 
    Unless otherwise provided by the City Code, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, Tenth Edition, shall govern the conduct and procedure of all meetings of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 363, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 2-4. - Term of mayor. 
    The mayor shall be elected for a four-year term commencing with the election to be held in 2006. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 1, 12-13-04) 
Secs. 2-5-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Volunteer fire department, § 9-16 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for administrative code, M.S. § 412.671. 

Sec. 2-16. - Departments and offices established. 
    There are established the following city departments and officers: 
(1)  General administration, which shall include the city clerk/manager; 
(2)  Department of park and recreation, which shall include the park and recreation coordinator; 
(3)  Department of finance, which shall include the finance director and an account clerk; 
(4)  Community development department, which shall include a community development director and a building official; 
(5)  Department of public works, which shall include a director of public works/city engineer; 
(6)  Chanhassen Fire Department, which shall include a fire chief; and 
(7)  Such other departments and officers as established by state law or city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 1.01, 1-21-85; Ord. No. 298, § 1, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 363, § 2, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 2-17. - Organization structure. 
    The organizational chart for all positions in departments of the city shall be established from time to time by resolution and shall be set forth in the city's position classification and compensation program. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 1.02, 1-21-85) 
Sec. 2-18. - Duties of city officers. 
    Each city officer shall perform all duties required of his office by state law, ordinance and resolution. Resolutions establishing duties shall be set forth in the job descriptions contained in the city position classification and compensation program. The city manager may prescribe additional duties not in conflict with state law, ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 1.03, 1-21-85) 
Sec. 2-19. - Offices of city clerk and city manager consolidated. 
    The office of city clerk and the office of city manager are consolidated. The city manager shall perform all of the statutory duties of the office of city clerk, including, but not limited to, those duties enumerated in M.S. § 412.151. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 1, 2-18-77) 
Cross reference- References to city clerk to mean city clerk/manager, § 1-2; references to city manager to mean city clerk/manager, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-20. - Enforcement of City Code. 
    The city manager or city manager's designee, peace officers, part-time peace officers, reserve officers, community service officers, community development director, building official, public works director, fire inspector officers within their job descriptions or as otherwise authorized by ordinance, are expressly authorized to institute in the name of the city any appropriate actions, civil or criminal, including the issuance of a citation in lieu of arrest against a person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this City Code or the Minnesota Statutes. Pursuit of one remedy shall not bar or act as a limitation on any other remedy the city may have at law. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 298, § 2, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 363, § 3, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 626, § 1, 7-24-17) 
Secs. 2-21-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL AFFAIRS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Authority of housing and redevelopment authority to issue bonds, § 2-56; recreation fund, § 14-41. 
State Law reference- Purchases, M.S. § 412.691; municipal budgets, M.S. § 412.701 et seq. 

Sec. 2-31. - Special assessments for certain services. 
    In addition to any other method authorized by law, the city council may, by ordinance, order the performance of any of the services or work enumerated in M.S. § 429.101, subd. 1. The performance by the city of any of the foregoing services or work shall constitute a special benefit for which a special assessment for the collection of the cost thereof may be levied against the property benefited. 
(Ord. No. 69, §§ 2.01, 3.01, 4-20-81; Ord. No. 347, § 1, 10-27-03) 
Sec. 2-32. - Urban and rural service districts. 
(a)  The city is divided into an urban service district and a rural service district, constituting separate taxing districts for the purpose of all municipal property taxes except those levied for the payment of bonds and judgments and interest thereon. The urban service district includes all properties within the Carver County limits in the city except those set forth by ordinance as the rural service district. The rural service district shall include only such unplatted lands, which need not be contiguous to one another, as in the judgment of the council at the time of adoption of the ordinance are rural in character, and are not developed for commercial, industrial or urban residential purposes, and for these reasons are not benefited to the same degree as other lands by municipal services financed by general taxation. The council finds that only property put to the following uses is rural in character: A parcel on which 90 percent of the tillable land is used for growing corn, grain, or feed crops; a parcel where the principal use is raising poultry, cattle, sheep, or swine; a parcel which is enrolled in the Federal Conservation Reserve Program. "Rural in character" specifically does not include property served by public sewer or water, tree farms, nurseries, hobby farms, and property whose principal use is residential. A dwelling on land that does not qualify for taxation under the state agricultural property tax law shall be considered urban residential. 
(b)  The city council finds that as of November 27, 1995, the parcels identified on a list dated November 27, 1995, entitled "Rural Service Districts" on file with the city clerk are in the rural service district. 
(c)  Whenever any parcel of land included in the rural service district is platted, in whole or in part, or whenever application is made for a permit for the construction of commercial, industrial or urban residential building or improvement to be situated on such parcel or any part thereof, or whenever such building or improvement is commenced without a permit, the council shall make and enter an order by resolution transferring such platted or improved parcel from the rural service district to the urban service district. 
(d)  In the judgment of the council, the ratio that exists between the benefits resulting from tax supported municipal service to parcels in the rural service district to parcels in the urban service district is 75 percent, plus any municipal property taxes levied for payments of bonds and judgments, and interest thereon. 
(Ord. No. 29, §§ 1-7, 7-1-68; Ord. No. 29A, § 1, 10-1-70; Ord. No. 245, § 1, 11-13-95; Ord. No. 347, § 2, 10-27-03) 
Secs. 2-33-2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Park and recreation commission, § 14-16 et seq.; planning commission, § 15-16 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to establish advisory boards and commissions, M.S. § 412.621(2). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-46. - Appointment to city committees and commissions. 
    All vacancies on committees, commissions, and boards shall be advertised to seek applicants. The city council may interview applicants before making appointment. With the exception of the housing and redevelopment authority, all appointments shall be by majority vote of the city council. Once appointed, an applicant shall serve until removed, with or without cause, by a four-fifths vote of the city council, until the expiration of the term of appointment and following appointment of the applicant's successor. Vacancies during a term shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term. 
Sec. 2-46.01. - Same-Generally. 
    The council determines the duties and exercises the powers of administrative boards or commissions. However, the council may establish boards or commissions as set forth in this article to investigate subjects or to perform quasi-judicial functions. Additional administrative boards or commissions shall be established as required by law or for the administration of a municipal function jointly shared with another political subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 4, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 2-46.03. - Planning commission. 
(a)  Commission established. The planning commission is established pursuant to the Minnesota Municipal Planning Act, and has the powers and duties assigned to it by that Act, by this Code, and state law. The planning commission is hereby designated the planning agency of the city pursuant to the Municipal Planning Act. 
(b)  Membership. The planning commission consists of seven members appointed in the manner set forth in this subsection. Members of the commission are appointed by the council for staggered terms of three years, expiring on March 31 of each year. 
(c)  Officers; meetings. The chairperson and vice chairperson of the planning commission are appointed by the commission from among its membership for the term of one year. The commission shall adopt its own bylaws with the approval of the city council. All members of the commission may vote on all questions before the commission. No member of the commission may vote on any question in which the member has fiduciary interest, either directly or indirectly. The commission shall determine in its bylaws the date and time of its meetings and shall set such public hearings as are necessary and desirable, or as required by law or this Code. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The planning commission shall have the powers and duties allowed under state law, including: 
(1)  To prepare a comprehensive plan for the future development of the city that is submitted to the council for implementation and to recommend amendments of the plan to the council from time to time as may be necessary or desirable. 
(2)  To initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, a study of the provisions of the zoning code and the subdivision regulations and to report to the council its advice and recommendations with respect thereto. 
(3)  To study applications and proposals for amendments to the zoning code and applications for special permits and to advise the council of its recommendations thereon. 
(4)  To study preliminary plats and to advise the council of its recommendations thereof. 
(5)  To act in an advisory capacity to the council in all matters wherein powers are assigned to the council by state law concerning comprehensive planning, zoning, platting, changes in streets, and other matters of a general planning nature. 
(e)  Reports. The commission shall make an annual written report to the council, not later than March 31 of each calendar year, containing the commission's recommendations for the ensuing year. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 5, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 2-46.05. - Park and recreation commission. 
(a)  Creation. There is established a park and recreation commission for the city. 
(b)  Membership. The park and recreation commission consists of seven members appointed in the manner set forth in this subsection. Members of the commission are appointed by the council for staggered terms of three years expiring on March 31 of each year. Additionally, the commission may also have one or two youth representatives who shall also be voting members. Youth representatives shall be appointed for one-year terms. 
(c)  Officers; meetings. The chairperson and vice chairperson of the park and recreation commission are appointed by the commission from among its membership for the term of one year. The commission shall adopt its own bylaws with the approval of the city council. All members of the commission may vote on all questions before the commission. No member of the commission may vote on any question in which the member has fiduciary interest, either directly or indirectly. The commission shall determine in its bylaws the date and time of its meetings and shall set such public hearings as are necessary and desirable or as required by law or this Code. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The park and recreation commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To hold meetings of its members, to consider such matters pertaining to parks and public recreation programs in the city as shall be referred to the commission by the council, or as the members of the commission themselves deem proper. 
(2)  To prepare a comprehensive plan for the future development of the city park and recreation system, to be submitted to the city council for implementation, and to maintain said plan, and recommend amendments of the plan to the city council, as may become necessary or desirable. 
(3)  To act in an advisory capacity to the council in all matters relating to park and recreation in the city. 
(e)  Reports. The commission shall make an annual written report to the council, not later than March 31 of each calendar year, containing the commission's recommendations for the ensuing year. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 6, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 582, § 1, 4-22-13) 
Sec. 2-46.07. - Board of adjustments and appeals. 
    Pursuant to M.S. § 462.354, a board of adjustments and appeals is hereby established. The planning commission shall serve as the board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 7, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 2-46.09. - Environmental commission. 
(a)  Commission established. The environmental commission is established to provide the residents of Chanhassen with opportunities to improve the quality of their environment, address issues that affect the city's natural resources, provide environmental education to the public, bring a comprehensive perspective to environmental issues, and advocate the benefits and necessity of Chanhassen's natural resources. 
(b)  Membership. The environmental commission consists of seven members appointed in the manner set forth in this subsection. Members of the commission are appointed by the council for staggered terms of three years expiring on March 31 of each year. 
(c)  Officers; meetings. The chairperson and vice chairperson of the environmental commission are appointed by the commission from among its membership for the term of one year. The commission shall adopt its own bylaws with the approval of the city council. All members of the commission may vote on all questions before the commission. No member of the commission may vote on any question in which the member has fiduciary interest, either directly or indirectly. The commission shall determine in its bylaws the date and time of its meetings and shall set such public hearings as are necessary and desirable or as required by law or this Code. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The environmental commission has the following powers and duties: 
(1)  The environmental commission shall serve as an advisory body to the city council and planning commission in addressing the needs of the environment as directed by the city council. All final decisions are to be made by the city council. 
(2)  The environmental commission will consider and make recommendations at the direction of the city council regarding environmental issues. 
(3)  The environmental commission will make recommendations at the direction of the city council regarding funding for environmental projects. 
(4)  The environmental commission may propose studies to the city council and make recommendations according to the results. 
(5)  The environmental commission will coordinate services with other governmental and private agencies for related issues. 
(e)  Reports. The environmental commission shall make an annual written report to the council, not later than March 31 of each calendar year, containing the commission's recommendations for the ensuing year. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 8, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 2-46.11. - Senior commission. 
(a)  Commission established. The senior commission serves as an advisory body to the city council in addressing the special needs of people over age 55 living in Chanhassen. They consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the special needs of seniors in the areas of transportation, information and assistance, independent living in the home, social and recreational programs, senior center and senior housing, but are not limited to these issues. All final decisions are made by the city council. 
(b)  Membership. The senior commission consists of seven or eight members appointed in the manner set forth in this subsection. Members of the commission are appointed by the council for staggered terms of three years, expiring on March 31 of each year. 
(c)  Officers; meetings. The chairperson and vice chairperson of the senior commission are appointed by the commission from among its membership for the term of one year. The commission shall adopt its own bylaws with the approval of the city council. All members of the commission may vote on all questions before the commission. No member of the commission may vote on any question in which the member has fiduciary interest, either directly or indirectly. The commission shall determine in its bylaws the date and time of its meetings and shall set such public hearings as are necessary and desirable or as required by law or this Code. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The senior commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  They make recommendations to the city council regarding funding for special services to be provided for citizens over age 55. 
(2)  They may propose needs studies for this age group where necessary and make recommendations to the city council based on the results. 
(3)  They coordinate services with other governments and private agencies for this age group. 
(e)  Reports. The commission shall make an annual written report to the council, not later than the last day of March of each calendar year, containing the commission's recommendations for the ensuing year. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 9, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 581, § 1, 4-8-13) 
Sec. 2-46.15. - Resignations and removal from commissions. 
    Commissioners may resign voluntarily or may be removed from office by a majority vote of the city council. Vacancies on any advisory board or commission shall be filled by appointment with a majority vote of the city council. Vacancies shall be announced in the city's official newspaper and posted within city hall. Applications shall be available at the city clerk's office and shall be forwarded to the city council within the time prescribed. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 10, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 2-46.17. - Compensation. 
    Commissioners shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 11, 1-12-04) 
Secs. 2-47-2-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOUSING AND REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Creation of city housing and redevelopment authority, M.S. § 469.003. 

Sec. 2-56. - Authority to adopt housing plan, issue bonds, etc. 
    The city economic development authority is authorized to exercise on behalf of the city all of the powers conferred by M.S. §§ 462C.01 to 462C.08, including without limitation, the power to adopt a housing plan and program and to issue and sell mortgage revenue bonds for single family housing. 
(Ord. No. 75, 11-7-83; Ord. No. 363, § 12, 1-12-04) 
Secs. 2-57-2-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 363, § 13, adopted Jan. 12, 2004, repealed Div. 3, which pertained to the public safety commissions and derived from Ord. No. 70-B, §§ 1.01, 3.02, 4.02, 5.01, and 6.01, adopted Oct. 1, 1984; Ord. No. 166, §§ 1 and 2, adopted Apr. 27, 1992; Ord. No. 268, § 1, adopted May 12, 1997; and Ord. No. 298, § 2, adopted Feb. 14, 2000. 

Secs. 2-66-2-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-72. - Definitions. 
    In this chapter: 
    Abandoned vehicle means a motor vehicle that: 
(1)  Has remained illegally: 
a.  For a period of more than 48 hours on any property owned or controlled by a unit of government, or more than four hours on that property when it is properly posted; or 
b.  On private property for a period of time, as determined under M.S. § 168B.04, subd. 2, without the consent of the person in control of the property; and 
(2)  Lacks vital component parts or is in an inoperable condition such that it has no substantial potential for further use consistent with its usual functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building. 
(3)  A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. § 168.10, is not considered an abandoned vehicle. 
(4)  Vehicles on the premises of junk yards and automobile graveyards that are defined, maintained, and licensed in accordance with M.S. § 161.242, or that are licensed and maintained in accordance with local laws and zoning regulations, are not considered abandoned vehicles. 
(5)  A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being held under police authority or pursuant to a writ or court order is not considered abandoned, nor may it be processed as abandoned while the police hold, writ, or court is in effect. 
    Junk vehicle means a vehicle that: 
(1)  Is three years old or older; 
(2)  Is extensively damages, with the damage including such things as broken or missing wheels, motor, drive trail, or transmission; 
(3)  Is apparently inoperable; 
(4)  Does not have a valid, current registration plate; and 
(5)  Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
    Net proceeds means the sale price of any item of property or of a motor vehicle, less any costs of handling, storage and sale. 
    Property means all forms of tangible personal property. 
(Ord. No. 400, § 1, 9-29-05) 
Sec. 2-73. - Disposal of property other than motor vehicles. 
    Unless otherwise specified in this section, property lawfully coming into the possession of the city and its duly designated agents, in the course of its municipal operations shall be stored and safely maintained by the city for a period of 60 days. Such property shall be disposed of by the city in the following manner: 
(1)  During such 60-day period the city may deliver such property to the true owner thereof upon proof of ownership, and upon ten days' notice by mail to other persons who may have asserted a claim of true ownership. In the event ownership cannot be determined to the satisfaction of the city manager, or the manager's designee, the manager may refuse to deliver such property to anyone until ordered to do so by the court. The city manager may in his or her discretion choose to deposit such property with the court if there are sufficient competing claims to the property. 
(2)  If the true owner does not claim the property during the 60-day period, the city may release the unclaimed property to the finder of the property if, at the time of delivery to the city, the finder indicated in writing that he or she wished to assert a claim to the property as finder. This subsection is not applicable if the property was found by a city employee in the ordinary course of his or her duties. 
(3)  Upon the expiration of the 60-day period, property remaining unclaimed may be sold by the city to the highest bidder at public auction or sale following one week published notice thereof. In lieu of public auction or sale, any of such unclaimed property may be appropriated to the use of the city upon approval of such appropriation by the city manager. If the property is not sold at the public auction or sale and is not deemed appropriate for use by the city, the city manager may then dispose of the property in any manner he or she deems appropriate. 
(4)  The city manager, or the manager's designee, may at any time without notice and in such manner as he or she determines to be in the public interest, dispose summarily of any property coming into the city's possession which the manager determines to be dangerous or perishable. The city manager shall make a record of the pertinent facts of the receipt and disposal of such property. 
(Ord. No. 400, § 1, 9-29-05) 
Sec. 2-74. - Deposit of net proceeds. 
    The net proceeds of the sale of any property other than a motor vehicle, whether by public auction or sale, shall be deposited in the general fund of the city subject to the right of the former owner of the property to the payment of the net sale proceeds from the general fund upon application and satisfactory proof of ownership within six months of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 400, § 1, 9-29-05) 
Sec. 2-75. - Disposal of motor vehicles. 
    Motor vehicles impounded by the city and its duly designated agents, or otherwise lawfully coming into its possession during the course of its municipal operations, shall be disposed of in accordance with M.S. ch. 168B as follows: 
(1)  The city shall give notice of the taking within five days unless the vehicle is reclaimed prior thereto. 
(2)  The notice shall set forth the date and place of taking, the year, make, model, and serial number of the vehicle if such information can be reasonably obtained and the place where the vehicle is being held. 
(3)  The notice shall inform the owner and any lien holders of the right to reclaim the vehicle. 
(4)  The notice shall state that failure of the owner or lien holders to exercise their right to reclaim shall be deemed a waiver by them of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent to the sale of the vehicle and contents at a public auction or sale. 
(5)  The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, of the vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien holders of record. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lien holders, the notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was taken. 
(Ord. No. 400, § 1, 9-29-05) 
Sec. 2-76. - Right of reclaim. 
    The owner or lien holder shall have the right to reclaim the vehicle from the city upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from the taking within 15 days in the case of a junk motor vehicle or abandoned motor vehicle or 45 days for other vehicles of the notice required by section 2-75. 
(Ord. No. 400, § 1, 9-29-05) 
Sec. 2-77. - Public sale. 
    If the vehicle is not reclaimed pursuant to section 2-76, if shall be sold to the highest bidder at a pubic auction sale. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the registrar of motor vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership. Before such vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety check. Proceeds of the sale will be used to reimburse the city for its costs involved in towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice, and publication costs. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the previous owner or entitled lien holders for 90 days and then shall be deposited in the treasury of the city. 
(Ord. No. 400, § 1, 9-29-05) 
Sec. 2-78. - Immediate sale. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, if a motor vehicle is more than seven-model years of age, is lacking vital component parts, and does not display a license plate currently valid in Minnesota or any other state or foreign country, it shall immediately be eligible for public sale pursuant to section 2-75 and shall not be subject to the notification, reclamation or title provisions specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 400, § 1, 9-29-05) 
Chapter 3 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10. 
State Law reference- Permission of police chief or fire chief required to install or use device that transmits prerecorded message to city, M.S. § 237.47. 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means any equipment or device which emits an audible, visual, or electric signal upon the detection of a potential burglary, robbery, fire, medical emergency, trespass, or property intrusion. "Alarm system" does not include anti-theft or tampering alarms installed in any motor vehicle. "Alarm system" does not include smoke detectors which emit only an audible alarm signal and which are installed within individual dwelling units. 
    Alarm user means any person in control of any building, structure, facility or tract of land wherein or whereon an alarm system is used or maintained within the city. 
    False alarm means an alarm signal eliciting a response by public safety personnel when a situation requiring a response does not exist, and which is caused by the activation of the alarm system through mechanical failure, alarm malfunction, improper installation or the inadvertence of the owner or lessee of the alarm system or of his employees or agents. "False alarm" does not include an alarm caused by climatic conditions such as tornadoes, thunderstorms, utility line mishaps, violent conditions of nature or any other conditions which are clearly beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer, installer or alarm user. 
    Public safety communications center means the central facility used to receive emergency requests for public safety services and general information from the public to be dispatched to public safety personnel. 
    Public safety personnel means all personnel employed by any law enforcement agency, and any fire-fighting personnel and any ambulance personnel. 
    Sheriff means the Carver County sheriff or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 72, § 3, 5-3-84) 
Sec. 3-2. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor, in addition to being subject to the alarm users fees imposed by this chapter. 
(b)  If a person fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the city may recover costs, damages, or alarm user fees in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  In addition to all other remedies, the city may certify any unpaid alarm user fees to the county auditor or county finance director as a governmental services lien for collection with the real property taxes imposed on the real property upon which the alarm system is or was located. 
(Ord. No. 72, §§ 7.01, 7.03, 7.04, 5-3-84) 
Sec. 3-3. - Rules. 
    The sheriff shall promulgate such rules as are necessary for the implementation and/or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 72, § 6.03, 5-3-84) 
Sec. 3-4. - Compliance. 
    No person shall locate, install, construct, alter, repair, use, or maintain any alarm system within the city except in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 72, § 4, 5-3-84) 
Sec. 3-5. - Audible alarms. 
(a)  Every person maintaining an alarm system with an audible alarm signal shall post a notice containing the name and telephone number of a person to be notified to render repairs or service to such alarm system at any time upon activation of such alarm system. Such notice shall be posted at the main entrance to such premises or near the alarm in such a position as to be legible from the ground level adjacent to the building. 
(b)  Alarm systems with audible alarm signals that sound like police or fire sirens are prohibited. 
(c)  All alarm systems with audible alarm signals, except for fire alarms, shall have an automatic shut-off which will silence the audible alarm signal within a period not to exceed 15 minutes. 
(Ord. No. 72, § 4.02, 5-3-84) 
Sec. 3-6. - Registration. 
    All persons using or maintaining any alarm system within the city shall register such alarm system with the sheriff, using registration forms to be furnished by the sheriff within 30 days after the installation of the alarm system. Any alteration or modification of any previously registered alarm system shall be registered with the sheriff, using registration forms to be furnished by the sheriff, within 30 days of the commencement of the alteration or modification. 
(Ord. No. 72, § 4.03, 5-3-84) 
Sec. 3-7. - In-house annunciation panel. 
    Financial institutions having an alarm system with a robbery signal feature, shall have an on-premises annunciator panel providing special annunciation of the sensors at a private monitoring location on the premises. When in the judgment of the sheriff no such on-premises monitoring location is feasible, the requirements of this section may be waived by the sheriff. 
(Ord. No. 72, § 4.04, 5-3-84) 
Sec. 3-8. - Multiple function alarm systems. 
    Alarm systems that have more than one alarm signal function (burglary, fire, etc.), shall report specifically which of the functions has been violated, when reporting to the public safety communications center for the purpose of dispatching public safety personnel to the site of the alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 72, § 4.05, 5-3-84) 
Sec. 3-9. - Connections to public safety communications center. 
    Except for alarm systems from financial institutions or public buildings, no alarm system shall connect directly to the public safety communications center. All such alarms must report to the public safety communications center in some other manner. No automatic telephone dialing device shall be allowed to dial direct or be programmed so that it dials directly into the public safety communications center. 
(Ord. No. 72, § 4.06, 5-3-84) 
Sec. 3-10. - User fees. 
(a)  An alarm user fee in the following amount is imposed upon any alarm user from whose alarm system eminates more than three false alarms within any period of 12 consecutive months: 
Number of False Alarms
Per Period Alarm User Fee 1, 2 or 3 No charge 4 $ 50.00 5   50.00 6   50.00 7   50.00 8   50.00 Each additional  100.00  
(b)  All federal, state, county and municipal buildings and all public schools are exempt from the fee in subsection (a). 
(c)  All newly-installed alarm systems have a 30-day probationary period, commencing on the date of first operational use thereof, during which period false alarms will not be counted for the purpose of computing the amount of any alarm user fee imposed by this section. 
(d)  All alarm systems which are altered by the addition to any new alarm feature have a 15-day probationary period, commencing on the date of first operational use of the new feature, during which period false alarms will not be counted for the purpose of computing the amount of any alarm user fee imposed by this section. 
(e)  Subsequent to any false alarm, the sheriff shall notify the affected alarm user in writing of the date of such false alarm, the apparent reason therefor, and the alarm user fee imposed. It shall be the duty of each alarm user to pay all alarm user fees to the sheriff within 30 days of the date of mailing of the sheriff's fee statement specifying the amount of such alarm user fees. The statement shall be mailed to the affected alarm user at his address shown on the registration form required by section 3-6. 
(f)  One-half of all alarm user fees collected by the sheriff shall be remitted to the city to defray its administrative and prosecution costs incurred in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. The other half of the alarm user fees shall be retained by the sheriff to defray his administrative costs incurred in enforcing this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 72, § 5, 5-3-84) 
Sec. 3-11. - When user to respond to alarms. 
    If in the judgment of public safety personnel at the scene of an alarm, it is determined that the alarm user should appear at the location of any alarm for the purpose of admitting public safety personnel to the subject premises to investigate any alarm system signal, or for the purposes of deactivating any alarm system signal, or for the purpose of identifying third parties found on the subject premises during the investigation of any alarm system signal, the alarm user shall appear immediately if so requested by the sheriff. 
(Ord. No. 72, § 6.01, 5-3-84) 
Sec. 3-12. - Correction of defective alarm. 
    If an alarm user has had more than three false alarms in a 12-month period, the alarm user, upon the written request of the sheriff, shall submit in written form a description of any steps being taken to remedy any problems with false alarms emanating from the alarm user's location. 
(Ord. No. 72, § 6.02, 5-3-84) 
Chapter 4 - LICENSE, PERMIT, AND ADMINISTRATIVE FEES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Policy and purpose of chapter. 
    By the enactment of this chapter, the city council intends to establish fees for licenses and permits required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 348, 11-10-03) 
Sec. 4-2. - Application of chapter. 
    Where a direct conflict exists between the amount of a license or permit fee set by any provision of this Code and a fee set by this chapter, the fee set by this chapter applies. 
(Ord. No. 348, 11-10-03) 
Secs. 4-3-4-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE AND OTHER BUSINESS AND PUBLIC SAFETY RELATED FEES 

Sec. 4-15. - Fees set. 
    The fees for the various licenses required by this Code are set forth in this section as follows: 
(a)  Liquor license fees: 
1.  The annual license fee for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be: 
  Floor Area:
Under
3,000 Sq. Ft. Floor Area:
3,000-6,000
Sq. Ft. Floor Area:
Over 6,000
Sq. Ft. Restaurant $6,115.00 $ 9,609.00 $13,104.00 Exclusive liquor 
store  7,862.00  11,356.00  14,851.00  
2.  Various other license fees shall be set as follows: 
Microdistillery off-sale ..... $200.00 
On-sale brewer taproom ..... 400.00 
On-sale cocktail room ..... 400.00 
Off-sale intoxicating ..... 200.00* 
Off-sale non-intoxicating ..... 58.00 
On-sale non-intoxicating ..... 410.00 
Small brewer off-sale ..... 200.00 
Sunday sales ..... 200.00* 
Wine/beer license ..... 410.00 
*Fees that are established by state statute. 
3.  The fees to conduct a background investigation on liquor license applications for owners, officers or operating managers shall be as follows (per application): 
New establishment/new owner ..... $250.00 
Changes in officers or operating managers of existing license holders ..... 100.00 
This includes new applications as well as changes in officers or operating managers of existing license holders. 
4.  Temporary on-sale liquor licenses shall be ..... 1.00  
(b)  Waste hauler fee (per company annually): ..... 300.00 
(c)  Peddler, solicitor or transient merchant registration fee per individual: ..... 100.00 
(d)  Kennel fees: ..... 25.00 
(e)  Dog and cat impounding fees: 
1st offense in a 12-month period ..... 50.00 
2nd offense in a 12-month period ..... 100.00 
3rd offense in a 12-month period ..... 150.00 
4th offense in a 12-month period ..... 200.00 
5th and subsequent offenses in a 12-month period ..... 250.00 
(f)  Massage therapy business license and background investigation fee: 
License ..... 50.00 
Background investigation ..... 250.00 
(g)  Fireworks license fee (annually): ..... 200.00 
(h)  Vehicle lockout services (per incident): ..... 50.00 
(i)  Sexually oriented business license: ..... 1,300.00 
(j)  Bow and arrow discharge permit: ..... 20.00 
(k)  Shotgun discharge permit: ..... 20.00 
(l)  Stable permit fee: ..... 25.00 
(Ord. No. 348, 11-10-03; Ord. No. 367, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 380, §§ 1, 2, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 466, § 1, 7-28-08; Ord. No. 489, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 517, § 1, 1-10-11; Ord. No. 588, § 1, 12-9-13; Ord. No. 610, § 1, 12-14-15; Ord. No. 617, § 1, 12-12-16; Ord. No. 620, § 1, 3-13-17; Ord. No. 632, § 2, 6-11-18; Ord. No. 637, §§ 1-3, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 4-16. - Cemetery fees. 
    Cemetery fees: 
  Resident Non-Resident Grave Fee $400.00 $600.00 Interment Fee $150.00 $150.00  
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 12-8-14) 
Secs. 4-17-4-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMIT AND ADMINISTRATIVE FEES 

Sec. 4-30. - Fees set. 
    The fees and charges for the various permits required by this Code are set forth as follows: 
(a)  Building permit and fire prevention fees: 
1.  Building permit fees shall be as set forth in Table 1-A. When submittal of plans is required, and the valuation is more than $3,000.00, a plan review fee equal to 65 percent of the permit fee, shall also be charged. Base minimum building valuation shall be as established by the most current version of the Minnesota Department of Labor and Industry Building Valuation Data. 
2.  Individual sewage treatment system permit fees shall be as set forth in Table 1-A. When submittal of plans is required, a plan review fee equal to 65 percent of the permit fee shall also be charged. 
3.  Fire suppression and fire alarm permit fees, and fees for other construction permits issued in accordance with the Minnesota State Fire Code, shall be as set forth in Table 1-A. When submittal of plans is required, a plan review fee equal to ten percent of the permit fee shall also be charged. 
TABLE 1-A 
Total Valuation Fee $1.00 to $500.00 $24.95 $501.00 to $2,000.00 $24.95 for the first $500.00 plus $3.25 for each additional $100.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00 $2,001.00 to $25,000.00 $73.50 for the first $2,000.00 plus $14.85 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00 $25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $415.10 for the first $25,000.00 plus $10.70 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00 $50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $682.95 for the first $50,000.00 plus $7.40 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00 $100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $1,054.25 for the first $100,000.00 plus $5.90 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00 $500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $3,430.65 for the first $500,000.00 plus $5.05 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00 $1,000,001.00 and up $5,950.30 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $3.85 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof  
Other Inspections and Fees: 1. Inspections outside of normal business hours $50.00 per hour 1 
(minimum charge-two hours) 2. Reinspection fees $50.00 per hour 1 3. Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated $50.00 per hour 1 
(minimum charge - one-half hour) 4. Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to plans $50.00 per hour 1 
(minimum charge - one-half hour) 5. For use of outside consultants for plan checking and inspections, or both Actual costs 2  
1  Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the greatest. This cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages and fringe benefits of the employees involved. 
2 Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs. 
4.  HVAC (heating, ventilation and air conditioning), mechanical, plumbing and gas piping permit fees shall be as set forth in Table 1-B. When submittal of plans is required, a plan review fee equal to ten percent of the permit fee shall also be charged. 
TABLE 1-B 
Valuation Fee $0 to $1,000.00 3% of valuation, minimum $30.00 $1,001.00 to $10,000.00 $30.00 for the first $1,000.00 plus 2.25% of the valuation over $1,000.00 $10,001.00 to $50,000.00 $232.50 for the first $10,000.00 plus 1.75% of the valuation over $10,000.00 $50,001.00 and up $932.50 for the first $50,000.00 plus 1.5% of the valuation over $50,000.00  
5.  Industrial heating equipment permit fees shall be as set forth in Table 1-C. 
TABLE 1-C 
Valuation Fee $0 to $50,000.00 1.2% of valuation, minimum $30.00 $50,000 to $250,000.00 $600.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus .4% of the valuation over $50,000.00 $250,001.00 to $500,000.00 $1,400.00 for the first $250,000.00 plus .3% of the valuation over $250,000.00 $500,001.00 to $750,000.00 $2,150.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus .2% of the valuation over $500,000.00 $750,001.00 and up $2,650.00 for the first $750,000.00 plus .1% of the valuation over $750,000.00  
6.  Fees for other inspections and services shall be as set forth in Table 1-A. 
7.  Re-inspection fee for as-built surveys ..... $50.00 per re-inspection 
(b)  Development review fees: 
1.  Comprehensive plan amendment: 
a)  Land use amendment ..... $600.00 
b)  Minor MUSA line for failing on-site sewers ..... 100.00 
2.  Conditional use permit (does not include site plan review): 
a)  Single-family residence ..... 325.00 
b)  All others ..... 425.00 
3.  Grading permits: 
a)  Under 50 cubic yards ..... NA 
b)  50-1,000 cubic yards ..... Actual cost 
(minimum $50.00) 
c)  Over 1,000 cubic yards: 
Processed as interim use permit 
4.  Interim use permit: 
a)  Single-family residence ..... 325.00 
b)  All others ..... 425.00 
5.  Sign rental ..... 200.00 
6.  Planned unit development/rezoning: 
a)  Major amendment ..... 750.00 
b)  Minor amendment ..... 100.00 
7.  Rezoning ..... 500.00 
8.  Sign permit: 
a)  Permanent ..... 100.00 
b)  Temporary ..... 35.00 
9.  Sign plan review ..... 150.00 
10.  Site plan review: 
a)  Commercial/industrial districts ..... 500.00 
Plus $10.00 per 1,000 square feet of building area 
b)  Residential districts ..... 500.00 
Plus $5.00 per unit 
c)  Administrative ..... 100.00 
11.  Subdivision: 
a)  Create 3 lots or less ..... 300.00 
b)  Create over 3 lots ..... 600.00 
Plus $15.00 per lot 
c)  Final plat ..... 250.00 
d)  Metes and bounds division ..... 300.00 
Plus $50.00 lot 
e)  Consolidate lots ..... 150.00 
f)  Administrative subdivision ..... 150.00 
12.  Temporary outdoor sales and events: 
a)  Temporary outdoor event permit ..... 50.00 
b)  Seasonal sales permit ..... 50.00 
c)  Special event permit ..... 100.00 
d)  Race addendum ..... 50.00 
13.  Vacation of right-of-way/easements ..... 300.00 
14.  Variance ..... 200.00 
15.  Wetland alteration permit: 
a)  Single-family residence ..... 150.00 
b)  All other uses ..... 275.00 
Monumentation for all wetland buffer strip (per sign) ..... 20.00 
16.  Zoning appeal ..... 100.00 
17.  Zoning ordinance amendment ..... 500.00 
18.  Filing fees/attorney costs 
a)  Recording documents (per document) ..... 50.00 
b)  Recording plats and related documents ..... 450.00 
19.  Consultant fees cost will be billed to developer 
20.  Flood zone information and written zoning requests ..... 25.00 
21.  Property owner's list, per property .....  3.00 
All requests must be made in writing 
22.  Beekeeping permit ..... 25.00 
23.  Chicken permit ..... 25.00 
(c)  Private development engineering fees: 
1.  Three hundred dollars per public street light. 
2.  Administration fee in conjunction with the installation of the improvements in the plat. The fee shall be calculated as follows: 
a)  If the cost of the construction of improvements is less than $500,000.00, three percent of the construction costs; 
b)  If the cost of the construction of improvements is between $500,000.00 and $1,000,000.00, three percent of construction costs for the first $500,000.00 and two percent of construction costs over $500,000.00; 
c)  If the cost of the construction of improvements is over $1,000,000.00, 21/2 percent of construction costs for the first $1,000,000.00 and 11/2 percent of construction costs over $1,000,000.00. 
3.  Surface water development fees: 
Development Type Per Acre Fee Parks/Open Space $4,730.00 Single-Family Residential $8,320.00 Medium Density Residential $9,990.00 Townhouse/Apartment Complex/High Density Residential $14,950.00 Industrial $21,580.00 Commercial $31,530.00  
Fees are based on the developable land. Undeveloped areas such as wetlands and buffers placed into an outlot, public parks, and public right-of-way are exempt from these fees. 
4.  Park fees (varies with land use)-100 percent of the fees are paid at time of final plat. 
Park dedication fees: 
Single-family $5,800.00/dwelling Duplex $5,000.00/dwelling Multifamily/apartment units $3,800.00/dwelling Commercial/industrial $12,500.00/acre Continuing care retirement facility $500.00/bed  
5.  Sewer and water fees. 
Residential development: 
Shall pay a portion of the sewer and water hook-up fees (area trunk fees) at the time of final subdivision approval: $691.00/unit (sewer) and $2,311.00/unit (water). The remainder of the sewer and water hook-up fees shall be collected with the building permit at the rate in effect at that time. 
Parcels previously assessed trunk hook-up fees are exempt. Residential trunk hook-up fees are based per unit. 
Sanitary Sewer $1,611.00/unit, or $2,302.00/unit if a portion of the sewer hook-up fee was not paid at the time of final subdivision approval-(Lake Ann Interceptor - $1,971.00/unit and subtrunk $2,068.00/unit)* Water $5,393.00/unit, or $7,704.00 if a portion of the water hook-up fee was not paid at the time of final subdivision approval SAC As established by the Metropolitan Council and $75.00 city SAC surcharge  
* Parcels within the Lake Ann Sewer District will be subject to the Lake Ann Trunk sewer fees in addition to the sewer trunk hook-up fees. 
Commercial, industrial and institutional development: 
Sewer and water trunk hook-up fees (area trunk fees). Fee is paid at the time of building permit. Parcels previously assessed trunk hook-up fees are exempt. Trunk hook-up fees are based on the number of sanitary access charge (SAC) units assigned by Metropolitan Council for office or industrial/commercial buildings. 
Sanitary Sewer $2,302.00/unit-(Lake Ann Interceptor - $1,971.00/unit and subtrunk $2,068.00/unit)* Water $7,704.00/unit SAC As established by the Metropolitan Council and $75.00 city SAC surcharge  
* Parcels within the Lake Ann Sewer District will be subject to the Lake Ann Trunk sewer fees in addition to the sewer trunk hook-up fees. 
All development: 
Lateral connection charges: If the lot or tract of land, or portion thereof, to be served by a lateral connection that has not been assessed for the cost of construction, then the applicant shall pay the following lateral connection: 
Sewer lateral connection charge ..... $7,710.00 
Water lateral connection charge ..... 9,508.00 
6.  Site inspection for private developments-The city hires consultant inspectors at an average of 20 hours/week at $80.00 per hour. This is over and above what the developer is required to provide per development contract. 
7.  G.I.S fees-$25.00/plat, $10.00/parcel, and $5.00 surcharge if the plat does not contain at least two section corners or quarters and the length and bearing between them. 
(d)  Park and recreation fees: 
1.  Group picnic reservation fees: 
Lake Susan Shelter
Lake Ann:
 Lakeside Pavilion or Al Klingelhutz Memorial Pavilion Shelter Monday-Thursday Friday-Sunday Resident - groups less than 100 $100.00 $125.00 Resident - groups of 100 or more $150.00 $175.00 Nonresident - groups less than 100 $200.00 $250.00 Nonresident - groups of 100 or more $300.00 $350.00 District 112/276 $45.00 $50.00 All other school districts $100.00 $150.00  
2.  Recreation center fees: 
Daily Fee Resident Daily Fee $3.00 Nonresident Daily Fee $3.50 Senior Resident Fee $2.75 Senior Nonresident $3.25  
Punch Cards 10 Punch Card Resident $30.00 10 Punch Card Nonresident $35.00 10 Punch Senior Resident $27.50 10 Punch Senior Nonresident $32.50 20 Punch Resident $55.00 20 Punch Nonresident $66.00 20 Punch Senior Resident $50.00 20 Punch Senior Nonresident $61.00 40 Punch Resident $106.00 40 Punch Nonresident $129.00 40 Punch Senior Resident $94.00 40 Punch Senior Nonresident $117.00  
Facility Rate/Hour Resident Nonresident Gym $40.00 $50.00 Community Room with Kitchen $15.00 $20.00 Community Room with Carpet $15.00 $20.00 Conference Room $15.00 $20.00  
(Ord. No. 348, 11-10-03; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 367, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 368, § 1, 1-26-04; Ord. No. 387, §§ 1-3, 12-13-04; Ord. No. 408, §§ 1-6, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 428, § 1, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 436, §§ 1, 2, 12-11-06; Ord. No. 455, § 1, 8-2-07; Ord. No. 462, §§ 1, 2, 12-10-07; Ord. No. 475, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-08; Ord. No. 489, §§ 2-4, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 8-9-10; Ord. No. 519, § 1, 1-10-11; Ord. No. 520, § 1, 1-24-11; Ord. No. 529, §§ 1, 2, 12-12-11; Ord. No. 574, § 4, 10-22-12; Ord. No. 576, §§ 1, 2, 12-10-12; Ord. No. 588, §§ 2, 3, 12-9-13; Ord. No. 600, §§ 2-4, 12-8-14; Ord. No. 610, §§ 2-4, 12-14-15; Ord. No. 617, §§ 2-5, 12-12-16; Ord. No. 619, § 2, 3-13-17; Ord. No. 627, §§ 1, 2, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 634, § 1, 6-25-18; Ord. No. 637, §§, 4, 5, 12-10-18; Ord. No. 639, § 1, 3-11-19) 
Secs. 4-31-4-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UTILITY RATES 

Sec. 4-45. - Water and sewage rates. 
    Utility rates are established for each 1,000 gallons of usage: 
Water Fixed charge (minimum water charge per quarter) $13.65 per quarter 0 to 6,000 gallons per quarter $1.28 per 1,000 gallons 6,001 to 24,000 gallons per quarter $2.57 per 1,000 gallons 24,001 to 48,000 gallons per quarter $3.37 per 1,000 gallons 48,001 to 99,000 gallons per quarter $3.93 per 1,000 gallons 99,001+ gallons per quarter (irrigation and residential only) $4.99 per 1,000 gallons Multi-family properties - uniform water rate $2.57 per 1,000 gallons Bulk sales to contractors, landscapers, etc. at city fill stations or other designated locations $6.77 per 1,000 gallons Sewage: Residential based on winter quarter usage $5.12 per 1,000 gallons Commercial based on actual quarterly usage $5.12 per 1,000 gallons Minimum sewage charge per quarter 
(for amounts up to 6,000 gallons per quarter) $31.50 per quarter  
(Ord. No. 368, § 2, 1-26-04; Ord. No. 388, § 1, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 408, § 7, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 436, § 3, 12-11-06; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 462, § 3, 12-10-07; Ord. No. 475, § 3, 12-8-08; Ord. No. 489, § 5, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 516, § 1, 12-13-10; Ord. No. 529, § 3, 12-12-11; Ord. No. 576, § 3, 12-10-12; Ord. No. 588, § 4, 12-9-13; Ord. No. 600, § 5, 12-8-14; Ord. No. 610, § 5, 12-14-15; Ord. No. 617, § 6, 12-12-16; Ord. No. 627, § 3, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 637, § 6, 12-10-18) 
Secs. 4-46-4-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT FEES 

Sec. 4-50. - Fees set. 
    Surface water management fees: 
Classification Land Use Utility Factor 1 Single-family and rural residential Not Applicable 2 Agricultural Not Applicable 3 Undeveloped Not Applicable 4 Medium density residential 2.22 5 High density residential, industrial, office, institutions (churches, schools, government buildings, hospitals) 3.30 6 Business/commercial 4.23 7 Parks, cemeteries, golf courses, arboretum 0.46 8 Parking lots as a principal use 6.14  
    The surface water management fee for each tax parcel classified 1, 2 and 3 shall be $14.88 per quarter. 
    The surface water management fee for each tax parcel classified 4 through 8 shall be calculated for each quarter as follows: $28.99 multiplied by the utility factor multiplied by the acreage of the parcel. 
(Ord. No. 411, § 2, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 436, § 4, 12-11-06; Ord. No. 462, § 4, 12-10-07; Ord. No. 475, § 4, 12-8-08; Ord. No. 489, § 6, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 529, § 4, 12-12-11; Ord. No. 576, § 4, 12-10-12; Ord. No. 588, § 5, 12-9-13; Ord. No. 600, § 6, 12-8-14; Ord. No. 610, § 6, 12-14-15; Ord. No. 617, § 7, 12-12-16; Ord. No. 627, § 4, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 637, § 7, 12-10-18) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals in parks, § 14-65. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate animals, M.S. § 412.221, subd. 21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 5-1-5-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 350, adopted Nov. 24, 2003, repealed § 5-16, which pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. 24-C, §§ 1, 19, adopted July 12, 1976; Ord. No. 24-D, § 1, adopted Aug. 2, 1982; Ord. No. 247, § 4, adopted Mar. 11, 1996; and Ord. No. 304, § 1, adopted June 26, 2000. See § 1-2 for definitions. 
Sec. 5-17. - Interference with enforcement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to break open the pound or to attempt to do so, or to take or let out any dog or cat therefrom, or to take or attempt to take from any officer any dog or cat taken up by him in compliance with this article, or in any manner to interfere with or hinder such officer in the discharge of his duties under this article. 
(Ord. No. 24-C, § 14, 7-12-76) 
Sec. 5-18. - Kennel license. 
(a)  License required. No person shall maintain a private or commercial kennel in the city without a license. No license shall be required for a private kennel consisting of cats, if the kennel is located on a tract or parcel of land being used for agriculture as that term is defined in the zoning ordinance, and if the cats are kept for rodent control purposes incident to the agricultural use of the tract or parcel of land. 
(b)  License; application. Application for a kennel license shall be made on forms provided by the city manager. The application shall contain: 
(1)  A description of the property to be used; 
(2)  The names and addresses of the owner, lessee, if any, and the operator or manager; 
(3)  The names, residences and addresses of two persons, residents of Carver or Hennepin Counties, who are familiar with the applicant's, the manager's or operator's character; 
(4)  Whether the applicant, manager or operator has ever been convicted of a crime or offense other than a traffic offense and, if so, information as to the time, place, and nature of such crime or offense; and 
(5)  The names, phone numbers and addresses of those persons who will be from time to time designated as a contact person as required by subsection 5-18.2(b). 
(6)  Such other information as may be required by the city manager. 
    If the application is made on behalf of a corporation or a partnership, it shall be accompanied by appropriate business records showing the names and addresses of all individuals having an interest in the business and, in the case of a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and shareholders. Applicants shall furnish to the city with their application, documents establishing the applicant's interest in the premises on which the business will be located. Documentation shall be in the form of a lease, a deed, a contract for deed or any other document which establishes the applicant's interest. Applications shall be signed and sworn to. If the application is by a natural person, it shall be signed and sworn to by such person; if by a partnership, by one of the partners; and if by an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof. 
(c)  License fees and license year. The application and license fee shall be as established in chapter 4 of this Code. The application, investigation, and license fees shall be paid when the application is filed. A separate license shall be obtained for each place of business. The licensee shall display the license in a prominent place in the licensed business at all times. Licenses shall expire on the December 31 following the issuance of the license. Applications to renew an existing license must be submitted by December 1. 
(d)  Granting or denial of licenses. License applications shall be reviewed by such departments as the city manager shall direct. The review shall include an inspection of the premises covered by the application to determine whether the premises conform to all requirements of this Code. Licenses shall be granted or denied by the city manager subject to the provisions of this chapter. The city manager shall approve the license if the provisions of the Code are met or deny the license if they are not met. 
(e)  Revocation, suspension and renewal of license. The license may be revoked, suspended or not renewed by the city manager upon a showing that the licensee, its owner, manager, employee or agent has engaged in: 
(1)  Fraud, deception or misrepresentation in connection with the securing or retaining the license. 
(2)  Any conduct which would constitute grounds for refusal to issue a license under this chapter. 
(3)  Any conduct constituting a violation of any of the rules and regulations provided for under this chapter. 
(4)  Any conduct constituting a violation of any provision of a conditional use permit or other zoning restriction. 
(5)  Any conduct constituting a nuisance. 
(f)  Appeal. The licensee may appeal a denial, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal to the city council. The licensee must file with the city clerk a notice of appeal within ten days of a revocation, suspension or nonrenewal. The council shall consider the appeal at a regularly or specially scheduled council meeting on or after 15 days from service of the notice of appeal upon the city clerk by the licensee. Hearing on the appeal shall be open to the public and the licensee shall have the right to appear and be represented by legal counsel and to offer evidence in behalf of licensure. At the conclusion of the hearing, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the council may order: 
(1)  The revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of the license. 
(2)  The revocation, suspension or nonrenewal by the city manager be lifted and the license be returned to the licensee. 
(3)  Additional terms, conditions and stipulations to be imposed on the licensee to mitigate problems. 
(Ord. No. 24-C, §§ 20.01, 20.02, 7-12-76; Ord. No. 350, § 2, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 374, § 1, 4-26-04) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10. 
Sec. 5-18.1. - Conditions of license. 
(a)  No license shall be issued if the applicants have been convicted of any offense involving cruelty to animals, the operation of kennels, or animal related nuisances. 
(b)  No licenses shall be issued to applicants who have, within one year prior to the date of application, been denied licensure or who have, within such period, had a same or similar license revoked. 
(c)  No licenses shall be issued to applicants who have failed to provide all of the information requested in the application, to pay the full license fee, or to cooperate with the city in review of the application. 
(d)  Licenses shall not be issued if the facilities or property fails to meet any provision in a conditional use permit or other zoning restriction. 
(Ord. No. 247, § 5, 3-11-96; Ord. No. 374, § 1, 4-26-04) 
Editor's note- Section 5 of Ord. No. 247, adopted Mar. 11, 1996, amended the Code by adding § 5-22. In order to keep like provisions together, such new provisions were included as § 5-18.1 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 5-18.2. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  All licensed kennels must operate according to the following rules and regulations. 
(1)  The licensee shall permit and allow the inspection of the premises during business hours by all appropriate city employees. 
(2)  Land upon which dogs are to be sheltered must be surrounded by a sturdy fence which will keep dogs confined. 
(3)  Housing and shelter must be provided which will keep animals comfortable and protected from the elements, and housing or shelter shall be so located as not to create a nuisance. 
(4)  Accumulations of feces shall be located at least 200 feet from any well. 
(5)  All accumulations of feces shall be removed at such periods as will ensure that no leaching or objectionable odors exist, and the premises shall not be allowed to become unsightly. 
(6)  All dogs and cats shall be housed indoors overnight (from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.). 
(7)  The following regulations apply to the site's animal quarters: 
a.  Indoor housing facilities must be structurally sound with ample heat, light, and ventilation. 
b.  Animals kept outside must have continual access so animals can get in and out to shelter and protect them from sun, rain, and snow. 
c.  If animals are confined by chains, such chains must be attached so as not to become entangled with chains of other dogs. 
d.  Individual animal enclosures must be of a size to allow each dog to turn around fully, stand, sit and lie in a comfortable condition. 
e.  The temperature of indoor housing facilities shall not be less than 50 degrees Fahrenheit for dogs not accustomed to lower temperatures. 
(8)  Disposal facilities are provided to minimize virus infestation, odors and disease hazards. 
(9)  Adequate storage and refrigeration is provided to protect food supplies against contamination and deterioration. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of subsection 5-18.2(a), commercial kennels shall also operate according to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  The licensed facility must at all times have a designated contact person available. The designated contact person must be available to correct and mitigate violations of this chapter and the Code whenever they occur. The licensee shall notify the sheriff's office in writing of the designated contact person along with contact information. The licensee shall notify the sheriff's office in writing of any change in the contact person. 
(2)  Housing enclosures for dogs and cats shall be at least 200 feet from any neighboring residential structure used for human habitation. 
(3)  No commercial kennel permit shall be issued for a lot of less than one acre. 
(4)  All dogs and cats shall be housed indoors when the commercial kennel employee(s) is not present at the subject property. 
(5)  Facility employees shall ensure that dogs are not allowed to create noise in violation of the City Code. When a citizen complaint is received, facility employees must make affirmative steps to reduce animal noise including but not limited to bringing dogs to indoor areas. 
(6)  Outdoor exercise (dog runs) confinement areas shall be screened and buffered. Such screening and buffering may be accomplished by using berms, fencing, a green belt planting strip (evergreens), or natural topography. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 2, 4-26-04) 
Sec. 5-19. - Running at large. 
    No dog or cat shall be allowed by its owner to run at large. The police or animal control officers of the city shall take up and impound any dog or cat found at large in violation of this section. The owner retains liability for all fees and charges related to the animal and it's impound. 
(Ord. No. 24-C, § 12, 7-12-76; Ord. No. 469, § 1, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 5-20. - Abandonment. 
    No person shall abandon any dog or cat within the city. A person who chooses to abandon or surrender their animal after impoundment retains liability for all fees and charges related to the animal and it's impound. 
(Ord. No. 24-C, § 21, 7-12-76; Ord. No. 469, § 2, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 5-21. - Destruction. 
(a)  A court of proper jurisdiction may issue a summons directed to the owner or custodian of a dog or cat commanding him to appear before the court to show cause why the animal should not be seized and destroyed by any police or animal control officer, or otherwise disposed of in the manner authorized in this article upon sworn complaint being made to the court that any one of the following facts exist: 
(1)  The animal at any time has destroyed property or habitually trespasses in a damaging manner on property of persons other than the owner; 
(2)  The animal has attacked or bitten a person outside the owner's or custodian's premises; 
(3)  The animal is vicious or shows vicious habits or molests pedestrians or interferes with vehicles on the public rights-of-way or highways; 
(4)  The animal is a nuisance as defined; or 
(5)  The animal is running at large in violation of this article. 
(b)  The summons shall be returnable not less than two or more than six days from the date of service thereof and shall be served at least two days before the time of the appearance mentioned therein. Upon hearing and finding the facts true as complained of, the court may either order the animal destroyed or order the owner or custodian to remove it from the city, or may order the owner or custodian to keep it confined to a designated place. If the owner or custodian violates such order any police or animal control officer may impound or destroy any animal described in such order. 
(c)  Costs of the proceedings authorized by this section shall be assessed against the owner or custodian of the animal if the facts in the complaint are found to be true, or to the complainant if the facts are found to be untrue. 
(Ord. No. 24-C, § 22, 7-12-76) 
Sec. 5-22. - Waste clean-up. 
    The owner or a person having control of a dog shall immediately remove any feces left by the dog not left on property of the dog owner or the person in control of the dog. A person walking a dog off the owner's property must have in their possession equipment for picking up and removing the feces. 
(Ord. No. 305, § 1, 7-10-00) 
Secs. 5-23-5-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 5-36. - Entry powers to enforce. 
    Any police or animal control officer of the city may enter upon the private property of any person in pursuit of any animal under probable cause to believe that such animal has bitten a person or animal, or that such animal is rabid. 
(Ord. No. 24-C, § 24, 7-12-76) 
Sec. 5-37. - Vaccination. 
(a)  No license shall be granted for any dog or cat which does not have a valid vaccination against rabies for the calendar year in which the license is to be issued. A valid vaccination shall be deemed to be one year for cats and one year for dogs vaccinated with a modified live vaccine; the period of immunity may be extended to no more than 36 months for dogs vaccinated with a modified live vaccine upon written certification by a licensed veterinarian in the state stating that the immunity is in excess of the periods herein stated. The veterinarian shall state on the certificate of vaccination the type of vaccine used. If not stated, it shall be assumed that the vaccine is a killed viral vaccine. 
(b)  Vaccinations shall be performed only by a doctor qualified to practice veterinary medicine in the state in which the animal is vaccinated. A veterinarian who vaccinates an animal to be licensed in the city shall complete a certificate of vaccination in triplicate. One copy shall be issued to the animal owner for affixing to the license application, and one copy shall be retained in the veterinarian's file. 
(Ord. No. 24-C, § 18, 7-12-76) 
Sec. 5-38. - Bites-Generally. 
    Except as expressly authorized by statute, it shall be unlawful for any person other than an officer or agent of the city acting pursuant to this article to destroy any dog or cat which has bitten any person or animal unless such dog or cat has been determined to be or is rabid. 
(Ord. No. 24-C, § 26, 7-12-76) 
Sec. 5-39. - Same-Humans bitten. 
(a)  Notwithstanding section 5-38, whenever any person owning, possessing or harboring any dog or cat within the city shall learn that such animal has bitten any human being, such person shall immediately impound such animal for a period of ten days separate and apart from other animals under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian until it is determined whether the animal had or has rabies. If the animal is found to be rabid, it shall be destroyed. If the owner can provide current proof of rabies shots, the owner may institute home quarantine for the ten-day period. As part of the home quarantine, the owner would need to keep the animal separate and indoors, may only take the animal outside on a leash accompanied by an adult to urinate and defecate. 
(b)  The owner shall notify the city police and animal control officer of such impoundment. 
(c)  If the owner cannot be advised of the animal bite within the two hours following the occurrence, or if the owner fails to impound the animal as required by this section, the city police or animal control officers shall cause such animal to be so impounded. If the animal is found to be rabid, it shall be destroyed. If it is found not to be rabid, it shall be returned to the owner provided the owner shall first pay for the cost of keeping said animal. If the owner does not pay such cost within five days after he has been notified to claim or retrieve his animal, the animal may be disposed of as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 24-C, § 27.01, 7-12-76; Ord. No. 350, § 3, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 5-40. - Same-Other animals bitten. 
    Any dog or cat known to have been bitten or exposed to rabies shall be impounded and destroyed; provided, however, that such animal may be immediately destroyed, if with reasonable effort it cannot first be taken up and impounded. If such an animal is impounded, it shall not be destroyed if the owner makes provision for suitable quarantine for a period of not less than six months, or proof of immunization is furnished and booster injections are given by a licensed veterinarian at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 24-C, § 27.02, 7-12-76) 
Secs. 5-41-5-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VACCINATION AND IDENTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 517, § 2, adopted Jan. 10, 2011, amended div. 3, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 3, §§ 5-51-5-56, was entitled "License", and derived from: Ord. No. 24-C, §§ 2-5, 9, 15, 16, adopted July 12, 1976; and Ord. No. 350, §§ 4-6, adopted Nov. 24, 2003. 

Sec. 5-51. - Vaccination requirements. 
(a)  Every dog or cat over six months of age, kept as a pet shall be vaccinated against rabies. Because of techniques and tolerances, species limitations, and public health implications, animal rabies vaccines shall be administered only by or under the supervision of a veterinarian. Any animal or a species for which no rabies vaccination is licensed for that species by the United States Department of Agriculture shall be considered unvaccinated for rabies, regardless of that animal's vaccination history. 
(b)  However, no dog or cat need be vaccinated when a licensed veterinarian has examined the animal and certified that, at such time, vaccination would endanger its health because of its age, infirmity, debility, illness, or other medical consideration; and such exception certificate is presented to the animal control officer within five days of such examination. The animal shall be vaccinated against rabies as soon as its health and age permit. Unvaccinated animals must be confined to the owner's property or a veterinary facility. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 2, 1-10-11) 
Sec. 5-52. - Identification requirements. 
    All dogs and cats are required to have some identification on them that would assist animal control in contacting the owner. Identification allowed under this division includes microchips, veterinarian-issued rabies tags, or any tags or collars with contact information and phone number(s) inscribed on it. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 2, 1-10-11) 
Secs. 5-53-5-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 5-71. - Generally. 
    The police and animal control officers of the city are authorized to take up and impound any dog or cat found at large in the city. 
(Ord. No. 24-C, § 5, 7-12-76) 
Sec. 5-72. - Establishment of city pound; records. 
    The city may construct and maintain an animal pound, or the city council may designate as the animal pound a suitable kennel. The animal control officer shall keep accounts of all animals impounded at the city pound and their disposition, and shall turn over such accounts to the city clerk upon request. 
(Ord. No. 24-C, § 11, 7-12-76) 
Sec. 5-73. - Notice. 
(a)  Posting or giving. Upon taking up and impounding any dog or cat, the animal control officer may within 24 hours thereafter post in one or more conspicuous places in the city, a notice of impounding. If the owner of the dog or cat is known, written notice of impounding, in lieu of posted notice, shall be given the owner either by mail or personal service. The date of sale or other disposition of the animal shall be five days after the posting or giving of the notice. 
(b)  Euthanizing animals. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, an animal control officer may immediately kill any dog, cat, or other animal under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The animal is reasonably believed to be diseased, vicious or dangerous and cannot be impounded without substantial risk to the safety of the officer; or 
(2)  The animal is reasonably believed to be mortally injured or diseased. 
(Ord. No. 24-C, § 6, 7-12-76; Ord. No. 183, § 1, 3-22-93) 
Sec. 5-74. - Redemption. 
    Any dog or cat may be redeemed from impoundment by the owner, within the time stated in the notice of impounding, upon payment of the impounding fees, and all other costs and charges incurred by the city for impounding and maintenance of said animal. 
(Ord. No. 24-C, §§ 7, 8, 7-12-76; Ord. No. 24-D, § 2, 8-2-82; Ord. No. 24-E, § 1, 2-10-86; Ord. No. 517, § 3, 1-10-11; Ord. No. 580, § 1, 4-8-13) 
Sec. 5-75. - Disposition of unclaimed animals. 
    Any dog or cat which is not claimed as provided in section 5-74, within five days after impounding, may be sold for not less than the amount provided in section 5-54 to anyone desiring to purchase the animal. Any animal which is not claimed by the owner or sold shall be painlessly disposed of and buried by the animal control officer. Whenever any licensed educational or scientific institution shall request, pursuant to state law, any impounded animal for research purposes, any such impounded animal remaining unclaimed for five days after impounding shall be surrendered to such institution. 
(Ord. No. 24-C, § 10, 7-12-76) 
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 598, § 1, adopted July 14, 2014, repealed div. 5 in its entirety. Former div. 5, §§ 5-76-5-85.2, was entitled "Dangerous and Potentially Dangerous Dogs", and derived from: Ord. No. 81, § 1, adopted Oct. 5, 1987; Ord. No. 350, § 7, adopted Nov. 24, 2003; and Ord. No. 518, § 1, adopted Jan. 10, 2011. 

Secs. 5-76-5-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HORSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-86. - Definitions. 
    In this article, "horse" includes horses, ponies, mini-horses, mules, burros, alpacas or llamas. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 2, 2-17-75; Ord. No. 241, § 1, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 621, § 2, 5-8-17) 
Sec. 5-87. - Running at large. 
(a)  No horse shall be permitted to run outside the confines of the stable area or enclosed real property of the person who maintains and stables the horse. Any person who maintains and stables horses within the city and who allows and permits a horse to escape from a confined area shall be liable for the charges to the city to recover the animal, which shall be at least $25.00. 
(b)  The escape of a horse necessitating recovery by agents or employees of the city shall automatically suspend the permit to keep horses within the city of the person who maintains and stables the horse until the stable inspector has re-inspected the premises for the keeping of horses and the owner has made payment for the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 9, 2-17-75; Ord. No. 241, § 2, 7-24-95) 
Sec. 5-88. - Existing stables. 
(a)  Persons maintaining or stabling horses as of April 24, 1975, shall comply with all provisions of this article except the requirements of sections 5-104, subsections (a)(1), (a)(2) and (a)(4). The previous sentence notwithstanding, it shall be unlawful for such persons or their heirs and assigns to: 
(1)  Enlarge, alter or increase the area of any horse housing enclosure not meeting the standards set forth in subsection 5-104(a)(4); or 
(2)  Increase the number of horses beyond the number of horses stabled on the subject premises as of April 25, 1975. 
Maintenance, necessary nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations of such housing enclosure shall nonetheless be permitted, provided that such maintenance, repairs or alterations do not extend, enlarge or intensity the housing enclosure. 
(b)  Any exemption under this section from the provisions of section 5-104, subsections (a)(1), (a)(2) and (a)(4) is void: 
(1)  Upon the subdivision, platting or replatting of the subject parcel of land for which a stable permit is required; or 
(2)  In the event that the use of the parcel of land for the maintaining and stabling of horses is discontinued for a continuous period of more than one year. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 10, 2-17-75; Ord. No. 241, § 3, 7-24-95) 
Sec. 5-89. - Cruel and inhumane treatment. 
(a)  Cruel and inhumane treatment of horses shall exist where a person fails to provide adequate care to horses. Adequate care includes but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Horses must be provided with food of sufficient quantity and quality to allow for normal growth or the maintenance of body weight. Feed standards shall be those recommended by the National Research Council. 
(2)  Horses must be provided with clean, potable water in sufficient quantity to satisfy the animal's needs or supplied by free choice. Snow or ice is not an adequate water source. 
(3)  Horses must be provided a minimum of free choice protection of a constructed shelter from direct rays of the sun when temperatures exceed 95 degrees Fahrenheit, from wind and from freezing precipitation for all horses. Constructed shelters must be a minimum of 240 square feet for the first two horses and 60 square feet for each additional horse. Four mini-horses or alpacas are equivalent to one horse. Each additional mini-horse or alpaca in excess of four mini-horses or alpacas would require a minimum of 15 square feet of additional shelter area. Constructed shelters must be structurally sound, free of injurious matter, maintained in good repair, and ventilated. 
(4)  Constructed shelters except for tie stalls must provide space for the animal to roll with a minimum danger of being cast. Stalls must be cleaned and kept dry to the extent the animal is not required to lie or stand in fluids. Bedding must be provided in all stalls, kept reasonably clean, and periodically changed. The nature of the bedding must not pose a health hazard to the animal. 
(5)  Horses must be provided opportunity for periodic exercise, either through free choice or through a forced work program, unless exercise is restricted by a licensed veterinarian. 
(6)  All horses must have their hooves properly trimmed periodically to prevent lameness. 
(7)  A vehicle used to transport a horse must have a floor capable of supporting the animal's weight safely. Floors must be of nonskid construction or of nonskid material sufficient to provide the animal with traction while in transport. A minimum of 12 inches must be allowed between the withers of the largest horse and the structure above the animal while it is in a natural standing position. Sturdy partitions must be provided at a minimum of approximately every ten feet inside the vehicle. Interior compartments of transporting vehicles must be of smooth construction with no protruding of [or] sharp objects and must provide ventilation. Food and water must be provided in sufficient quantities to minimize stress and maintain hydration. 
(b)  No person shall treat a horse in a cruel or inhumane manner. 
(Ord. No. 241, § 4, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 621, § 3, 5-8-17) 
Secs. 5-90-5-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STABLE PERMITS 

Sec. 5-101. - Required. 
    No person shall maintain or stable horses in the city without a permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 2, 2-17-75) 
Sec. 5-102. - Application. 
    Application for the permit required by this division shall be made to the city upon a form furnished by the city. A nonrefundable application fee shall be as established in chapter 4 of this Code and shall be paid to the city when the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 56, §§ 2, 3, 2-17-75; Ord. No. 637, § 8, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 5-103. - Inspection of premises. 
    The stable inspector shall inspect the premises of those seeking a stable permit and shall approve an application that is in compliance with this chapter or disapprove applications that are not in compliance with this chapter for permits under this division. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 4, 2-17-75; Ord. No. 241, § 5, 7-24-95) 
Sec. 5-104. - Conditions required for issuance. 
    A stable permit shall be issued by the city clerk upon approval by the stable inspector if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Minimum pasture acreage for horses shall be determined as follows: 
a.  Grassed pasture two acres per horse. Mini-horses and alpacas may reduce the required grassed pasture to one-quarter acre per mini-horse or alpaca. A grassed pasture provides sufficient and suitable vegetation for the feeding of a horse during the growing season. 
b.  Dry lot 400 square feet of pasture per horse. Mini-horses and alpacas may be reduced to 200 square feet of dry lot per mini-horse or alpaca. A "dry lot" does not provide sufficient and suitable vegetation for the feeding of a horse. 
The applicant shall specify on the permit what acreage of pasture is grassed and what acreage is dry lot. 
(2)  No stable permit shall be issued for a lot of less than one acre, or a lot with less than 120 square feet of free access shelter. 
(3)  Pasture area shall be enclosed by a sturdy wood, metal, or electrical fence which will keep the animal or animals confined within. 
(4)  All shelters and stabling facilities must be setback at least 100 feet from any structure used for residential purposes, excepting those owned by the applicant. 
(5)  The shelter or stabling facility shall be so located so as not to create a public nuisance. 
(6)  The shelter or stabling facility shall be clean and sanitary. Excessive feces, urine, mud or other waste products must not accumulate within the housing enclosures or to the extent that these cause unhealthy conditions. 
(7)  Keeping, storing, stabling, or maintenance of horses shall not directly contribute to the pollution of any public body of water. 
(8)  Accumulations of manure shall be located at least 100 feet from any well. 
(9)  All accumulations of manure shall be removed at such periods as will ensure that no leaching or objectionable odors exist, and the premises shall not be allowed to become unsightly. 
(10)  The shelter structure shall be a minimum of 200 feet from any wetland. 
(Ord. No. 56, §§ 5, 11, 2-17-75; Ord. No. 241, § 6, 7-24-95; Ord. 350, § 8, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 621, § 4, 5-8-17) 
Sec. 5-105. - Annual registration. 
(a)  The holder of a stable permit shall register annually with the city by completing and submitting an application form as provided in section 5-102, based on the current status of the stable under permit, by June 1 of each year. Upon filing the application form, the holder shall pay to the city a nonrefundable inspection fee in the amount established by resolution. 
(b)  Failure to annually register with the city as required will result in automatic cancellation of the stable permit. The holder of a canceled stable permit shall be required to make application for a new stable permit; the subject premises shall be inspected as provided by section 5-103; and in no event shall the city issue a new stable permit to the holder except upon approval by the stable inspector. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 6, 2-17-75; Ord. No. 241, § 7, 7-24-95) 
Sec. 5-106. - Revocation. 
    A permit issued pursuant to this division may be revoked by the stable inspector if it is determined, after investigation by the stable inspector or a designated employee and after holding a hearing thereon, proceeded by notice of the hearing to be given to the holder of the permit mailed to the address shown on the application or most recent annual registration statement at least ten days prior to the hearing, that: 
(1)  The permit holder has not maintained the standards set forth in section 5-104; 
(2)  The winter accumulation of manure is not removed from the stabling area prior to May 1 of each year or as soon as is practicable thereafter; 
(3)  The permit holder failed to make a reasonable effort to keep the horse, or horses, under control and contained within the applicant's stabling area; 
(4)  The permit holder has treated a horse cruelly or inhumanely or has not furnished adequate care to a horse as set forth in section 5-89; 
(5)  The horses are kept, stabled, boarded, or harbored in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance; or 
(6)  The accumulation of manure presents a hazard to public health. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 7, 2-17-75; Ord. No. 241, § 8, 7-24-95) 
Sec. 5-107. - Pre-existing uses. 
    Properties with a valid stable permit as of May 8, 2017 may continue renew their stable permit in the following situations: 
(1)  Non-conforming uses: The applicant may apply for a stable permit for up to the number of horses allowed by a previous permit, subject to the requirements of sections 20-71 to 20-91. 
(2)  Interim use permit: Interim use permits for stables shall not be revoked by a change in zoning. Holders of interim use permits may continue to apply for and receive stable permits under the terms of their interim use permit. 
(3)  Conditional use permit: Holders of conditional use permits may continue to apply for and receive stable permits under the terms of their conditional use permits. 
    In any case where a property owner wishes to increase the number of horses housed on the property beyond what was allowed by a previous permit, they must meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 5, 5-8-17) 
Secs. 5-108-5-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HONEY BEES 

Sec. 5-120. - Definitions. 
    In this article, the following terms have the stated meanings: 
    "Apiary" means the assembly of one or more colonies of bees at a single location. 
    "Beekeeper" means a person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of bees. 
    "Beekeeping equipment" means anything used in the operation of an apiary, such as hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors. 
    "Colony" means an aggregate of bees consisting principally of workers, but having, when perfect, one queen and at times drones, brood, combs, and honey. 
    "Hive" means the receptacle inhabited by a colony that is manufactured for that purpose. 
    "Honey bee" means all life stages of the common domestic honey bee, apis mellifera species. 
    "Lot" means a contiguous parcel of land under common ownership. 
    "Undeveloped property" means any idle land that is not improved or actually in the process of being improved with residential, commercial, industrial, church, park, school or governmental facilities or other structures or improvements intended for human use or occupancy and the grounds maintained in associations therewith. The term shall be deemed to include property developed exclusively as a street or highway or property used for commercial agricultural purposes. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 2, 6-25-18) 
Sec. 5-121. - Purpose of ordinance. 
    The purpose of the ordinance from which this article derives is to establish certain requirements for beekeeping within the city, to avoid issues which might otherwise be associated with beekeeping in populated areas. 
(1)  Compliance with this article shall not be a defense to a proceeding alleging that a given colony constitutes a nuisance, but such compliance may be offered as evidence of the beekeeper's efforts to abate any proven nuisance. 
(2)  Compliance with this article shall not be a defense to a proceeding alleging that a given colony violates applicable ordinances regarding public health, but such compliance may be offered as evidence of the beekeeper's compliance with acceptable standards of practice among hobby beekeepers in the State of Minnesota. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 2, 6-25-18) 
Sec. 5-122. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall maintain or keep honey bees without a permit issued by the city. 
(b)  Application for the permit required by this article shall be made to the city upon a form furnished by the city. A nonrefundable fee in the amount established by resolutions shall be paid to the city when the application if filed. 
(c)  In order to be issued a permit the applicant must: 
(1)  Provide proof of having successfully completed 16 hours of training in beekeeping through the University of Minnesota, or similarly reputable organization. 
(2)  Have a lot of one-third acre or larger. 
(3)  Submit a notarized statement to city stating that they have informed all adjoining neighbors that they intend to keep honey bees. 
(4)  Not have had a prior beekeeping permit revoked by the City of Chanhassen. 
(5)  Meet the colony density and setback requirements listed in section 5-123. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 2, 6-25-18) 
Sec. 5-123. - Colony density and setbacks. 
(a)  No person is permitted to keep more than the following numbers of colonies on any lot within the city, based upon the size of the apiary lot: 
(1)  Lots one-third acre or larger but smaller than one acre: Two colonies. 
(2)  Lots one acre or larger but smaller than 21/2 acres: Four colonies. 
(3)  Lots 21/2 acres or larger but smaller than ten acres: Eight colonies. 
(4)  Lots larger than ten acres: No limit. 
(b)  Colonies must be located in the rear yard and must be setback from the property lines a minimum of 25 feet. 
(1)  On lots with multiple street frontages, colonies may not be located in any yard with street frontage. 
(2)  On lots directly adjacent to undeveloped property colonies may be setback a minimum of ten feet from lot lines dividing the property from the undeveloped property. The colonies must still be setback a minimum of 25 feet from any lot line dividing the property from any parcel that is not undeveloped property. If the undeveloped property is later improved so as to no longer meet the definition of undeveloped property, the colonies' location shall not be considered vested and it must be removed or relocated to comply with the 25-foot minimum setback. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 2, 6-25-18) 
Sec. 5-124. - Standards of practice. 
    The following standards of practice apply to all properties in the city: 
(1)  Beekeepers must select queens from European stock bred for gentleness and non-swarming characteristics. 
(2)  Honey bee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames, which must be kept in sound and usable conditions. 
(3)  Each beekeeper must ensure that a convenient source of water is available within ten feet of each colony at all times that the colonies remain active outside the hive. 
(4)  Each beekeeper must ensure that no wax comb or other material that might encourage robbing by other bees that are left upon the grounds of the apiary lot. Such materials once removed from the site shall be handled and stored in sealed containers, or placed within a building or other vermin-proof container. 
(5)  Each beekeeper shall maintain their beekeeping equipment in good condition, including keeping the hives painted if they have been painted but are peeling or flaking, and securing unused equipment from weather, potential theft or vandalism and occupancy by swarms. 
(6)  Honey bee colonies may not be kept on a lot with a multi-tenant building. 
(7)  Beekeepers in districts zoned for residential use are allowed to sell honey as a home occupation in accordance with chapter 20, article XXIII, division 3, sections 20-976 through 20-1000, with the understanding that the apiary and hives shall not be considered to violate section 20-979. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 2, 6-25-18) 
Sec. 5-125. - Revocation of permit. 
    A beekeeping permit issued under this article may be revoked by the community development director if it is determined after an inspection by city staff that the permit holder has not maintained the standards set forth in section 5-124 or that bees are being kept in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 2, 6-25-18) 
Secs. 5-126-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CHICKENS 

Sec. 5-130. - Definitions. 
    In this article, the following terms have the stated meanings: 
    "Chicken or domesticated chicken" means a subspecies of the species Gallus domesticus. 
    "Coop" means the structure for the keeping or housing of chickens. 
    "Hen" means a female chicken. 
    "Rooster" means a male chicken. 
    "Run" means an enclosed and covered area attached to the coop where the chickens can roam unsupervised. 
(Ord. No. 639, § 2, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 5-131. - Purpose of ordinance. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards for the keeping of domesticated chickens. This article enables residents to keep chickens on a non-commercial basis as an accessory use to a residence, while limiting the adverse effects of the activity on surrounding properties. Such adverse effects can include noise, odors, unsanitary conditions, attraction of predators, chickens running at large, unsightly conditions, and similar adverse conditions. 
(Ord. No. 639, § 2, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 5-132. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall maintain or keep domesticated chickens without a permit issued by the city. Properties exceeding ten acres where agriculture is a permitted use are exempt from the permit requirements of this article. 
(b)  Application for a permit required by article shall be made to the city upon a form furnished by the city. A nonrefundable fee in the amount established by ordinance shall be paid to the city when the application if filed. 
(c)  In order to be issued a permit the applicant must: 
(1)  Have a lot one acre or larger. 
(2)  Have as the principal use of the property a single-family residential structure. 
(3)  Submit a notarized statement to the city stating that they have informed all adjoining neighbors that they intend to keep chickens. 
(4)  Not have had a prior chicken permit revoked by the City of Chanhassen. 
(5)  Meet the density and setback requirements listed in section 5-133. 
(Ord. No. 639, § 2, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 5-133. - Density and setbacks. 
(a)  No person is permitted to keep more than the following numbers of chickens on any lot within the city, based upon the size of the parcel: 
(1)  Lots one acre or larger but smaller than 21/2 acres: Eight chickens. 
(2)  Lots 21/2 acres or larger but smaller than ten acres: 16 chickens. 
(3)  Lots larger than ten acres: No limit. 
(b)  The coop and attached run must be located in the rear yard and must be set back a minimum of 25 feet from all adjacent residences that are not occupied by the applicant, and be set back a minimum of ten feet from any lot line. 
(1)  On corner lots, coops and runs may not be located in any yard with street frontage. 
(2)  On double frontage lots, coops and runs may not be located in any required front yard. 
(Ord. No. 639, § 2, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 5-134. - Standards of practice. 
    The following standards of practice apply to all properties governed by this article: 
(1)  No roosters or crowing hens are allowed. 
(2)  No outdoor butchering of chickens is allowed. 
(3)  Chickens must be kept in a coop or run whenever they are unsupervised; however when supervised they are allowed in a fenced area. 
(4)  The coop must: 
a.  Be maintained in good condition. 
b.  Be enclosed and constructed of durable materials to prevent entry by predators or the escape of chickens. 
c.  Be built to protect the chickens from extreme heat or cold. 
d.  Provide at least four square feet per chicken. 
(5)  The run must: 
a.  Be maintained in good condition. 
b.  Be attached to the coop. 
c.  Be enclosed and constructed of durable materials to prevent entry by predators or the escape of chickens. 
d.  Provide at least four square feet per chicken. 
(6)  The chicken's living area must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(7)  Odor shall not be perceptible at the lot line. 
(8)  All stored manure shall be placed within a fully enclosed container. All manure not used for composting or fertilizing shall be removed weekly. The coop and run must be kept free from trash and accumulated manure. 
(9)  Feed must be stored in a rodent-proof container inside of a structure. 
(10)  No person may keep any chickens inside a house. 
(Ord. No. 639, § 2, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 5-135. - Revocation of permit. 
    A chicken permit issued under this article may be revoked by the community development director if it is determined after an inspection by city staff that the permit holder has not maintained the standards set forth in section 5-134 or that chickens are being kept in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 639, § 2, 3-11-19) 
Secs. 5-136-5-160. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - BOATS AND WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Parking of boat trailers on South Shore Drive, South Shore Court and Hill Street restricted, § 12-17; parks and recreation, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Local water and watercraft regulations authorized, M.S. § 86B.201. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 356, § 1, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, repealed § 6-1, which pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. 73, §§ 2.01, 2.03-2.12, 2.14, 2.16-2.19, 2.21-2.28, adopted July 11, 1983; and Ord. No. 184, § 1, adopted Apr. 26, 1993. See § 1-2 for definitions. 
Sec. 6-2. - Exemption for law enforcement personnel. 
    Watercraft used by resource management, emergency and enforcement personnel, when acting in the performance of their assigned duties, are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 13, 7-11-83) 
Sec. 6-3. - Temporary event permits. 
    A temporary exemption from this chapter may be obtained through a permit issued for special events, trials and races as provided for in section 20-964. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 14, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 628, § 2, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 6-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 628, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 2017, deleted § 6-4 entitled "Permits for water obstacles," which derived from Ord. No. 73, § 6, adopted July 11, 1983. 
Secs. 6-5-6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 483, § 1, adopted Aug. 10, 2009, deleted art. II, §§ 6-21-6-30, entitled "Structures", and derived from Ord. No. 73, §§ 3.01-3.13, 8, 9, adopted July 11, 1983; Ord. No. 109, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 29, 1989; Ord. No. 160, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 10, 1992; Ord. No. 171, § 1, adopted May 18, 1992; Ord. No. 184, § 2, adopted Apr. 26, 1993; and Ord. No. 356, §§ 2-4, adopted Dec. 8, 2003. See § 20-920 for similar provisions. 

Secs. 6-21-6-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATERCRAFT OPERATING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-46. - State law incorporated. 
    The provisions of M.S. ch. 86B, and the rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources promulgated thereunder are hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 5.01, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 356, § 5, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 6-47. - Towing airborne vehicles. 
    No person shall tow any airborne vehicle with a watercraft. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 5.02, 7-11-83) 
Sec. 6-48. - Operation near shoreline. 
    Operation of motorized watercraft within 100 feet of any shoreline shall be limited to emerging straight out from and straight towards the shoreline, or slow-no wake operation. Operation of personal watercraft within 150 feet of any shoreline shall be limited to emerging straight out from and straight towards the shoreline, or slow-no wake operation. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 5.05, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 356, § 6, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 6-49. - Slow-no wake areas. 
(a)  No person shall operate a watercraft in any marked slow-no wake areas in excess of slow-no wake speed. Slow-no wake areas shall be marked in accordance with the applicable regulations of the state department of natural resources. The location and boundaries of each slow-no wake area established are shown on that certain map entitled Water Surface Use Zoning Map of Chanhassen dated July 11, 1983, on file in the city hall. The map and all notations, references and data thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this article and shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth and described herein. 
(b)  Emergency slow-no wake areas may be established by resolution of the city council and shall be marked in accordance with the appropriate regulations of the state department of natural resources and posted at all public accesses. 
(c)  Special slow-no wake restrictions. 
(1)  Lotus Lake: All persons shall operate watercraft at a slow-no wake speed on Lotus Lake whenever the water elevation exceeds the 100-year predicted level for Lotus Lake of 896.8 MSL as set forth in the 1994 Surface Water Management Plan. The slow-no wake surface zoning shall remain in place until the water drops below the 100-year predicted level of 896.8 MSL for three consecutive days. Upon the placement of a slow-no wake restriction, notice will be given: 
a.  On a sign posted at the public access. 
b.  On the City of Chanhassen web page. 
c.  On the City of Chanhassen Clean Water Hotline. 
d.  On the Community Cable Access Channel. 
e.  In an e-mail format to known representatives on Lotus Lake. 
f.  To the Carver County Sheriff's Department. 
g.  To the public by other appropriate means determined by council. 
(2)  Lake Susan: All persons shall operate watercraft at a slow-no wake speed on Lake Susan whenever the water elevation exceeds 882.5. The slow-no wake surface zoning will remain in place until the water level drops below 882.5 for 72 hours. Upon placement of a slow no-wake restriction notice will be given: 
a.  On a sign posted at the public access. 
b.  On the City of Chanhassen web page. 
c.  On the City of Chanhassen Clean Water Hotline. 
d.  On the Community Cable Access Channel. 
e.  In an e-mail format to known representatives on Lake Susan. 
f.  To the Carver County Sheriff's Department. 
g.  To the public by other appropriate means determined by council. 
(d)  Watercraft utilized by resource management, emergency and enforcement personnel, when acting in the performance of their assigned duties, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 5.06, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 356, § 7, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 418, § 1, 5-8-06; Ord. No. 419, § 1, 5-22-06) 
Sec. 6-50. - Speed. 
    No person shall operate a watercraft at a speed which exceeds the following limitations: 
(1)  All areas in lakes marked "slow-no wake"; 
(2)  Lake Ann: 15 miles per hour; 
(3)  Lake St. Joe: 15 miles per hour; 
(4)  Lotus Lake: 
a.  Sunrise to sunset, 40 miles per hour; 
b.  Sunset to sunrise the following day, 15 miles per hour; 
(5)  Lake Lucy: 
a.  Sunrise to sunset, 40 miles per hour; 
b.  Sunset to sunrise the following day, 15 miles per hour; 
(6)  Lake Minnewashta: 
a.  Sunrise to sunset, 40 miles per hour; 
b.  Sunset to sunrise the following day, 15 miles per hour; 
(7)  Lake Susan: 
a.  Sunrise to sunset, 40 miles per hour; 
b.  Sunset to sunrise the following day, 15 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 5.07, 7-11-83; Ord. 356, § 8, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 6-51. - Motors. 
    The operation of motorboats which are propelled by an internal combustion engine is prohibited upon Lake Ann. The operation of motorboats which are propelled by electric motors is permitted upon Lake Ann. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 5.08, 7-11-83) 
Sec. 6-52. - Direction of travel. 
    The operation of motorized watercraft at speeds in excess of 15 miles per hour in other than a counter-clockwise pattern of travel is prohibited upon Lotus Lake. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 5.09, 7-11-83) 
Sec. 6-53. - Towing person on water skis or other device. 
(a)  Observer or mirror required. A person may not operate a watercraft and tow a person on water skis, an aquaplane, a surfboard, a saucer, or a similar device unless: 
(1)  There is another person in the watercraft in addition to the operator who is in a position to continually observe the person being towed; or 
(2)  The boat is equipped with a mirror providing the operator a wide field of vision to the rear. 
(b)  Night skiing or towing prohibited. A person may not be towed or operate a watercraft towing a person on water skis, an aquaplane, a surfboard, a saucer, or another device from one hour after sunset to sunrise of the following day. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 5.10, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 401, § 1, 9-29-05) 
State Law reference- Towing person on water skis, M.S. § 86B.315. 
Sec. 6-54. - Tow ropes. 
    No person shall be towed on water skis, aquaplane, surfboard, saucer, or similar device, by a cable or other towing device longer than 85 feet. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 5.11, 7-11-83) 
Sec. 6-55. - Personal floatation devices. 
    No person shall be towed, or shall operate a watercraft towing a person on any such device unless the person being towed is wearing a United States Coast Guard approved type I, II, III or V personal floatation device. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 5.12, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 356, § 9, 12-8-03) 
State Law reference- Personal floatation devices, M.S. §§ 86B.313, 86B.501. 
Chapter 7 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Structures near bodies of water, § 6-21 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; planning and development, ch. 15; subdivisions, ch. 18; zoning, ch. 20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 7-1-7-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State building code, M.S. § 16B.59 et seq. 

Sec. 7-16. - Application, administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The application, administration, and enforcement of the building code shall be in accordance with Minnesota Rules Chapter 1300. 
(b)  The code enforcement agency of the City of Chanhassen is called the community development department, inspections division. 
(c)  This Code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified Building Official designated by the City of Chanhassen to administer the Code (M.S. § 16B.65, subd. 1). 
(d)  The building code board of appeals shall be as appointed by resolution of the city council (Minnesota Rules 1300.0230). 
(e)  A violation of the Code is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 23-B, §§ 1-3, 7, 2-23-81; Ord. No. 23-C, §§ 1-3, 5-16-83; Ord. No. 82, § 1, 10-5-87; Ord. No. 84, § 1, 3-14-88; Ord. No. 167, § 1, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 237, § 1, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 317, § 1, 4-23-01; Ord. No. 351, § 1, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-17. - Permits and fees. 
(a)  The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in M.S. § 16B.62, subd. 1. The fees to be paid to the city for building permits and inspections shall be as established in chapter 4 of this Code. 
(b)  An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whenever any work for which a permit is required by this Code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this Code. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this Code, nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(c)  A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each re-inspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. Re-inspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not readily available, approved plans are not readily available, failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the building official. The fee shall be as established in chapter 4 of this Code. 
(d)  Fee refunds may be authorized by the building official of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code. The building official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
(Ord. No. 23-B, § 4, 2-23-81; Ord. No. 167, §§ 2, 3, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 317, § 2, 4-23-01; Ord. No. 351, § 2, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-18. - Building code. 
(a)  The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to M.S. §§ 16B.59 to 16B.75, is hereby adopted as the building code for the City of Chanhassen. The code is hereby incorporated in this section as if fully set out herein. The ordinance codified in this section shall perpetually include the most current edition of the Minnesota State Building Code with the exception of the optional appendix chapters. Optional appendix chapters shall not apply unless specifically adopted. 
    The Minnesota State Building Code includes the following chapters of Minnesota Rules: 
(1)  1300-Administration of the Minnesota State Building Code; 
(2)  1301-Building Official Certification; 
(3)  1302-State Building Construction Approvals; 
(4)  1303-Minnesota Provisions; 
(5)  1305-Adoption of the 2006 International Building Code; 
(6)  1307-Elevators and Related Devices; 
(7)  1309-Adoption of the 2006 International Residential Code; 
(8)  1311-Adoption of the 2000 Guidelines for the Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings; 
(9)  1315-Adoption of the 2005 National Electrical Code; 
(10)  1325-Solar Energy Systems; 
(11)  1330-Fallout Shelters; 
(12)  1335-Floodproofing Regulations; 
(13)  1341-Minnesota Accessibility Code; 
(14)  1346-Adoption of the Minnesota State Mechanical Code; 
(15)  1350-Manufactured Homes; 
(16)  1360-Prefabricated Structures; 
(17)  1361-Industrial/Modular Buildings; 
(18)  1370-Storm Shelters (Manufactured Home Parks); 
(19)  4715-Minnesota Plumbing Code; 
(20)  7670, 7672, 7674, 7676, and 7678, Minnesota Energy Code. 
(b)  The City of Chanhassen adopts for reference the following optional chapter of the Minnesota State Building Code: Minnesota Rules Chapter 1306 - Special Fire Protection Systems, including 1306.0020 Subp. 2 and 1306.0030. 
    Optional Administration: Minnesota Rules Chapter 1335, Floodproofing Regulations, Parts 1335.0600 to 1335.1200 are adopted. 
(Ord. No. 23-B, § 5, 2-23-81; Ord. No. 84, § 2, 3-14-88; Ord. No. 167, § 4, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 351, § 3, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 454, §§ 1, 2, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 611, § 2, 12-14-15; Ord. No. 613, § 1, 3-14-16) 
Sec. 7-19. - Plans and specifications. 
    The building official may require that plans and specifications, required by the Minnesota State Building Code, include a survey of the lot upon which the proposed building or construction is to be done, prepared and attested by a registered surveyor. An original signature is required on the certificate of survey. The survey shall provide the following information unless otherwise approved by the administrative authority: 
(1)  Scale of drawing and north arrow; 
(2)  Legal description of property; 
(3)  Dimensions and bearing of front, rear and side property lines; 
(4)  Front, rear and side yard setback dimensions of all proposed structures; 
(5)  Location of all existing structures on the property, boulevards, streets and right-of-way, including but not limited to, sanitary and storm manholes, hydrants, catch basins, power poles, phone boxes, fences and any encroachments; 
(6)  Outside dimensions of proposed structure(s) including decks, porches, retaining walls (include elevations at bottom of footing and top of wall), stoops, stairs, cantilevers, fireplaces, bay and bow windows, egress window wells; 
(7)  Location of a benchmark stake established by the surveyor at the front setback line within 20 feet of the proposed structure. Maintenance of the benchmark stake once established by the surveyor shall be the responsibility of the permit applicant; 
(8)  Location of stakes established by the surveyor on side property lines at: 
a.  Front setback line. 
b.  Front building line. 
c.  Rear building line. 
The maintenance of these stakes once established by the surveyor shall be the responsibility of the permit applicant. 
(9)  Location of first floor elevation of buildings on adjacent lots. Vacant adjacent lots shall be labeled as such; 
(10)  Location of all easements of record, including but not limited to, tree preservation, wetland conservation, cross-access, etc.; 
(11)  Existing and proposed elevations at the following locations: 
a.  Each lot corner. 
b.  Top of curb or centerline of roadway at each lot line extension. 
c.  Center of proposed driveway at curb. 
d.  Grade at corners of proposed structure. 
e.  Lowest floor level, top of block, garage slab. 
(12)  Indication of direction of surface water drainage by arrows; 
(13)  Tree removal, tree preservation and grading plan if required by the development contract; 
(14)  Wetland boundaries with ordinary high water level and 100-year flood elevation if applicable; 
(15)  Driveway grade (minimum-0.50 percent, maximum-ten percent); 
(16)  All trees in excess of six inches in diameter (diameter measured at four feet above grade); 
(17)  All custom-graded lots and lots deviating from the approved grading plan shall require an as-built survey submitted to the city prior to issuing a certificate of occupancy; 
(18)  Wetland buffer areas and wetland or lake setback dimensions; 
(19)  Other information as required by the city; 
(20)  Location and type of erosion and sediment control measures to be installed by permit holder; 
(21)  Calculation of the amount and percentage of the lot coverage for the lot or parcel broken out by impervious surfaces and pervious pavement, if present. 
(Ord. No. 23-B, § 6.01, 2-23-81; Ord. No. 167, § 5, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 317, § 3, 4-23-01; Ord. No. 324, § 2, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 351, § 4, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 441, § 1, 2-12-07; Ord. No. 628, §§ 3, 4, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 633, § 1, 6-25-18) 
Cross reference- Report of enlargement of establishment selling non-intoxicating malt liquor at time of application for building permit, § 10-36; report of alteration to alcoholic beverage establishment to be made at time of application for building permit, § 10-87. 
Sec. 7-20. - Denial of permit. 
    The building official shall deny a permit for construction or enlargement of a dwelling on ground which is too low for adequate drainage of surface waters. He shall also deny a permit for construction or enlargement of any building when it appears that the proposed elevations of the lot for which the permit is to be issued, in relation to the established or proposed grades of adjoining or nearby streets, will probably cause a change in the existing drainage of surface waters which will result in substantial hazard or inconvenience to persons residing in the city or traveling on its roadways. 
(Ord. No. 23-B, § 6.02, 2-23-81; Ord. No. 324, § 3, 7-9-01) 
Sec. 7-21. - As-built grading survey. 
    Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, an as-built grading survey is required. An as-built grading survey is defined as a lot survey showing the elevations of the lot after construction of the building structure and prior to sodding the lot. In lieu of an as-built grading survey, the building official may issue a certificate of occupancy provided that a $1,500.00 escrow fee has been submitted. The escrow fee shall be returned to the permit applicant, without interest, upon successful completion and submission to the city of all of the following: 
(1)  An as-built grading survey, signed by a licensed engineer or land surveyor and certified that the grades and elevations are in conformance with the city-approved grading plan and that permanent iron monuments are in place at each lot corner. 
(2)  City staff review of the submitted as-built grading survey to assure that all final grades match the approved grading plan for the development, to within a tolerance of 0.2 feet. 
(Ord. No. 325, § 1, 8-13-01) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 317, § 4, adopted Apr. 23, 2001, repealed former § 7-21 which pertained to certificate of occupancy. Subsequently, Ord. No. 325, § 1, adopted Aug. 31, 2001, added provisions designated as a new § 7-21 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 7-22. - Grading and erosion control. 
(a)  A satisfactory erosion and sediment control plan and grading plan consistent with the city's surface water management plan and chapter 19 section 19-145 of Chanhassen City Code must be approved by the city engineer or designee, before a building permit is issued for construction, if the construction will require an erosion and sediment control plan under section 19-145. 
(b)  Every effort shall be made during the building permit application process to determine the full extent of erosion control required. However, the city engineer may require additional controls to correct specific site related problems as normal inspections are performed. 
(c)  All construction activity that results in disturbance of the ground shall comply with the city's surface water management plan and section 19-145 of the Chanhassen City Code. 
(Ord. No. 176, § 1, 10-12-92; Ord. No. 351, § 5, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 406, § 1, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 441, § 2, 2-12-07; Ord. No. 524, § 1, 6-27-11) 
Sec. 7-23. - Elevations. 
    Elevations shall be in accordance with grading or development plans previously approved by the city, if any. All elevations shall correspond to sea level datum of 1929. Benchmark elevations may be available from the city's engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 237, § 5, 4-10-95) 
Sec. 7-24. - Landscaping security. 
(a)  If the lot on which a certificate of occupancy for a single-family dwelling is requested, it is subject to landscaping requirements set forth in the development contract with the city. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the landscaping has been completed or unless a $750.00 fee, or such other amount as determined by the city's community development director, cash escrow or letter of credit is furnished to the city guaranteeing completion within 60 days, weather permitting. If the landscaping requirements are not met within one year of the completion deadline, the money shall be forfeited and deposited into the city's tree planting fund. 
(b)  The city may use the escrow to reimburse the city for any labor or material costs it incurs in securing compliance with the landscaping requirements. If the city draws on the escrowed funds, no additional permits shall be issued for the lot until the pre-draw escrow balance has been restored. The city shall endeavor to give notice to the owner or developer before proceeding, but such notice shall not be required in an emergency as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 6, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 457, § 1, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 470, § 1, 8-25-08) 
Secs. 7-25, 7-26. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-27. - Building demolition. 
(a)  A demolition permit is required for the demolition of structures in the city. 
(b)  Hazardous material assessment and hazardous material abatement documentation shall be submitted to the city as required by the building official. 
(c)  Compliance with other utility or regulatory agencies (electric utility, gas utility, MPCA, watershed, etc.) is required. Approvals or other documentation required by such agencies shall be submitted to the city as required by the building official. 
(d)  All debris (demolished construction material) shall be removed from the site. Any resulting excavation shall be backfilled with soil free of debris or contaminants. 
(e)  Grading, erosion control and groundcover, pursuant to section 7-22 of this chapter, may be required. 
(f)  Demolition projects with a value exceeding $5,000.00, or within ten feet of a structure or property line may require security in the form of cash escrow or letter of credit to ensure timely and complete demolition and restoration of the site. 
(g)  A site plan or survey of the site indicating the structure(s) to be removed, pursuant to section 7-19 of this chapter, may be required. 
(Ord. No. 429, § 1, 9-25-06) 
Secs. 7-28, 7-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATING, MINING, FILLING AND GRADING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning generally, ch. 20; landscaping and tree removal, § 20-1176 et seq.; mineral extraction, § 20-1351. 

Sec. 7-30. - Purposes and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the community and to establish reasonable uniform limitations, standards, safeguards and controls for excavating, mining, filling and grading within the city. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90; Ord. No. 351, § 7, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Earth work or work the earth: Excavating, mining, filling or grading. 
    Excavating; or mining: 
(1)  The removal of the natural surface of the earth, whether sod, dirt, soil, sand, gravel, stone, or other matter, creating a depression. 
(2)  Any area where the topsoil or overburden has been removed for the purpose of removing earthly deposits or minerals. 
(3)  Any area that is being used for stockpiling, storage and processing of sand, gravel, black dirt, clay and other minerals. 
    Filling or grading: To change the contour of the land. 
    Overburden: Those materials which lie between the surface of the earth and material deposit to be extracted. 
    Restoration: To renew land to self-sustaining, long-term use which is compatible with contiguous land uses, present and future, in accordance with the standards set forth in this article. 
    Topsoil: That portion of the overburden which lies closest to the earth's surface and supports the growth of vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90) 
Sec. 7-32. - Permit required. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for anyone to work the earth without having first obtained a written permit from the city authorizing the same in accordance with this article. Active earth work operations that predate this article that do not have a permit shall cease operations or obtain an earth work permit within six months after the adoption of this article. Current permit holders shall come into compliance with the terms of this article no later than the renewal date of such permit holder's earth work permit. Excavating, mining, filling and grading permits for more than 50 cubic yards, but less than 1,000 cubic yards of material in a 12-month period may be processed administratively. Excavating, mining, filling, and grading of 1,000 cubic yards of material or more in a 12-month period shall be processed in the same manner as an interim use permit. Violations of any written permit condition shall constitute a misdemeanor violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90; Ord. No. 351, § 8, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-33. - Exemptions from permit requirements. 
    The following activities do not require an earth work permit: 
(1)  Excavation for a foundation, cellar, or basement of a building if a building permit has been issued. 
(2)  Grading a lot in conjunction with building if a building permit has been issued. 
(3)  Excavation by the federal, state, county, city, or other government agencies in connection with construction or maintenance of streets, highways or utilities. 
(4)  Curb cuts, utility hookups, or roadway openings for which another permit has been issued by the city. 
(5)  Excavating, mining, filling or grading of less than 50 cubic yards or excavating, mining, filling or grading of less than 5,000 square feet of area in a calendar year. 
(6)  Plowing and tilling for agricultural purposes. 
(7)  Earth work in accordance with a development contract approved under the city's subdivision ordinance. If the development contract requires that a letter of credit or other security be posted, the letter of credit or other security must be posted before any excavation takes place. 
(8)  Earth work in accordance with an approved site plan review, conditional use permit, interim use permit or wetland alteration permit. If the approved site plan review, conditional use permit, interim use permit or wetland alteration permit requires that a letter of credit or other security be posted, the letter of credit or other security must be posted before any excavation takes place. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90; Ord. No. 324, § 4, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 351, §§ 9, 10, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-34. - Exempt earth work. 
    Earth work that is exempt from obtaining a permit pursuant to section 7-33 shall: 
(1)  Comply with the city's erosion control standards. 
(2)  Maintain natural or existing drainage patterns. 
(3)  Comply with the city's other ordinance requirements including tree preservation and wetland protection. 
(4)  Obtain all applicable permits as required and work within the requirements of the permits. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90; Ord. No. 441, § 3, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 7-35. - Applications for earth work permits. 
(a)  An application for an earth work permit shall be processed in accordance with the same procedures specified in the City Code relating to interim use permits except that earth work of more than 50 cubic yards of material but less than 1,000 cubic yards of material in a 12-month period may be approved administratively. 
(b)  An application for a permit shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the operator and owner of the land, together with proof of ownership. If the operator and owner are different, both must sign the application. 
(2)  The correct legal description of the property where the activity is proposed to occur. 
(3)  A certified abstract listing the names of all landowners owning property within 500 feet of the boundary of the property described above. 
(4)  Specifications of the following, using appropriate maps, photographs and surveys: 
a.  Proposed grading plan. 
b.  Proposed stockpile sites. 
c.  The physical relationship of the proposed designated site to the community and existing development. 
d.  Site topography and natural features including location of watercourses and waterbodies. 
e.  The description and quantity of material to be excavated. 
f.  The depth of water tables throughout the area. 
g.  The location and depth of wells and buried garbage, water and fill. 
(5)  The purpose of the operation. 
(6)  The estimated time required to complete the operation. 
(7)  Hours and months of operation. 
(8)  A tree survey indicating the location and type of all trees over six inches in caliper. In a heavily wooded area only the boundaries of the tree areas must be indicated on the survey. 
(9)  An end use landscape plan and interim screening plan for the operation period. 
(10)  The plan of operation, including processing, nature of the processing and equipment, location of the plant source of water, disposal of water and reuse of water. 
(11)  Travel routes to and from the site and the number and type of trucks that will be used. 
(12)  Plans for drainage, erosion and sediment control and dust control. 
(13)  A restoration plan providing for the orderly and continuing restoration of all disturbed land to a condition equal to or better than that which existed prior to the earth work. Such plan shall illustrate, using photographs, maps and surveys where appropriate, the following: 
a.  The contour of the land prior to excavation and proposed contours after completion of excavation and after completion of restoration. 
b.  Those areas of the site to be used for storage of topsoil and overburden. 
c.  A schedule setting forth the timetable for excavation of land lying within the extraction facility. 
d.  The grade of all slopes after restoration, based upon proposed land uses, and description of the type and quantity of plantings where revegetation is to be conducted. 
e.  The criteria and standards to be used to achieve final restoration as well as intermittent stabilization. 
(14)  A statement identifying the applicant's program to insure compliance with the permit conditions, method of response to complaints and resolving conflicts that may arise as a result of complaints. 
(15)  Unless exempt under Minnesota Rules, an environmental assessment worksheet, if required by the city. 
(16)  A wetland alteration permit, if required by the City Code, which shall be processed concurrently with the excavation permit application. 
(17)  Other information required by the city. 
(c)  Applicants for earth work permits involving less than 1,000 cubic yards of material must only furnish the information specified in subsections (b)(1), (2), (4)a., (5), (6), (7), (8), (12), (13), (16) and (17). 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90; Ord. No. 441, § 4, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 7-36. - Processing of earth work permit applications. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the city council shall review the earth work permit application and shall approve the permit if it is in compliance with this article, the city's zoning ordinance, and other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(b)  A permit may be approved subject to conditions necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements and purpose of this article. When such conditions are established, they shall be set forth specifically in the permit. Conditions may, among other matters, limit the size, kind or character of the proposed operation, require the construction of structures, require the staging of extraction over a time period and require the alteration of the site design to ensure compliance with the standards in this article. 
(c)  Earth work of more than 50 but less than 1,000 cubic yards of material in a 12-month period may be approved by the city staff. The applicant shall submit the fee required by section 7-39 of this Code. Upon receipt of a completed application, the city staff shall review the application within ten working days and shall notify the applicant of the decision by mail. The city staff may impose such conditions as may be necessary to protect the public interest. Bonding may be required in an amount sufficient to ensure site restoration should the applicant default. Any applicant aggrieved by a decision may appeal the determination to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90) 
Sec. 7-37. - Termination of permit. 
(a)  An earth work permit may be terminated for violation of this article or any condition of such permit. No earth work permit may be terminated until the city council has held a public hearing to determine whether such permit shall be terminated, at which time the operator shall be afforded an opportunity to contest the termination. The city council may establish certain conditions, which if not complied with, will result in immediate suspension of operations until the public hearing to consider termination of the permit can be held. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to conduct earth work after a permit has been terminated. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90) 
Sec. 7-38. - Annual permits. 
(a)  Earth work permits shall be renewed annually. The purpose of the annual permit is to monitor compliance with the conditions of approval. The city engineer, after consultation with appropriate city staff, may issue renewal permits upon satisfactory proof of compliance with the issued permit and this article. If the city engineer denies a renewal permit, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days after the city engineer denies the permit. 
(b)  Request for renewal of an earth work permit shall be made 60 days prior to the expiration date. If application or renewal is not made within the required time, all operations shall be terminated, and reinstatement of the permit may be granted only upon compliance with the procedures set forth in this article for an original permit. 
(c)  An earth work permit which is limited in duration cannot be extended by the city engineer. Extensions must be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90) 
Sec. 7-39. - Issuance of permit imposes no liability on city, relieves permittee of no responsibilities. 
    Neither the issuance of a permit under this article, nor compliance with the conditions thereof with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit under this article serve to impose any liability on the city, its officers or employees for any injury or damage to persons or property. A permit issued pursuant to this article does not relieve the permittee of the responsibility of securing and complying with any other permit which may be required by any other law, ordinance or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90) 
Sec. 7-40. - Fees. 
    A schedule of fees shall be determined by resolution of the city council, which may, from time to time, change such schedule. Prior to the issuance or renewal of any permit, such fees shall be paid to the city and deposited in the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90) 
Sec. 7-41. - Agreement; irrevocable letter of credit. 
    Prior to the issuance of an earth work permit, there shall be executed by the operator and landowner and submitted to the city an agreement to construct such required improvements and to comply with such conditions of approval as may have been established by the city council. The agreement shall run with the land and be recorded against the title to the property. The agreement shall be accompanied by a letter of credit acceptable to the city in the amount of the costs of complying with the agreement as determined by the city council. The adequacy of the letter of credit shall be reviewed annually by the city. The city engineer may direct the amount of the letter of credit be increased to reflect inflation or changed conditions. The city may draw against the letter of credit for noncompliance with the agreement and shall use the proceeds to cure any default. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90) 
Sec. 7-42. - Setbacks. 
    Mining for the purpose of selling sand, gravel, black dirt, clay, and other minerals shall not be conducted within: 
(1)  100 feet of an existing street or highway. 
(2)  30 feet of an easement for an existing public utility. 
(3)  300 feet of the boundary of an adjoining property not in mining use except that aggregate processing that creates objectionable noise and dust, including, but not limited to, crushing, must be set back 1,500 feet from the boundary of adjoining property not in mining use. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90) 
Sec. 7-43. - Fencing. 
    During operations permitted under this article, any area where excavation slopes are steeper than one foot vertical to one and one-half feet horizontal shall be fenced, unless the city determines that they do not pose a safety hazard. Water storage basins shall also be fenced if the city determines the basins pose a potential safety hazard. Unless otherwise approved by the city, required fencing shall be a minimum six-foot-high chain link fence meeting Minnesota Department of Transportation standards for right-of-way fencing. An initial fencing plan must be approved by the city council. The city engineer may subsequently authorize changes in the plan to accommodate changing conditions. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90) 
Sec. 7-44. - Appearance and screening. 
    The following standards are required at the site of any operation permitted under this article: 
(1)  Machinery shall be kept in good repair. Abandoned machinery, inoperable equipment and rubbish shall be removed from the site. 
(2)  All buildings and equipment that have not been used for a period of one year shall be removed from the site. 
(3)  All equipment and temporary structures shall be removed and dismantled not later than 90 days after termination of the extraction operation and expiration of the permit. 
(4)  Where practical stockpiles of overburden and materials shall be used as a part of the screening for the site. 
(5)  Where the city determines it is appropriate to screen off-site views, the perimeter of the site shall be planted with coniferous trees, bermed, or otherwise screened. Trees shall be at least six feet in height at the time of planting. 
(6)  Existing trees and ground cover shall be preserved to the extent feasible, maintained and supplemented by selective cutting, transplanting of trees, shrubs, and other ground cover along all setback areas. 
(7)  Noxious weeds shall be eradicated. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90) 
Sec. 7-45. - Operations; noise; hours; explosives, dust, water pollution; topsoil preservation. 
    The following operating standards shall be observed at the site of any operation permitted under this article: 
(1)  The maximum noise level at the perimeter of the site shall be within the limits set by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
(2)  Earth work shall be performed during only those times established by the city council as part of the permit unless otherwise provided in the permit. Such activity may only take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Such activity is also prohibited on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Christmas Eve Day, and Christmas Day. 
(3)  Operators shall use all practical means to eliminate vibration on adjacent property from equipment operation. 
(4)  Operators shall comply with all applicable city, county, state and federal regulations for the protection of water quality, including the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and Federal Environmental Protection Agency regulations for the protection of water quality. No waste products or process residue shall be deposited in any lake stream or natural drainage system. All wastewater shall pass through a sediment basin before drainage into a stream. 
(5)  Operators shall comply with all city, county, state and federal regulations for the protection of wetlands. 
(6)  Operators shall comply with all requirements of the watershed where the property is located. 
(7)  All topsoil shall be retained at the site until complete restoration of the state has been taken place according to the restoration plan. 
(8)  Operators shall use all practical means to reduce the amount of dust, smoke, and fumes caused by the operations. When atmospheric or other conditions make it impossible to prevent dust from migrating off-site, operations shall cease. 
(9)  To control dust and minimize tracking sand, gravel, and dirt onto public roadways, internal private roads from a mine to any public roadway shall be paved with asphalt or concrete for a distance of at least 300 feet to the intersection with a public roadway. All internal roadways shall be swept and to minimize dust according to a schedule established by the city. The city may approve alternatives to paved internal roadways that accomplish the same purpose. 
(10)  All haul routes to and from the mine shall be approved by the city and shall only use streets that can safely accommodate the traffic. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90; Ord. No. 324, § 5, 7-9-01) 
Sec. 7-46. - Restoration standards. 
    The following restoration standards shall apply to the site of any operation permitted under this article: 
(1)  The plan must be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Restoration shall be a continuing operation occurring as quickly as possible after the extraction operation has moved sufficiently into another part of the extraction site. 
(3)  All banks and slopes shall be left in accordance with the operation plan submitted with the permit application. 
(4)  Slopes, graded areas and backfill areas shall be surfaced with adequate topsoil to secure and hold ground cover. Such ground cover shall be tended as necessary until it s self-sustaining. 
(5)  All water areas resulting from excavation shall be eliminated upon restoration of the site. In unique instances where the city council has reviewed proposals for water bodies at the time of approval of the overall plan and has determined that such would be appropriate as an open space or recreational amenity in subsequent reuse of the site, water bodies may be permitted. 
(6)  No part of the restoration area which is planned for uses other than open space or agriculture shall be at an elevation lower than the minimum required for connection to a sanitary or storm sewer. The city may waive this requirement if the site could not reasonably be served by gravity sewer notwithstanding the proposed operation. Finished grades shall also be consistent with the established plan for the property restoration. 
(7)  Provide a landscaping plan illustrating reforestation, ground cover, wetland restoration, and other features. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90) 
Sec. 7-47. - Waiver. 
    The city council may allow deviation from the standards set forth herein: 
(1)  For operations that existed prior to the enactment of this article when it is not feasible to comply because of pre-existing conditions. 
(2)  When because of topographic or other conditions it is not possible to comply. 
(3)  When alternates that accomplish the purpose and intent of the standard set forth in this article are agreed upon by the city and the operator. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 1, 5-14-90) 
Secs. 7-48, 7-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10; miscellaneous provisions and offenses, Ch. 11; nuisances, Ch. 13; planning and development, Ch. 15; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 17; subdivisions, Ch. 18; zoning, Ch. 20. 

Sec. 7-50. - General. 
(a)  Title . These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Chanhassen, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this Code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment, and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
(c)  Intent. This Code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein. 
(d)  Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 7-51. - Applicability. 
(a)  General. The provisions of this Code shall apply to all matters affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in section 7-50. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this Code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
(b)  Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this Code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this Code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises. 
(c)  Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code. 
(d)  Existing remedies. The provisions in this Code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary. 
(e)  Workmanship . Repairs, maintenance work, alterations, or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this Code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(f)  Historic buildings. The provisions of this Code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the Code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. 
(g)  Referenced codes and standards . The codes and standards referenced in this Code shall be those that are listed in the Minnesota State Building Code (MSBC) and Minnesota State Fire Code (MSFC) and considered part of the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. 
(h)  Requirements not covered by Code . Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this Code, shall be determined by the Code official. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 11-13, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-52. - Department of property maintenance inspection. 
(a)  General. The building inspection division of the city is responsible for administering the provisions of this Code and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Code official. 
(b)  Appointment. The Code official shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(c)  Restriction of employees . An official or employee connected with the enforcement of this Code, shall not be engaged in, or directly or indirectly connected with, the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of construction documents thereof, unless that person is the owner of the building; nor shall such officer or employee engage in any work that conflicts with official duties or with the interests of the department. 
(d)  Liability. The Code official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this Code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not hereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. 
    Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this Code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The Code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this Code; and any officer of the department of property maintenance inspection, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. 
(e)  Fees. The fees for inspections and services performed in carrying out the responsibilities under this Code shall be as established in chapter 4 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, § 14, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-53. - Duties and powers of the code official. 
(a)  General. The code official shall enforce the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Right of entry. The code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the code official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law. 
(c)  Identification. The code official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this Code. 
(d)  Notices and orders. The Code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this Code. 
(e)  Department records. The code official shall keep official records of all business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this Code. Such records shall be retained in the official records as long as the building or structure to which such records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by other regulations. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 7-54. - Approval. 
(a)  Modifications . Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this Code, the code official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the code official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this Code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this Code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files. 
(b)  Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this Code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this Code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this Code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this Code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
(c)  Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this Code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this Code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the jurisdiction. 
(d)  Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this Code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code official shall approve the testing procedures. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 7-55. - Violations. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Notice of violation. The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with section 7-56. 
(c)  Prosecution of violation . Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with section 7-56 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
(d)  Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(e)  Abatement of violation . The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, § 15, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-56. - Notices and orders. 
(a)  Notice to owner or to person or persons responsible. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this Code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsections 7-56(b) and (c) to the person responsible for the violation as specified in this Code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with section 7-57. 
(b)  Form. Such notice prescribed in subsection 7-56(a) shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
(3)  Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued. 
(4)  Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
(5)  Inform the property owner of the right to appeal. 
(6)  Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with subsection 7-55(c). 
(c)  Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
(1)  Delivered personally; 
(2)  Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or 
(3)  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
(d)  Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 16-18, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-57. - Hazardous and substandard buildings and vacant buildings. 
(a)  Hazardous and substandard buildings . Hazardous and substandard buildings shall be abated in accordance with M.S. § 463.15 et seq. 
(b)  Securing vacant buildings . Vacant buildings may be secured in accordance with M.S. § 463.251. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 7-58. - Emergency measures. 
(a)  Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Code Official." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same. 
(b)  Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
(c)  Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
(d)  Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the code official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(e)  Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the city. The city attorney shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. In addition, to the extent authorized by statute, the city may provide for the collection of the costs as a special assessment against the property benefited pursuant to M.S. § 429.101, subd. 1. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 7-59. - General definitions. 
(a)  Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this Code, have the meanings shown in this chapter. 
(b)  Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular. 
(c)  Terms defined in other codes . Where terms are not defined in this Code and are defined in Minnesota State Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes. 
(d)  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(e)  Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "dwelling," "premises," "building," "rooming house," "rooming unit" or "story" are stated in this Code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, § 19, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-60. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 351, § 20, adopted Nov. 24, 2003, repealed § 7-60, which pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. 340, § 1, adopted Oct. 14, 2002. See § 1-2 for definitions. 
Sec. 7-61. - General requirements. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of sections 7-61 through 7-66 shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property. 
(b)  Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements except as otherwise provided for in this Code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of section 7-61 through section 7-66. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit or premises which they occupy and control. 
(c)  Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 251, § 21, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-62. - Exterior property areas. 
(a)  Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. 
Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs. 
(c)  Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(d)  Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
(e)  Rodent harborage . All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation. 
(f)  Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant. 
(g)  Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
(h)  Gates. Gates which are required to be self-closing and self-latching shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from a still position of six inches from the gatepost. 
(i)  Swimming pools . Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair. In-ground swimming pools shall be protected by a fence in accordance with section 20-1021. 
(j)  Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth. 
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including bodywork, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes. 
(k)  Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 22-24, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-63. - Exterior structure. 
(a)  General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. 
(c)  Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals. Numbers shall be a minimum five inches high for single family homes and 12 inches high for all other buildings. 
(d)  Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
(e)  Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. 
(f)  Exterior walls . All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration. 
(g)  Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains; gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
(h)  Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(i)  Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes, and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(j)  Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(k)  Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(l)  Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened an capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(m)  Window, skylight and door frames . Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight. 
(1)  Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. 
(2)  Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware. 
(n)  Insect screens. During the period from May 1 to October 1, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
(o)  Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the door. 
(p)  Basement hatchways . Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water. 
(q)  Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents. 
(r)  Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within. 
(1)  Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock meeting the specifications set forth herein. Such deadbolt locks shall be operated only by the turning of a knob or key and have a lock throw of not less than one inch. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to manufacturers specifications and maintained in good working order. All deadbolt locks required by this section shall be installed in such a manner so as to be operable inside of the dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit without the use of a key, tool, combination thereof or any other special knowledge or effort. 
Exception: If already provided, deadbolt locks are not required to have a minimum lock throw of one inch. 
(2)  Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within six feet above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device 
(3)  Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 25, 26, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-64. - Interior structure. 
(a)  General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property. 
(b)  Structural members . All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(c)  Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking, or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed, or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood, and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected. 
(d)  Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
(e)  Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(f)  Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 7-65. - Handrails and guards. 
(a)  General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches high or more than 42 inches high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 30 inches high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface. Handrails and guards shall be maintained in accordance with the Code in effect at time of construction. 
Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 28, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-66. - Rubbish and garbage. 
(a)  Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
(b)  Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers. 
(c)  Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premises shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish. 
(d)  Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers. 
(e)  Screening. If required in the zoning district where the property is located, all exterior garbage and recycling containers shall be screened by opaque screening. 
(f)  Curbside collection. Appliance, furniture and similar items shall be left outside for collection and disposal for not more than 72 hours before they are collected. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 27, 29, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-67. - Extermination. 
(a)  Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
(b)  Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure. 
(c)  Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises. 
(d)  Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for extermination. 
(e)  Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure. 
Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, § 27, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-68. - Light, ventilation and occupancy limitations. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of sections 7-68 through 7-71 shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure. 
(b)  Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of sections 7-68 through 7-71. 
(c)  Alternative devices . In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the MSBC shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 27, 29, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-69. - Light. 
(a)  Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be eight percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. 
Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet. The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served. 
(b)  Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in one- two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a 60 watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet of floor area or equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet. In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress stairways shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of one foot candle at floors, landings and treads. 
(c)  Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, § 27, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-70. - Ventilation. 
(a)  Habitable spaces . Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum glazed area required in section 7-69. 
Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet. The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated. 
(b)  Bathrooms and toilet rooms . Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by section 7-69, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated. 
(c)  Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in a rooming unit or dormitory unit. 
Exception: Where specifically approved in writing by the Code official. 
(d)  Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space. 
(e)  Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 27, 31, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-71. - Occupancy limitations. 
(a)  Maximum density, minimum space, use and location requirements. No person shall occupy nor permit or let to be occupied any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements. 
(b)  Permissible occupancy of dwelling unit. With the exception of owners occupying a respective dwelling unit prior to January 1, 2003, and a "family" as defined in section 7-60 of this Code, the maximum permissible occupancy of any dwelling unit shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  For the first occupant 150 square feet of habitable room floor space. 
(2)  In no event shall the total number of occupants exceed two times the number of habitable room less kitchen, in the dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, § 27, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-72. - Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of sections 7-72 through 7-78 shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided. 
(b)  Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with the requirements of sections 7-72 through 7-78. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 27, 32, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-73. - Required facilities. 
(a)  Dwelling units . Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory. 
(b)  Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units. 
(c)  Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories, and baths are not provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten occupants. 
(d)  Employees' facilities. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one drinking facility shall be available to employees. 
(e)  Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler, or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, § 27, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-74. - Toilet rooms. 
(a)  Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling. 
(b)  Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing not more than one flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 27, 33, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-75. - Plumbing systems and fixtures. 
(a)  General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition. 
(b)  Fixture clearances . Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning. 
(c)  Plumbing system hazards . Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the Code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, § 27, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-76. - Water system. 
(a)  General . Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the plumbing code. 
(b)  Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture as required by the Minnesota State Plumbing Code. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets, and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker. 
(c)  Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks. 
(d)  Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110° F (43° C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 27, 34, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-77. - Sanitary drainage system. 
(a)  General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system. 
(b)  Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, § 27, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-78. - Storm drainage. 
    General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, § 27, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-79. - Mechanical and electrical requirements. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of sections 7-79 through 7-85 shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided. 
(b)  Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the requirements of sections 7-80 through 7-85. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No; 351, §§ 27, 35, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-80. - Heating facilities. 
(a)  Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section. 
(b)  Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature required for the locality by the Minnesota State Building Code. 
(c)  Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to May 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
(d)  Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to May 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
(2)  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
(e)  Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be measured three feet above the floor near the center of the room and two feet inward from the center of each exterior wall. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 27, 36, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-81. - Mechanical equipment. 
(a)  Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent. 
Exception: Cooking appliances listed and labeled for unvented operation. 
(d)  Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained. 
(e)  Safety controls . All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation. 
(f)  Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment. 
(g)  Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping there from, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose in compliance with manufacturers listing and the installation is specifically approved. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 27, 37, 11-24-03) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 351, § 37, adopted Nov. 24, 2003, repealed subsection (b), which pertained to cooking and heating equipment. 
Sec. 7-82. - Electrical facilities. 
(a)  Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and section 7-83. 
(b)  Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with NFPA 70. Every dwelling shall be served by main service that is not less than 60 amps, three wires, 120/240-volt ac nominal. 
(c)  Electrical system hazards . Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the Code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 27, 38, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-83. - Electrical equipment. 
(a)  Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner. 
(b)  Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. 
(c)  Lighting fixtures . Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric lighting fixture. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, § 27, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-84. - Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters. 
(a)  General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained to sustain safely all imposed loads, to operate properly, and to be free from physical and fire hazards. The most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter; or the certificate shall be available for public inspection in the office of the building operator. 
(b)  Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied. 
Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, § 27, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-85. - Duct systems. 
    Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, § 27, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-86. - Fire safety requirements. 
(a)  Scope. Under the provisions of sections 7-86 through 7-90, the Minnesota State Fire Code (MSFC) shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises; including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided. 
(b)  Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of sections 7-87 through 7-90. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 27, 39, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-87. - Means of egress. 
(a)  General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the MSFC. 
(b)  Aisles. Aisles shall be maintained in accordance with the Minnesota State Fire Code. 
(c)  Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except as provided for in the MSBC. 
(d)  Emergency escape openings . Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the Code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room, without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings. However, such devices must provide a minimum net clear opening size that complies with the MSBC. They shall also be releaseable or removable from the inside, without the use of a key, tool, or force greater than that required for the normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. Where such bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are installed in existing buildings, smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with section 7-90. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 27, 40, 11-24-04) 
Sec. 7-88. - Accumulations and storage. 
(a)  Accumulations. Rubbish, garbage or other materials shall not be stored or allowed to accumulate in stairways, passageways, doors, windows, fire escapes or other means of egress. 
(b)  Hazardous material. Combustible, flammable, explosive or other hazardous materials, such as paints, volatile oils and cleaning fluids, or combustible rubbish, such as wastepaper, boxes and rags, shall not be accumulated or stored unless such storage complies with the applicable requirements of the MSFC. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 27, 41, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 7-89. - Fire resistance ratings. 
(a)  General. The fire resistance rating of floors, walls, ceilings, and other elements and components required by the building code shall be maintained. 
(b)  Maintenance. All required fire doors and smoke barriers shall be maintained in good working order, including all hardware necessary for the proper operation thereof. Fire doors shall not be held open by doorstops, wedges and other unapproved hold-open devices. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 7-90. - Fire protection systems. 
(a)  General. All systems, devices, and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the MSFC. 
(b)  Fire suppression system. Fire suppression systems shall be maintained in proper operating condition at all times. 
(c)  Standpipe systems . Standpipe systems shall be maintained in proper operating condition at all times. Hose connections shall be unobstructed. 
(d)  Fire extinguishers. All portable fire extinguishers shall be visible, provided with ready access thereto, and maintained in an efficient and safe operating condition. Extinguishers shall be of an approved type. 
(e)  Smoke alarms. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Occupancy Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations: 
Exception: Owner occupied Group R-3 occupancies already provided with single-station smoke alarms. 
(1)  On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms. 
(2)  In each room used for sleeping purposes. 
(3)  In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. 
(4)  Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other occupancy groups in accordance with the MSFC. 
(f)  Power source. In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection. 
Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery-operated in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not served from a commercial source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is a crawl space or basement available which could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes. 
(g)  Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwelling units not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing alterations, repairs, or construction of any kind. 
(2)  Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is a crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes. 
(h)  Fire alarm systems. Fire alarm systems shall be in proper operating condition at all times. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 10-14-02; Ord. No. 351, §§ 27, 42, 11-24-03) 
Secs. 7-91-7-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 7-100. - Purpose; application of this article. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to implement the provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code and Minnesota Rules Chapter 1315, which adopts the National Electrical Code. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all installations of electrical conductors, fittings, devices, fixtures, hereinafter referred to as "electrical equipment", within or on public and private buildings and premises, with the following general exceptions. The provisions of this article do not apply to the installations in mines, ships, railway cars, aircraft, automotive equipment or the installations or equipment employed by a railway, electric or communication utility in the exercise of its functions as a utility, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(c)  As used in this article, "reasonably safe to persons and property" as applied to electrical installations and electrical equipment means safe to use in the service for which the installation or equipment is intended without unnecessary hazard to life, limb or property. 
(d)  For purposes of interpretation of the provisions of this article, the most recently published edition of the National Electrical Code shall be prima facie evidence of the definitions and scope of words and terms used in this article. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 7-11-11) 
Sec. 7-101. - Electrical inspector, qualifications and appointment. 
(a)  Creation; qualifications. There is hereby created the office of electrical inspector. The person chosen to fill the office of electrical inspector shall be of good moral character, shall be possessed of such executive ability as is requisite for the performance of his duties and shall have a thorough knowledge of the standard materials and methods used in the installation of electrical equipment; shall be well versed in approved methods of construction for safety to persons and property; the statutes of the state relating to electrical work and any orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof; and the National Electrical Code as approved by the American Standards Association; shall have two years experience as an electrical inspector or five years experience in the installation of electrical equipment, or a graduate mechanical or electrical engineer with two years of practical electrical experience. 
(b)  Licensed inspector. The electrical inspector shall be a licensed master or journeymen electrician as defined under Minnesota Statutes. 
(c)  Duties of the electrical inspector. It shall be the duty of the inspector to enforce the provisions of this article. The inspector shall, upon application, grant permits for the installation or alteration of electrical equipment, and shall make inspections of electrical installations, all as provided in this article. The inspector shall keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections and reinsertions made and other official work performed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  No financial interest. It shall be unlawful for the inspector to engage in the sale, installation or maintenance of electrical equipment, directly or indirectly, and the inspector shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in any such business. 
(e)  Authority of electrical inspector. The inspector shall have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building or premises in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinsertion or test of electrical equipment contained therein or its installation. When any electrical equipment is found by the inspector to be dangerous to persons or property because it is defective or defectively installed, the person responsible for the electrical equipment shall be notified in writing and shall make any changes or repairs required in the judgment of the inspector to place such equipment in safe condition. If such work is not completed within 15 days or any longer period that may be specified by the inspector in said notice, the inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or order discontinuance of electrical service to said electrical equipment. In cases of emergency where necessary for safety to persons and property, or where electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department, the inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or cause disconnection immediately of any electrical equipment. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 7-11-11) 
Sec. 7-102. - Standards for electrical equipment installation. 
(a)  All installations of electrical equipment shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with the provisions of this article and the applicable statutes of the state and all orders, rules and regulations issued by the authority thereof. All electrical equipment shall be listed and labeled by a testing agency. 
(b)  Conformity of installations of electrical equipment with applicable regulations set forth in the current National Electrical Code as adopted by the Minnesota Rules, shall be prima facie evidence that such installations are reasonably safe to persons and property. Noncompliance with the provisions of this article or the National Electrical Code as adopted by the Minnesota Rules, shall be prima facie evidence that the installation is not reasonably safe to persons and property. 
(c)  The electrical inspector may, with approval of the building official, authorize installations of special wiring methods other than herein provided for. 
(d)  Buildings or structures moved from without to within and within the limits of the city shall conform to all of the requirements of this Code for new buildings or structures. 
(e)  Existing buildings or structures hereafter changed in use shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this Code for the new use. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 7-11-11) 
Sec. 7-103. - Connections to installations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make connections from a supply of electricity to any electrical equipment for the installation of which a permit is required or which has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the electrical inspector. 
(b)  The public or private utility providing services shall disconnect the same upon a written order from the electrical inspector, if the inspector considers any electrical installation unsafe to life and property or installed contrary to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 7-11-11) 
Sec. 7-104. - Permits and inspectors. 
(a)  Permit required. An electrical permit is required for each installation, alteration, addition or repair of electrical work for light, heat and power within the limits of the city. Permits for the installation of electrical work in new structures shall only be issued to electrical contractors duly licensed by the state. Permits for the installation, alteration, addition or repair of electrical work in existing structures shall only be issued to electrical contractors duly licensed by the state or to resident owners of property where the work is to be done. 
(b)  Public service corporation exception. No permit shall be required for electrical installations of equipment owned, leased, operated or maintained by a public service corporation which is used by said corporation in the performance of its function as a utility, except that such electrical installation shall conform to the minimum standards of the National Electrical Safety Code. 
(c)  Ownership. Ownership of any transmission or distribution lines or appurtenances thereto, including, but not limited to, transformers, shall not be transferred by a public service corporation to any person, except another franchised public service corporation dealing in electric energy for distribution and sale, without a permit first having been issued therefore by the city. Such permit shall be issued only after the facilities to be transferred have been inspected and approved as provided in this article and upon payment of an inspection fee as set forth in this section of the article. 
(d)  Application and plans. Application for such permit, describing the electrical work to be done, shall be made in writing, to the city by the person so registered to do such work. The application shall be accompanied by such plans, specifications and schedules as may be necessary to determine whether the electrical installation as described will be in conformity with all the legal requirements. The fees for electrical inspection as set forth in this section shall accompany such application. If applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this article, a permit for such electrical installation shall be issued. 
(e)  Concealment. All electrical installations which involve the concealment of wiring or equipment shall have a "rough-in" inspection prior to concealment, wherein the inspector shall be duly notified in advance, excluding Saturday, Sunday and holidays. 
(f)  Inspection fees. 
(1)  Permits required. Before commencing any installation of any work regulated by this article, a permit therefore shall be secured and the fee for such permit paid. The fees schedule set forth in M.S. § 326B.37 is adopted by reference and incorporated herein. No such permit shall be issued to do any of the work or make any installation regulated by this article except to persons licensed to do such work under the terms of this article. Holders of a contractor's license shall not obtain permits for electrical work unless the work is supervised by them and is performed by workers employed by them or their firm. 
(2)  Fees double, when. Should any person begin work of any kind, such as set forth in this article, or for which a permit from the electrical inspector is required by ordinance, without having secured the necessary permit therefore from the inspector of buildings either previous to or during the day of the commencement of any such work, or on the next succeeding day where such work is commenced on a Saturday or on a Sunday or a holiday, he shall, when subsequently securing such permit, be required to pay double the fees provided for such permit. 
(3)  Additional fees and/or shortages. Additional fees and/or fee shortages must be received by the city within 14 days of written notice. If additional fees and/or fee shortages are not received within 14 days of notice, permits for electrical installations will not be accepted by the city until such time as the additional fees and/or fee shortages are received. 
(g)  Electrical inspections. 
(1)  At regular intervals, the electrical inspector shall visit all premises where work may be done under annual permits and shall inspect all electrical equipment installed under such a permit since the day of his last previous inspection, and shall issue a certificate of approval for such work as is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this article, after the fee required has been paid. 
(2)  When any electrical equipment is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of the building, the person installing the equipment shall notify the electrical inspector and such equipment shall not be concealed until it has been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector or until 24 hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, shall have elapsed from the time of such scheduled inspection; provided, that on large installations where the concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the person installing the electrical equipment shall give the electrical inspector due notice and inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the work. 
(3)  If upon inspection, the installation is not found to be fully in conformity with the provisions of this article, the electrical inspector shall at once forward to the person making the installation a written notice stating the defects which have been found to exist. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 7-11-11) 
Secs. 7-105-7-130. - Reserved. 
Chapter 8 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to acquire and regulate cemeteries, M.S. § 412.221, subd. 9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY CEMETERY 

Sec. 8-16. - Establishment; description. 
    The Chanhassen Pioneer Cemetery (also sometimes referred to as Chanhassen Cemetery), as acquired by the city, by deed dated September 13, 1984, is established as a city cemetery and shall be controlled, managed and operated as set forth in this article. The cemetery shall consist of the following described tract of land in Carver County, Minnesota: 
    Commencing at a point on the quarter section line 239.25 feet east of the southwest comer of the northwest quarter of section 15, township 116, range 23; thence north 330 feet to a point; thence east 165 feet to a point; thence south 330 feet to a point on the quarter section line; thence west 165 feet to the place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 79, §§ 1, 2, 4-24-85) 
Sec. 8-17. - Rights reserved to city. 
    The city reserves the right to remove all monuments and all markers, flowers, plants, trees, decorations or other similar things without liability to the owner whenever any of these objects becomes unsafe or unsightly, or fails to meet the standards, rules or regulations of the cemetery as provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 18 4-24-85) 
Sec. 8-18. - Records and reports. 
    The city clerk shall be the actuary of the cemetery and shall, in addition to other records and duties, keep a register of all interments and disinterments. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 15, 4-24-85) 
Sec. 8-19. - Maintenance funds. 
    All income received by the city for grave or lot purchase price shall be receipted to the general fund for the purpose of defraying the cost of caring for, maintaining and improving the cemetery lots; expansion; or other cemetery purposes as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 6, 4-24-85; Ord. No. 353, § 1, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 8-20. - Transfer of lots. 
    No cemetery graves or lots may be sold, assigned, conveyed or otherwise disposed of, except by will or operation of law, without the approval of the city. The city retains the first option to repurchase a cemetery grave or lot at the price paid or then current price, whichever is lower. The city may use any of its funds or any cemetery funds for such repurchase and may hold such grave or lot, or again sell and convey the same. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 9, 4-24-85) 
Sec. 8-21. - Monuments, markers and plantings generally, 
(a)  In addition to those standards provided herein, the city manager may from time to time adopt regulations establishing standards and requirements regulating the type, location, size, material, number, the manner of placement and installation, and removal of monument markers, and plantings permitted with the city cemetery to the extent not established by this article, and may prohibit the placement of new monuments. 
(b)  Every monument and marker shall be placed in the space as shown on the cemetery plat or as directed by the city. No monument or marker shall be placed unless its location has been approved by the city and the full purchase price of the grave has been paid. 
(c)  No monument or marker may be constructed of limestone, sandstone, wood, or other materials which will not assure relative permanency. 
(d)  All markers or monuments shall be placed upon a suitable foundation and must be structurally sound and properly secured to avoid endangering public safety, health and other property. An apron of at least four inches in width shall be placed around said marker or monument, which shall be made of concrete, which apron shall also be level with the surface of the ground, and which shall be affixed to the marker so as to prevent grass, weeds, or other vegetation from growing between the marker and apron. 
(e)  This section and regulations that may be established by the city council shall not affect monuments or markers of plantings in existence as of April 15, 1985, except in those instances where such monuments or markers or plantings have become unsafe. 
(f)  Only one monument or marker shall be allowed per grave. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 10, 4-24-85; Ord. No. 288, § 1, 2-18-99; Ord. No. 353, § 2, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 8-22. - Foundations. 
    All monuments and markers shall be placed on foundations of solid masonry at a depth and size so as to assure no settling or movement of the marker or monument. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 11, 4-24-85) 
Sec. 8-23. - Installation of monuments or markers. 
    Persons engaging in placing monuments and markers shall provide adequate planking to protect turf and shall remove materials, equipment and refuse immediately upon completion of work. The lot owner, his heirs, successors or assigns are responsible for any failure to abide by this section and shall pay for any and all charges or damages resulting. The lot owner, his heirs, successors or assigns are also responsible for any and all damage resulting from injury or damage to the cemetery or other lots during the excavation of the grave site or recovering thereof. Contractors and others engaged in such work must notify the city before beginning the same. All work in the cemetery, of whatever kind, must be carried on subject to the direction and control of the city. No monument or marker shall be placed in the cemetery until authorization has been issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 12, 4-24-85; Od. No. 353, § 3, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 8-24. - Vaults and mausoleums. 
    Above ground vaults and mausoleums are not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 13, 4-24-85; Ord. No. 353, § 4, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 8-25. - Improvements. 
    Natural plants, shrubs and flowers in containers only may be placed on the cemetery lots. No trees, vines, flowers, plants or shrubs may be planted, no fences erected, nor shall unnatural flowers, shrubs or plants be placed on the cemetery lot. The city reserves the right to remove any tree, shrub, vine, plant or flower which may become unsightly dangerous or not in keeping with the landscaping design of the cemetery or this section. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to the city. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 14, 4-24-85) 
Sec. 8-26. - Hours open to public. 
    The cemetery will be open to visitors during the hours of sunrise to sunset. Permission to enter at other times shall be secured from the city. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 16, 4-24-85) 
Sec. 8-27. - Graves. 
    Each grave in the cemetery may contain the remains of up to two people, either one casket and one cremation urn, or two cremation urns. However, only one monument or marker will be allowed per grave. 
(Ord. No. 353, § 6, 11-24-03) 
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alarm systems, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; fire lanes, § 12-16; fires in parks, § 14-66. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to provide for fire prevention, M.S. § 412.221, subd. 17. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 357, § 1, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, repealed § 9-1, which pertained to obstruction of fire hydrants and derived from Ord. No. 3H, § 11.01, adopted Aug. 1, 1977; and Ord. No. 3-J, § 1, adopted July 23, 1984. 
Secs. 9-2-9-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 578, § 1, adopted Mar. 11, 2013, deleted Art. II, §§ 9-16-9-26, entitled "Fire Department", which derived from Ord. No. 12-A, §§ 1-10, 12, adopted Nov. 7, 1983; Ord. No. 257, §§ 1-5, adopted Sept. 9, 1996; Ord. No. 298, § 2, adopted Feb. 14, 2000; and Ord. No. 357, §§ 2-7, adopted Dec. 8, 2003. 

Secs. 9-16-9-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Minnesota Uniform Fire Code, M.S. § 299F.011. 

Sec. 9-41. - Compliance. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article or of any other code or standards adopted in this article, or any order made pursuant thereto shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 62-A, § 6, 7-23-84; Ord. No. 357, § 8, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 9-42. - Interpretation. 
    Whenever any part of this article conflicts with the Minnesota State Building Code, or are less restrictive than the Minnesota State Fire Code, the Minnesota State Building Code and the Minnesota State Fire Code, whichever is applicable, shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 62-A, § 2, 7-23-84; Ord. No. 138, § 1, 2-11-91; Ord. No. 283, § 1, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 357, § 9, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 9-43. - Technical standards-Adopted. 
    The 2003 Minnesota State Fire Code is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 62-A, §§ 2, 3, 7-23-84; Ord. No. 138, § 2, 2-11-91; Ord. No. 283, § 2, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 357, § 10, 12-8-03) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference authorized, M.S. § 471.62. 
Sec. 9-44. - Fires or cooking devices on balconies or patios. 
(a)  Prohibition. No person may kindle, maintain or cause any fire or open flame fire or store or use any cooking device, fuel, torch, or other heating or lighting equipment or flammable chemicals on any balcony above ground level or on any ground floor patio immediately adjacent to or within 15 feet of any unit in any structure containing two or more vertically stacked residential units. 
(b)  Exception; permitted cooking devices in certain structures. Subsection (a) does not apply to the storage or use of permitted cooking devices on balconies or ground floor patios that are constructed of noncombustible material on five or six sides. Fuel for a permitted cooking device must be stored in compliance with subsection (1) of this section. 
(c)  Exception; permanent natural gas and electrical cooking devices. Natural gas fired or electrically heated cooking devices that are permanently mounted, plumbed to the building's natural gas supply or electrically connected to the building's electrical service, not merely plug-ins, and which maintain a minimum clearance of 16 inches on the sides and back of the device may be installed on balconies and patios. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 2, 2-13-06) 
Sec. 9-45. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 357, § 11, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, repealed § 9-45, which pertained to definitions for the Uniform Fire Code and derived from Ord. No. 62-A, § 4, adopted July 23, 1984. 
Sec. 9-46. - Appeals. 
(a)  Whenever the fire marshal shall disapprove or refuse to grant a permit, or issue an order or notice as provided in the Minnesota State Fire Code, or when it is claimed that the Minnesota State Fire Code has been wrongly applied or interpreted, the aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the fire marshal as provided in this section. 
(b)  The aggrieved person must first request the fire marshal to reconsider his decision. The request to reconsider must be made within ten days from the date of the fire marshal's initial decision. 
(c)  A person aggrieved by the final decision of the fire marshal may appeal the decision to the city manager. The appeal to the city manager must be made within 30 days from the date of the final action of the fire marshal. 
(d)  A person aggrieved by the decision of the city manager may appeal to the city council. The appeal to the city council must be made within 30 days from the date of the decision of the city manager. 
(e)  A person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal to the state fire marshal in accordance with M.S. § 299F.011, subd. 5 and 5b. 
(f)  All requests and appeals specified in this section shall be made in writing. An aggrieved party who does not appeal within the time limits specified shall be deemed to have waived his right to appeal and shall be bound by the latest decision in the appeal process. 
(Ord. No. 62-A, § 5, 7-23-84; Ord. No. 357, § 12, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 9-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 357, § 13, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, repealed § 9-47, which pertained to storage of flammable or combustible liquids and derived from Ord. No. 138, § 4, adopted Feb. 11, 1991. 
Sec. 9-48. - Storage of liquefied petroleum gases. 
    All single-container installations with a total water storage capacity of 2,001 gallons or greater, or where the aggregate of interconnected containers is greater than 2,001 gallons shall be protected by one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Buried in an approved manner. 
(2)  Mounded in an approved manner. 
(3)  Protected by an approved water application system. 
(4)  Protected by other approved means. 
(Ord. No. 138, § 5, 2-11-91; Ord. No. 283, § 4, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 357, § 14, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 9-49. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 357, § 15, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, repealed § 9-49, which pertained to storage of explosives and blasting agents and derived Ord. No. 138, § 6, adopted Feb. 11, 1991; and Ord. No. 283, § 5, adopted Aug. 24, 1998. 
Secs. 9-50-9-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPEN BURNING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section I of Ord. No. 102, adopted Apr. 24, 1988, amended Ch. 9 by adding an Art. IV thereto. The provisions of § I were included herein as Art. IV, § 9-71, by the editor. 

Sec. 9-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 357, § 17, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, repealed § 9-71, which pertained to restrictions and permitting for open burning and derived from Ord. No. 102, § I, adopted Apr. 24, 1989; and Ord. No. 298, § 2, adopted Feb. 14, 2000. 
Chapter 10 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alarm systems, ch. 3; kennel license, § 5-18; solid waste collectors, § 16-31 et seq.; bond for persons making connections to water lines, § 19-22; bond of persons making connections to sanitary sewer line, § 19-48; licensing and certification of contractors, maintenance, etc., for individual sanitary sewage disposal systems, § 19-76; licensing of storm sewer contractors, § 19-98. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 299, § 1, adopted Mar. 13, 2000 amended former article II, §§ 10-16-10-125, in its entirety and set forth a new article II, §§ 10-16-10-53 effectively repealing former article II, §§ 10-16-10-125. Former article II, §§ 10-16-10-125, also pertained to alcoholic beverages and derived from Ord. No. 2H, §§ 3, 4, 5.01-5.04, 5.06, 5.08, 6.01-6.05, 7.02-7.06, 7.10, 7.11, 7.13-7.15, 7.18, 7.4, 8.01-8.11, 9.01-9.03, 9.06-9.08, 10.01, 10.04, 10.05, 10.22, and 11, adopted Apr. 19, 1982; Ord. No. 34-E, §§ 1, 2.07, 3.01-3.03, 4.01, 4.02, 5.01-5.04, 6.01-6.05, 8.01, 9.01, 9.04-9.07, 9.09, 9.11, 10.02(3), (4), 12.01, and 13.01, adopted Feb. 14, 1983; Ord. No. 2-I, §§ 1-7, adopted Feb. 14, 1983; Ord. No. 2-K, § 1, adopted May 19, 1986; Ord. No. 115, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 1989; Ord. No. 158, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1991; Ord. No. 175, § 1, Oct. 12, 1992; Ord. No. 201, § 1, adopted Apr. 11, 1994; Ord. No. 226, § 1, adopted Oct. 24, 1994; Ord. No. 235, § 1, adopted Feb. 27, 1995; Ord. No. 279, § 1, adopted Apr. 13, 1998; and Ord. No. 295, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 1999. 

DIVISION 1. - STATE LAW ADOPTED/DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 10-16. - Provisions of state law adopted. 
    Except to the extent the provisions of this article are more restrictive, the provisions of M.S. ch. 340A, as amended, regarding the terms, licensing, consumption, sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor are adopted and made a part of this article as if set out in full. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-17. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, and in addition to those definitions contained in M.S. ch. 340A, as amended, the terms used in this subsection are defined as follows; 
(a)  Display. The term "display" means the keeping, storing, or permitting to be kept or stored of an alcoholic beverage which has been poured, dispensed or has had its package seal broken on, in, or at any table, booth, bar or other area of a licensed premises accessible to the general public, except when the alcoholic beverage is stored in a normal storage area during non-sale hours. 
(b)  Interest. the term "interest" as used in this article includes any pecuniary interest in the ownership, operation, management or profits of a liquor establishment, but does not include: bona fide loans; bona fide fixed sum rental agreements; bona fide open accounts or other obligations held with or without security arising out of the ordinary and regular course of business or selling or leasing merchandise, fixtures or supplies to such establishment; or any interest of five percent or less in any corporation holding a city liquor license. A person who receives monies, from time to time, directly or indirectly from a licensee in the absence of a bona fide consideration therefor and excluding bona fide gifts or donations, shall be deemed to have a pecuniary interest in such retail license. In determining "bona fide," the reasonable value of the goods or things received as consideration for the payment of the licensee and all other facts reasonably tending to prove or disprove the existence of any purposeful scheme or arrangement to evade any prohibitions under this article shall be considered. 
(c)  Licensed premises. The term "licensed premises" is the premises described in the approved license application. In the case of a restaurant, club, or exclusive liquor store licensed for on-sales of alcoholic beverages and located on a golf course, "licensed premises" means the entire golf course except for areas where motor vehicles are regularly parked or operated. 
(d)  Operating manager. The term "operating manager" as used in this article means a person designated by the license holder who works full-time at the licensed premises and is in charge of day-to-day liquor sales. 
(e)  Properly designated officer. The term "properly designated officer" means and includes; 
(1)  The city fire inspector; 
(2)  The city building official; and 
(3)  The health inspectors employed by Carver or Hennepin county or the state acting in the course of the scope of their employment. 
(f)  Underage person. The term "underage person" means a person who is under the legal drinking age as provided by M.S. ch. 340A. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
DIVISION 2. - RETAIL LICENSES 

Sec. 10-18. - Licenses required. 
    No person, except as otherwise provided in M.S. ch. 340A shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, keep for sale or deliver any intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor, or wine as part of a commercial transaction without first having received a license to do so as provided in this article; nor shall any private club or public place, directly or indirectly, or upon any pretense or by any device, allow the consumption or display of intoxicating liquor or serve any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor without first obtaining a license from the city as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-19. - Types of licenses. 
    The following types of licenses are issued under this article: 
(a)  On-sale intoxicating liquor license. On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses shall be granted only to hotels, bowling centers, clubs, restaurants, and exclusive liquor stores. A license shall be issued to clubs and congressionally chartered veterans' organizations if they have been in existence for at least three years and liquor sales will only be to members and bona fide guests. On-sale licenses will only be issued to exclusive liquor stores that were licensed on January 1, 2000. 
(b)  Off-sale intoxicating liquor license. Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued to an exclusive liquor store and shall permit off-sale of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor. 
(c)  Wine licenses. Wine licenses may be issued, with the approval of the commissioner of public safety, only to restaurants having facilities for seating of at least 25 people at one time for the sale of wine not exceeding 24 percent alcohol by volume and for consumption on the licensed premises only in conjunction with the sale of food. The holder of a wine license who is also licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale may also sell intoxicating malt liquors at on-sale without an additional license. 
(d)  On-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license. On-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license may be issued to bona fide clubs, bowling centers, golf courses, including driving ranges, restaurants, and hotels where food is prepared and served for consumption on the premises only. 
(e)  Off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license. Off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license may be issued to general food stores and drug stores and permit the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor at retail in the original package for consumption off the premises only. 
(f)  On-sale Sunday liquor license. On-sale Sunday liquor licenses may be issued only to a hotel or restaurant, with facilities for serving not less than 50 guests at one time, to which an on-sale intoxicating license has been issued. Such license may permit the sale of liquor to be consumed on the premises during the hours allowed by state law in conjunction with the serving of food provided that the licensee is in conformance with the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act, M.S. § 144.411 et seq., and provided a public hearing is held prior to the issuance of the license. No Sunday liquor license is needed for on-sale wine licenses. 
(g)  Temporary on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses. Temporary on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses may be issued to a club or charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization in existence for at least three years. The license may authorize the on-sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor for not more than three consecutive days, and may authorize on-sales on premises other than premises the licensee owns or permanently occupies. The license may provide that the licensee may contract for 3.2 percent malt liquor with the holder of a full-year on-sale liquor license issued by the city. The licenses are subject to the terms, including the license fee, normally imposed by the city. The licenses issued in this section are subject to all laws and ordinances governing the sale of liquor, including furnishing a form of proof of financial responsibility. 
(h)  Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses. 
(1)  The city council may issue to a club or charitable religious or nonprofit organization in existence for at least three years or to a political committee registered under M.S. § 10A.14, a temporary license for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the city sponsored by the licensee. The license may authorize the on-sale of intoxicating liquor for not more than four consecutive days, and may authorize on-sales on premises other than premises the licensee owns or permanently occupies. The license may provide that the licensee may contract for intoxicating liquor catering services with the holder of a full-year on-sale liquor license issued by the city. The licenses are subject to the terms, including license fee, imposed by the city. The licenses issued under this section are subject to all laws and ordinances governing the sale of intoxicating liquor except M.S. § 340A.409 and § 340A.504, subd. 3(d), and the laws and ordinances which by their nature are not applicable. 
(2)  The city council may issue to a brewer who manufactures fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year or a microdistillery a temporary license for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the municipality sponsored by the brewer or microdistillery. The terms and conditions specified for temporary licenses under paragraph (h)(1) shall apply to a license issued under this paragraph, except that the requirements of section M.S. § 340A.409, subds. 1 to 3a, shall apply to the license. 
(3)  Limitations on temporary on-sale intoxication liquor licenses: 
a.  Temporary licenses must first be approved by the commissioner of public safety before they become valid. 
b.  No more than three four-day, four three-day, or six two-day temporary licenses, in any combination not to exceed 12 days per year, may be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages to any one organization or registered political committee, or for any one location, within a 12-month period. 
c.  Not more than one temporary license may be issued to any one organization or registered political committee, or for any one location, within any 30-day period. 
(i)  Club licenses. Club licenses may be issued to clubs as provided in M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 1. 
(j)  Consumption and display permits. Consumption and display permits may be issued to a bottle club which complies with the requirements of M.S. § 340A.414 and which has obtained a permit from the commissioner of public safety. Consumption and display permits shall not be issued in the city, except to establishments that have been issued such license on or prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 299. 
(k)  On-sale brewer taproom license. May be issued to a brewery licensed under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(c), (i) or (j) for the on-sale of malt liquor produced by the brewer for the consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one brewery location owned by the brewer as provided in M.S. § 340A.26. 
(1)  On-sale brewer taproom license holders are allowed Sunday on-sales as provided in M.S. § 340A.26, subd. 5, and do not require a separate on-sale sunday liquor license. No Sunday on-sales are allowed before 10:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. 
(l)  Small brewer off-sale license. May be issued to a brew pub or brewery licensed under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(c), (i) or (j) for the off-sale of malt liquor at its licensed premises that has been produced and packaged by the brewer as provided in M.S. §§ 340A.24, 340A.28, and 340A.285. 
(1)  Small brewer off-sale license holders are allowed Sunday off-sale as provided in M.S. §§ 340A.24 and 340A.28, and 340A.285. No Sunday off-sales are allowed before 10:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. 
(m)  On-sales cocktail room. License may be issued to a microdistillery for the on-sale of distilled spirits produced by the distiller for the consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one distillery location owned by the distiller as provided in M.S. § 340A.22, subd. 2. 
(1)  On-sales cocktail room license holders are allowed Sunday on-sales as provided in M.S. § 340A.22, subd. 2, and do not require a separate on-sale Sunday liquor license. No Sunday on-sales are allowed before 10:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. 
(n)  Microdistillery off-sale license. May be issued to a microdistillery for the off-sale of distilled spirits as provided in M.S. § 340A.22, subd. 4. 
(1)  Microdistillery off-sale license holders are allowed Sunday off-sales as provided in M.S. § 340A.22, subd. 4, and do not require a separate on-sale Sunday liquor license. No Sunday off-sales are allowed before 10:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 371, §§ 1-3, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 404, § 1, 10-10-05; Ord. No. 447, § 1, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 605, § 1, 6-8-15; Ord. No. 615, § 1, 10-10-16; Ord. No. 618, § 1, 1-23-17; Ord. No. 632, §§ 3, 4, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 10-20. - License period. 
    Each renewal license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. Temporary licenses shall expire according to their terms. All intoxicating liquor licenses, 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses, and consumption and display licenses expire on April 30 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-21. - Retail license fees. 
(a)  Annual fees. The annual fees for all licenses and temporary licenses shall be as determined by city council resolution in amounts no greater than those amounts provided under M.S. § 340A.408. 
(b)  Prorated fees. If a license application is made during the license year, the license shall be issued for the remainder of the year and, except in the case of wine licenses and off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, the license fee shall be pro-rated, with any unexpired fraction of a month being counted as one month. 
(c)  Investigation fees. Investigation fees shall be determined by city council resolution. Investigation fees are nonrefundable. No investigation fee shall be charged for a renewal application. At any time that an additional investigation is required because of a change in the control of a corporate license, change in manager, change in location, or enlargement of the premises, the licensee shall pay an additional investigation fee. Where a new application is filed as a result of incorporation or a change of name by an existing licensee and the ownership control and interest in the license are unchanged, no additional investigation fee will be required. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-22. - License fee refunds. 
    License fees shall be refunded if an application for a license is denied by the city council, except where rejection is for a willful misstatement in the license application. No part of the fee paid for any issued license shall be refunded except as authorized under M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 5, upon application to the city clerk within 20 days of the happening of any event provided under M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 5. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-23. - Liability insurance. 
    Except as provided in M.S. § 340A.409, subd. 4, all applicants for any liquor license or consumption and display permit must, as a condition to the issuance of the license, demonstrate proof of financial responsibility with regard to liability imposed by M.S. § 340A.801, subd. 1, to the city by providing proof of liability/dram shop, general liability, and workers' compensation insurance coverage as specified by M.S. § 340A.409, subd 1. The city shall be named as additional insured on the liability insurance policy. The insurance limits outlined in this section shall be effective for license renewals and immediately on any new applications. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 371, § 4, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 508, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 10-24. - License application. 
    A license applicant shall complete the applicable application form provided by the city clerk. The city clerk may waive completion of any part of the form that is inappropriate or unnecessary. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-25. - Execution of application. 
    If the application is by an individual, it shall be signed and sworn to by such person; if by a corporation, by an officer thereof; if by a partnership, by one of the partners; if by an incorporated association, by the operating officer or managing officer thereof. If the applicant is a partnership, the application, license, and insurance policy shall be made and issued in the name of all partners. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in an application. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-26. - Renewal application. 
    Applications for the renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 45 days prior to the date of the expiration of the license, and shall state that everything in the prior applications remains true and correct except as otherwise indicated. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 618, § 2, 1-23-17) 
Sec. 10-27. - Investigations. 
(a)  At the time of making an initial application, renewal application, or request for approval for a new manager, the applicant shall, in writing, authorize the city to investigate all facts set out in the application and do a personal background and criminal record check on the applicant and operating manager. The applicant shall further authorize the city to release information received from such investigation to the city council. 
(b)  should the city council deny the applicant's request for a license due, partially or solely, to the applicant's prior conviction of a crime, the city council shall notify the applicant of the grounds and reasons for the denial; the applicable complaint and grievance procedure as set forth in M.S. § 364.06; the earliest date the applicant may reapply for a license; and that all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-28. - Hearing required for new licenses. 
    A public hearing for the issuance of a license for a new premises, or for a different licensee at the same premises, shall be preceded by ten days' published notice. In addition, the public hearing for the issuance of a license for a new premises shall also be preceded by a ten days' mailed notice to all owners of property located within 500 feet of the boundaries of the property on which the business that is the subject of the application is located. A public hearing is not required for temporary license applications, or for off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 371, § 5, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 10-29. - Information considered for license approval. 
    The city council shall consider the following in addition to conformity with state statutes and city ordinances in determining whether a new or renewal license shall be granted: 
(a)  The investigative and staff report submitted by the city clerk; 
(b)  Information received through the public hearing process; 
(c)  Whether the applicant has or will take affirmative action to minimize public safety problems commonly associated with on-sale liquor establishments, including but not limited to DWI drivers, illegal sale to minors, disturbing the peace, etc.; 
(d)  Any other relevant information. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-30. - Granting or transfer of license. 
(a)  Applicant. A license shall be issued to the applicant only, and no license shall be transferred except as provided in this article. 
(b)  Premises. Each license shall be issued only for the exact rooms and square footage described in the application. A license is valid only in the compact and contiguous building or structure situated on the premises described in the license, and all transactions relating to a sale under such license must take place within such building or structure. 
(c)  Building under construction. When a license is granted for a premises where the building is under construction or otherwise not ready for occupancy, the city clerk shall not issue the license until notified by the building official that the building is ready for occupancy. 
(d)  Death of licensee. In the event of the death of a person holding a license, the personal representative of that person shall be allowed to continue to operate the business within the terms of the license for a period not to exceed 90 days after the death of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-31. - Corporations, partnerships, or associations. 
(a)  All corporations, partnerships, and associations must designate an operating manager. The operating manager must be a person working full-time at the licensed premises who is in charge of day-to-day liquor sales. 
(b)  Licenses issued to corporations shall be valid only so long as there is no change in the officers or ownership interest of the corporation, as defined in this article, unless such change is approved by the council. The requirement concerning change in officers does not apply to corporations whose stock is traded on the New York or American Stock Exchanges. 
(c)  Licenses issued to associations or partnerships shall be valid only so long as there is no change in the partnership or association, unless such change is approved by the council. 
(d)  Corporations, partnerships, or associations holding licenses shall submit written notice to the city clerk of any changes described herein on or before 30 days prior to the effective date of any such change. Notwithstanding the definition of "interest" as defined in this article, in the case of a corporation, the licensee shall notify the city clerk when a person not listed in the application acquires an interest that, when combined with that of a spouse, parent, brother, sister, or child, exceeds five percent and shall give all information about said person as is required of a person pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Corporations holding licenses shall submit written notice to the city clerk of any change in operating managers prior to the effective date of such change. The written notice shall designate the new operating manager. The new operating manager shall be subject to the investigation required by this article. 
(f)  The designation of a new operating manager shall not cause the corporation's license to become invalid before a decision is rendered by the city manager or city manager's designee, provided proper notice and application are made by the applicant. A proposed new operating manager shall be referred to as the interim operating manager. In the event an interim operating manager is rejected by the city manager or city manager's designee, the corporation shall designate another interim operating manager and make the required application within 15 days of the decision by the city manager or city manager's designee. In any event, a corporation shall be limited to two successive interim operating managers. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-32. - Ineligible for license. 
(a)  State law. No license shall be granted to or held by any person: 
(1)  Made ineligible by state law; 
(2)  Who is a person under 21 years of age; 
(3)  Who is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien; 
(4)  Upon whom it is impractical to conduct a background and financial investigation due to the unavailability of information; 
(5)  Who has had a liquor license revoked within five years of the license application, or to any person who at the time of the violation owns any interest, whether as a holder of more than five percent of the capital stock of a corporation licensee, or to a corporation, partnership, association, enterprise, business, or firm in which any such person is in any manner interested; 
(6)  Who is not of good moral character and repute; 
(7)  Who has a direct or indirect interest in a manufacturer, brewer, or wholesaler; or 
(8)  Who, within five years of the license application, has been convicted of a felony or a willful violation of a federal or state law or local ordinance governing the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of an alcohol beverage and who cannot show competent evidence under M.S. § 364.03 of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a licensee. 
(b)  Manager required. No licenses shall be granted to a corporation that does not have an operating manager. 
(c)  Real party in interest. No license shall be granted to a person who, in the judgment of the council, is not the real party in interest or beneficial owner of the business operated, or to be operated, under the license. 
(d)  Residency requirements. A license will not be renewed if, in the case of an individual, the licensee is not a resident of the state at the time of the date for renewal; if, in the case of a partnership, the managing partner is not a resident of the state at the time of the renewal; or in the case of a corporation, if the operating manager is not a resident of the state at the time of the date of renewal. The time for establishing residency within the state may, for good cause, be extended by the council. 
(e)  Delinquent taxes or charges. No license shall be granted for operation on any premises on which state, city or county taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the state, city, or county are delinquent and unpaid. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the delinquent taxes, assessments, or financial claims are against a landowner, and licensee is a tenant of landowner and has no financial interest in landowner, then the city council may, in its discretion, but shall not be required to, grant a license to an applicant so long as the applicant is not delinquent on any taxes, assessments, or financial claims as set forth herein. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  Instructional program. No license or renewal license shall be issued to sell alcoholic beverages under this article unless an applicant or license holder has an approved program for instructing all employees at the business premises for which the license was issued, in the legal requirements pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages, including, but not limited to, reviewing the law on the sale of alcoholic beverages, providing information on the health risks of using alcoholic beverages, and requiring employees to request identification from every customer who appears to be under 27 years of age. No license shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant or license holder signs a city form attesting that each employee of the applicant or license holder has received training and instruction on the sale of alcoholic beverages and the date such training occurred. Training must be completed before an employee commences work in a licensed establishment and annually thereafter. The training shall include information that the sale of alcoholic beverages to minors is illegal, explains what proof of age is legally acceptable, and that a sale to a minor can subject the applicant or license holder and their employees to criminal liability. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 618, § 3, 1-23-17) 
Sec. 10-33. - Conditions of approval. 
    At the time a license is issued pursuant to this article or a consumption and display permit is approved, the city council may attach special conditions to the approval based upon the nature of the business the location of the business, and verified complaints, if any, to protect the health, safety, welfare, and quietude of the community and ensure harmony with the location where the business is located. Violation of any of the conditions shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-34. - Nudity on licensed premises. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person on premises licensed under this article to: 
(1)  Employ or use any person in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages in or upon the licensed premises while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose or to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft or the buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
(2)  Employ or use services of any host or hostess while such host or hostess is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as described in subsection (1) above. 
(3)  Employ or use any dancers, musicians, or other performers or entertainers, who are unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as described in paragraph (1) above. 
(4)  Directly or indirectly sponsor any contests which may foreseeably cause, result in, or lead to the occurrence of the acts or incidents described in subsection (6) below. 
(5)  Encourage or permit any person on the licensed premises to touch, caress or fondle breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any employee of the licensee or any performers or entertainers who are employed or whose services are used by the licensee. 
(6)  Permit any person to perform acts of or acts which simulate: 
a.  With or upon another person sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law; 
b.  Masturbation or bestiality; 
c.  With or upon another person the touching, caressing or fondling of the buttocks, anus, genitals, or female breasts; 
d.  The displaying of pubic hair, anus, vulva, genitals or female breasts below the top of the areola. 
(7)  Permit any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects depicting any of the prohibited activities described. 
(8)  Permit any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises, or any area owned or controlled by the licensee upon the licensee's premises, who permits the public to view any portion of his genitals or anus. 
(9)  Permit the showing of film, still pictures, electronic reproduction or other visual reproduction depicting: 
a.  Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law; 
b.  Any person being touched, caressed or fondled on the breast, buttock, anus, or genitals; 
c.  Scenes wherein a person displays the vulva, the anus or the genitals; 
d.  Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the prohibited activities described in this section. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any theatrical production performed in a theater by a professional theatrical or musical company that has serious artistic merit. 
(c)  Both the licensee and the person(s) actually engaging in any of the acts prohibited by subsection (a) shall be criminally liable. Any violation of this section shall also constitute grounds for revocation or suspension of the licensee's license. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-35. - Federal stamps. 
    No licensee shall possess a federal wholesale liquor dealer's special tax stamp or a federal gambling stamp. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-36. - Compliance checks. 
(a)  Compliance checks. From time to time, the city shall conduct compliance checks. Such compliance checks may involve, but are not limited to, engaging underage persons to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase alcohol and alcohol related products. 
(b)  Underage persons. If underage persons are used for compliance checks they shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of alcohol when such items are obtained as a part of a compliance check. No underage person used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the person's age, and all underage persons lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the person's age asked by the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce any identification for which he or she is asked. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-37. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
    The council may suspend or revoke any license for the sale of intoxicating or 3.2 percent malt liquor for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  False or misleading statements made on a license application or renewal, or failure to abide by the commitments, promises or representations made to the city council; 
(b)  Violation of any special conditions under which the license was granted, including, but not limited to, the timely payment of real estate taxes, and all other charges; 
(c)  Violation of any federal, state, or local law regulating the sale of intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor, or controlled substance; 
(d)  Creation of a nuisance on the premises or in the surrounding area; 
(e)  That the licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts upon the licensed premises or on property owned or controlled by the licensee adjacent to the licensed premises, unrelated to the sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor; 
(f)  That the licensee had knowledge of illegal acts upon or attributable to the licensed premises, but failed to report the same to the police; 
(g)  Expiration or cancellation of any required insurance, or failure to notify the city within a reasonable time of changes in the term of the insurance or the carriers. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-38. - Inactive license. 
    The city council may revoke the intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor license of any establishment granted a license that is not under construction and exhibiting satisfactory progress toward completion within six months from its issuance, or any establishment that ceases operation for a period of six months. A hearing shall be held to determine what progress has been made toward opening or reopening the establishment and, if satisfactory progress is not demonstrated, the council may revoke the license. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-39. - Hearing notice. 
    Revocation or suspension of a license by the city council shall be preceded by a public hearing conducted in accordance with M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.69. The city council may appoint a hearing examiner or may conduct a hearing itself. The hearing notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the hearing, include notice of the time and place of the hearing, and state the nature of the charges against the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 371, § 6, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 10-40. - Minimum civil penalties. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish criteria by which the city council determines the length of license suspensions and the propriety of revocations, and shall apply to all premises licensed under this article. These penalties are the minimum penalties appropriate for most situations; however, the council may deviate in an individual case where the council finds that there exist reasons making it more appropriate to deviate, such as, but not limited to, a licensee's efforts in combination with the state or city to prevent the sale of alcohol to minors. When deviating from these standards, the council will provide written findings that support the penalty selected. 
(b)  Minimum penalties for violations. The minimum penalties for convictions or violations are as follows (unless specified, numbers below indicate consecutive days' suspension); 
Appearance Type of Violation 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 1. Commission of a felony related to the licensed activity Revocation NA NA NA 2. Sale of alcoholic beverages while license is under suspension Revocation NA NA NA 3. Sale of alcoholic beverages to under-age person 3 6 18 Revocation 4. Sale of alcoholic beverages to obviously intoxicated person 3 6 18 Revocation 5. After hours sale of alcoholic beverages 3 6 18 Revocation 6. After hours display or consumption of alcoholic beverages 3 6 18 Revocation 7. Refusal to allow city inspectors or police admission to inspect premises 5 15 Revocation NA 8. Illegal gambling on premises 3 6 18 Revocation 9. Failure to take reasonable steps to stop person from leaving premises with alcoholic beverages 3 6 18 Revocation 10. Sale of intoxicating liquor where only license is for 3.2 percent malt liquor Revocation NA NA NA  
(c)  Multiple violations. At a licensee's first appearance before the council, the council must act upon all of the violations that have been alleged in the notice sent to the licensee. The council in that case must consider the minimum penalty for each violation under the first appearance column in subsection (b) above. The occurrence of multiple violations is grounds for deviation from the minimum penalties in the council's discretion. 
(d)  Subsequent violations. Violations occurring after the notice of hearing has been mailed, but prior to the hearing, must be treated as a separate violation and dealt with as a second appearance before the council, unless the city manager and licensee agree in writing to add the violation to the first appearance. The same procedure applies to a second, third, or fourth appearance before the council. 
(e)  Subsequent appearances. Upon a second, third, or fourth appearance before the council by the same licensee, the council must impose the minimum penalty for the violation or violations giving rise to the subsequent appearance without regard to the particular violation or violations that were the subject of the first or prior appearance. However, the council may consider the amount of time elapsed between appearances as a basis for deviating from the minimum penalty imposed by this section. 
(f)  Computation of appearances. After the first appearance, a subsequent appearance by the same licensee will be determined as follows: 
(1)  If the first appearance was within three years of the current violation the current violation will be treated as second appearance. 
(2)  If a licensee has appeared before the council on two previous occasions, and the current violation occurred within five years of the first appearance, the current violation will be treated as a third appearance. 
(3)  If a licensee has appeared before the council on three previous occasions, and the current violation occurred within seven years of the first appearance, the current violation will be treated as a fourth appearance. 
(4)  Any appearance not covered by subsection (1), (2), or (3), above will be treated as a first appearance. 
(g)  Other penalties. Nothing in this section shall restrict or limit the authority of the council to suspend up to 60 days, revoke the license, impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000.00, to impose conditions, or take any other action in accordance with law; provided, that the license holder has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing in the manner provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
DIVISION 3. - RETAIL SALES REGULATION 

Sec. 10-41. - Right of inspection. 
(a)  Any city designated police officer displaying proper identification shall have the unqualified right to enter, inspect, and search the premises of any licensee hereunder without a warrant, during business hours or when owners, managers, or other employees are located on the premises. 
(b)  the business records of the licensee, including federal and state tax returns, shall be available for inspection by the city at all reasonable times upon written request. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-42. - Responsibility of licensee. 
(a)  Orderly conduct. Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct on the licensee's place of business including conduct and activity attributable to the business on property owned or controlled by the licensee. Every licensee shall also cooperate with the city in controlling activity attributable to the business in surrounding areas. 
(b)  Act of employee. The act of any employee in violation of this article on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable for all penalties provided by this article and other laws equally with the employee. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-43. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Hours and days of sale. Hours and days of sale shall be as allowed by state law. There shall be no consumption or display of intoxicating or 3.2 percent malt liquor during the hours that sale is prohibited by state law. 
(b)  Non-employees on premises. A liquor licensee shall not allow non-employees on the business premises from 15 minutes after the sale of intoxicating liquor is prohibited until the sale is again permitted except as hereinafter provided. On-sale intoxicating liquor licensees and on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licensees may permit non-employees on the premises during its normal hours of operation when the sale of intoxicating and 3.2 percent malt liquor is prohibited, provided, that there be no sale, consumption, or display of intoxicating or 3.2 percent malt liquor during the hours in which the sale or consumption of liquor is prohibited, and provided that the licensee has closed off all access to the bar area in a manner approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-44. - Posting license. 
    All liquor licensees shall have the license posted in a conspicuous place that is visible to the public in the licensed establishment at all times. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-45. - Building changes. 
    Proposed enlargement or substantial alteration which changes the character of the establishment, or extension of premises previously licensed shall be reported to the city clerk at or before the time application is made for a building permit for any such change. The enlargement, substantial alteration or extension shall not be allowed unless the council approves an amendment to the license. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-46. - Public character of liquor sales. 
    No sale of liquor shall be made to or in guest rooms of hotels unless: 
(1)  The rules of such hotel provide for the service of meals in guest rooms; 
(2)  The sale of such liquor is made in the manner on-sales are required to be made; 
(3)  Such sale accompanies and is incidental to the regular service of meals to guests therein; 
(4)  The rules of such hotel and the description, location, and number of such guest rooms are fully set out in the application for the liquor license. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-47. - Restrictions involving underage persons. 
(a)  No licensee, his agent, or employee shall serve or dispense upon the licensed premises any intoxicating or 3.2 percent malt liquor to a person under the legal drinking age; nor shall such licensee, or his agent or employee, permit any such person to be furnished or allowed to consume any such liquors on the licensed premises; nor shall such licensee, his agent, or employee, permit any such person to be delivered any such liquors. 
(b)  No person under the legal drinking age shall enter a licensed premises for the purpose of purchasing or consuming any alcoholic beverage. It is not unlawful for any person who has attained the age of 18 years to enter licensed premises for the following purposes; 
(1)  To perform work for the establishment, including the serving of alcoholic beverages, unless otherwise prohibited by statute; 
(2)  To consume meals; and 
(3)  To attend social functions that are held in a portion of the establishment where liquor is not sold. 
(c)  No person under the legal drinking age shall possess any intoxicating or 3.2 percent malt liquor. Possession of an alcoholic beverage by a person under the legal drinking age at a place other than the household of the parent or guardian is prima facie evidence of intent to consume it at a place other than the household of the person's parent or guardian. 
(d)  Misrepresenting age. No underage person shall misrepresent the person's age for the purpose of obtaining intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor, nor shall the person enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor for the purposes of purchasing or having served or delivered any alcoholic beverage. Nor shall any such person purchase, attempt to purchase, consume, or have another person purchase for the underage person any intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor. 
(e)  Identification requirements. 
(1)  Identification required. Any person shall, upon demand of the licensee, his employee, or agent, produce and permit to be examined one of the forms of identification provided under M.S. § 340A.503, subd. 6. 
(2)  Prima facie evidence. In every prosecution for a violation of the provisions of this section relating to the sale or furnishing of intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating malt beverages to underage persons and in every proceeding before the council with respect thereto, the fact that the underage person involved has obtained and presented to the licensee, his employee or agent, a driver's license, passport or identification card from which it appears that said person was not an underage person and was regularly issued such identification card, shall be prima facie evidence that the licensee, his agent or employee is not guilty of a violation of such a provision and shall be conclusive evidence that a violation, if one has occurred, was not willful or intentional. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 371, § 7, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 10-48. - Employment of persons under eighteen years of age. 
    No person under 18 years of age may serve or sell intoxicating liquor in a retail intoxicating liquor establishment. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-49. - Prohibited conditions. 
(a)  Prostitution. No licensee shall knowingly permit the licensed premises or any room in those premises or any adjoining building directly under the licensee's control to be used by prostitutes. 
(b)  Controlled substances. No licensee shall knowingly permit the sale, possession or consumption of controlled substances on the licensed premises in violation of state law. 
(c)  Gambling. Except for lawful gambling conducted in accordance with state law and City Code, gambling and gambling devices are not permitted on licensed premises. State lottery tickets may be purchased or sold within licensed premises as authorized by the director of the state lottery. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 371, § 8, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 10-50. - Ownership of equipment. 
    No equipment or fixture in any licensed place shall be owned in whole or in part by any manufacturer or distiller except such as shall be expressly permitted by state law. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-51. - Display of liquor. 
    No on-sale liquor establishment shall display liquor to the public during the hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-52. - Delivery. 
(a)  Restrictions. Only licensed off-sale retail liquor establishments and no other dealers may make deliveries of intoxicating liquor from their stores to the residence of the purchaser or other location. Such delivery shall be made only to a person 21 or more years of age. No deliveries may be made to a beer tavern or other public or private place in violation of law. No deliveries may be made to purchasers in any location where the sale or delivery thereof is prohibited by law. No deliveries may be made of any intoxicating liquor during the hours when off-sale of liquor is prohibited by state law or municipal ordinance. Only alcoholic beverages ordered and packed at the store for delivery shall be carried in the delivery vehicle. 
(b)  Delivery tickets required. The person in charge of any vehicle delivering intoxicating liquor to purchasers shall carry an invoice or delivery slip stating the date and names and addresses of the seller and purchaser, itemizing the number, size, and brands of intoxicating liquor to be delivered. Upon delivery, the invoice shall be signed by the person accepting delivery and by the deliverer and the signed copy preserved on the retainer's premises for a period of six months. 
(c)  Licensee may refuse to deliver. Any licensee, or employee or agent of the licensee, may refuse to sell or deliver intoxicating liquor to any person whom they have reasons to believe is ineligible to buy such liquor, or whom they have reason to believe intends to deliver the intoxicating liquor to ineligible consumers. They may require a person of doubtful age to produce written evidence of being 21 or more years of age. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00) 
Sec. 10-53. - Samples. 
    On- or off-sale licensees may provide or permit a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler or its agents to provide on the premises of the retail licensee samples of malt liquor, wine, liqueurs, cordials, and distilled spirits which the licensee currently has in stock and is offering for sale to the general public without obtaining an additional license, provided, the malt liquor, wine, liqueur, cordial, and distilled spirits samples are dispensed at no charge and consumed on the licensed premises during the permitted hours of sale in a quantity less than 100 milliliters of malt liquor per variety per customer, 50 milliliters of wine per variety per customer, 25 milliliters of liqueur or cordial, and 15 milliliters of distilled spirits per variety per customer. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 632, § 5, 6-11-18) 
Secs. 10-54-10-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 337, § 1, adopted May 22, 2002, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 10-54-10-82. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 10-76-10-82. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; miscellaneous provisions and offenses, Ch. 11; zoning, Ch. 20. 

Sec. 10-76. - Sale of fireworks. 
    It is unlawful to sell fireworks in the City of Chanhassen in violation of M.S. §§ 624.20 through 624.25, inclusive, which are adopted by reference. "Legal fireworks" as defined in this article may, however, be sold upon issuance of a license issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 5-22-02) 
Sec. 10-77. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this section "legal fireworks" is defined to mean: 
Wire or wood sparklers of not more than 100 grams of mixture per item, other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical mixture per tube or a total of 200 grams or less for multiple tubes, snakes and glow worms, smoke devices, or trick noisemakers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops, each consisting of not more than twenty-five hundredths grains of explosive mixture. 
(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 5-22-02) 
Cross reference- Rules of construction and definitions, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-78. - Application. 
    The application for a license shall contain the following information: name, address, and telephone number of applicant; the address of the location where fireworks will be sold; the type of legal fireworks to be sold; the estimated quantity of legal fireworks that will be stored and displayed on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 5-22-02) 
Sec. 10-79. - Processing application. 
    The application must be filed with the fire marshal together with the license fee. Following an inspection of the premises proposed to be licensed, the city manager or his/her designee shall issue the license if the conditions for license approval are satisfied and the location is properly zoned. If the city manager or his/her designee denies the license application, the applicant may, within ten days, appeal the decision to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 5-22-02) 
Sec. 10-80. - Conditions of license. 
    The license shall be issued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The license is nontransferable, either to a different person or location. 
(2)  The licensed premises must comply with National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124 (2003 edition). 
(3)  The license must be publicly displayed on the licensed premises. 
(4)  The premises are subject to inspection by city employees or law enforcement during normal business hours. 
(5)  The sale of legal fireworks must be allowed by the zoning ordinance and must comply with all zoning ordinance requirements including signs. 
(6)  The premises must be in compliance with the state building code and state fire code. 
(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 5-22-02; Ord. No. 421, 6-26-06) 
Sec. 10-81. - License period and license fee. 
    Licenses shall be issued for a calendar year. The license fee shall be established by city council resolution. License fees shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 5-22-02) 
Sec. 10-82. - Revocation of license. 
    Following written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the city manager or his/her designee may revoke a license for violation of this article or state law concerning the sale, use or possession of fireworks. If a license is revoked, neither the applicant nor the licensed premises may obtain a license for 12 months. If the city manager or his/her designee revokes a license, the license holder may within ten days appeal the decision to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 5-22-02) 
Secs. 10-83-10-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 186, adopted May 24, 1993, amended art. IV in its entirety and designated provisions as §§ 10-141-10-151. In order to avoid duplication of section numbers, the provisions of the ordinance originally designated as §§ 10-150 and 10-151 have been redesignated by the editor as §§ 10-149.1 and 10-149.2, respectively. Prior to amendment, Art. IV consisted of §§ 10-141 and 10-142 which bore no history notes. 
State Law reference- Peddlers and transient merchants, M.S. § 329.095 et seq.; authority of city to restrain, license or regulate hawkers, peddlers, etc., M.S. § 412.221, subd. 19; authority to regulate transient merchants, M.S. § 437.02. 

Sec. 10-141. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 371, § 9, adopted Apr. 12, 2004, repealed § 10-141, which pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. 186, § 1, adopted May 24, 1993. See § 1-2 for definitions. 
Sec. 10-142. - Registration required. 
    It unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant to engage in any such activity within the city without first registering with the city in compliance with the provisions of this article. Any transient merchant, peddler, or solicitor registering in the city must show proof that such person is licensed for such occupation under the provisions of M.S. ch. 329, as amended. Registration does not exempt compliance with other applicable local, state, and federal laws, including the zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 5-24-93; Ord. No. 371, § 10, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 10-143. - Exemptions. 
    The registration requirements of this article do not apply to: 
(1)  Persons selling products of the farm or garden, including Christmas trees and flowers at sites approved by the city manager or city manager's designee considering vehicular traveling speeds, turning movement, available parking, and other public safety considerations; 
(2)  Children, age 17 or younger, soliciting for school sponsored activities; 
(3)  Residents selling personal property from their residence for no more than three days per year (such as a "garage sale,"); or 
(4)  Religious, charitable, or nonprofit organizations. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 5-24-93; Ord. No. 298, § 2, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 371, § 11, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 10-144. - Registration form. 
    Persons registering under this article shall file with the city a written statement on a form to be furnished by the city. The statement shall provide: 
(1)  Name, date of birth, driver's license number identification, and written authorization for necessary background checks by the city of the person registering and each individual that will be carrying out the activity of a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant. While only one representative for a group need apply on behalf of the organization, each individual that will be participating in the activity shall be required to submit their name, date of birth, driver's license information, and written authorization for the city to conduct a background check. 
(2)  The permanent home and business address of the applicant and, in the case of transient merchants, the local address from which proposed sales will be made. 
(3)  A description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold, and the name and address of the person or business from whom the goods were purchased. 
(4)  The length of time for which the right to do business is required. 
(5)  The names of at least three references who will substantiate the person's good character and business respectability or other evidence of the good character and business responsibility of the person registering. 
(6)  A statement as to whether or not the person has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, other than traffic violations, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed. 
(7)  The two preceding cities, if any, where the person carried on his activity prior to the current registration. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 5-24-93; Ord. No. 371, § 12, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 10-145. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 596, § 1, adopted May 27, 2014, repealed § 10-145, entitled "Fee", which derived from: Ord. No. 186, § 1, adopted May 24, 1993; and Ord. No. 396, § 1, adopted June 27, 2005. 
Sec. 10-146. - Persons working for or assisting registrant. 
    The registrant shall also supply the information required in section 10-144 of this article for all persons working for or assisting the registrant for each person. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 5-24-93; Ord. No. 596, § 2, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 10-147. - Registration verification. 
(a)  Upon registration, the city shall issue a photo identification card, which shall be visibly displayed by the person(s) engaged in such activity. The photo identification card must be returned to the city within ten days of the expiration date. Failure to return the photo identification card within ten days of expiration shall be grounds for denial of a permit for the following 365 days. 
(b)  The permit holder must have in their possession at times while engaging in soliciting, a state or federal ID, such as a drivers license or passport. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 5-24-93; Ord. No. 371, § 13, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 396, § 2, 6-27-05; Ord. No. 596, § 3, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 10-148. - Practices prohibited. 
(a)  No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall call attention to his business or to his merchandise by crying out, by blowing a horn, or by ringing a bell or other noise so as to be audible within the confines of an enclosed dwelling structure, or otherwise in violation of city ordinances pertaining to noise or other nuisances. 
(b)  Peddlers and solicitors may be prohibited by placard. Any resident of a dwelling unit or business employee in the city who wishes to exclude peddlers, solicitors, or transient merchants from the dwelling unit occupied by the resident or business, may place upon or near the usual entrance to the dwelling or business a printed placard or sign bearing the following notice: "Peddlers and Solicitors Prohibited." The placard or sign shall be at least 33/4 inches long and 33/4 inches wide and the printing shall not be smaller than 48-point type. No peddler or solicitor shall enter upon any premises, ring any doorbell, or knock on any door where a placard or sign is posted, unless the peddler or solicitor has been previously invited by the resident of the dwelling unit. 
    No person other than the dwelling unit's occupant, or authorized employee of the business shall remove, injure or deface the placard sign. 
(c)  Any resident or employee of a business in the city who wishes to exclude the deposit of advertising handbills, advertising circulars and other advertising materials from the premises occupied by the resident or the place of business may place upon or near the front entrance to the premises a printed placard or sign bearing the following notice: "Depositing of Handbills, Circulars, Advertising Material Prohibited." The placard or sign shall be at least 33/4 inches long and 33/4 inches wide and the printing shall not be smaller than 48-point type. 
    No person other than the person occupying the premises or authorized employee of the business shall remove, injure or deface the placard or sign. 
    No person shall enter upon any premises where such a sign or placard is placed and deposit any advertising handbills, advertising circulars or other advertising material. 
(d)  No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall enter upon any residential or business premises for the purpose of carrying on his trade or business between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of the following day unless such person has been expressly invited to do so by the owner or occupant thereof. 
(e)  Peddlers, such as ice cream sales, that sell from a motor vehicle where the customer comes to the motor vehicle to make a purchase may not solicit sales on public or private streets, roads or highways, or any other roadways. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 5-24-93; Ord. No. 371, § 14, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 396, § 3, 6-27-05) 
Sec. 10-149. - Registration period. 
    Registration expirations shall be set by the permit technician based upon the planned solicitation, but shall expire no later than December 31 after their issue. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 5-24-93; Ord. No. 596, § 4, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 10-149.1. - Registration nontransferable. 
    A registration may not be transferred. Each peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall separately register. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 5-24-93) 
Sec. 10-149.2. - Revocation or denial of registration. 
(a)  A person registered under the provisions of this article shall be allowed to conduct his or her activity within the city provided that none of the following occurs: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for registration. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on his or her activity. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  A criminal conviction that is directly related to the occupation or business licensed as defined by M.S. § 364.03, subd. 2, provided that the registrant or applicant cannot show competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the licensed occupation or business as defined by M.S. § 364.03, subd. 3. 
a.  There is a presumption that the following offenses are directly related and that the rehabilitation period is ten years from the completion of the sentence for the offense: 
Homicide 
Robbery (including simple robbery) 
Assault (1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th degrees) 
Criminal sexual assault (including fifth degree) 
Solicitation of children to engage in sexual conduct 
Kidnapping 
False imprisonment 
b.  There is a presumption that the following offenses are directly related and that the rehabilitation period is five years from the completion of the sentence for the offense: 
Burglary 
Theft (misdemeanor and above) 
Possession of stolen property 
Identify theft 
Mail theft 
Motor vehicle tampering 
Embezzlement 
Possession of code grabbing devices 
Burglary and theft tools 
Forgery 
Aggravated forgery 
Obtaining signature by false pretense 
Interference with privacy 
Stalking 
Racketeering 
Coercion 
Deceptive or unfair trade practices elderly or handicapped victims 
Prostitution 
(5)  Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  A registration shall be denied or revoked by the city clerk/manager, preceded by written notion and an opportunity to be heard, if any of the conduct listed in subsection (a) of this section shall occur. 
(Ord. No. 186, § 1, 5-24-93; Ord. No. 371, § 15, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 396, § 4, 6-27-05; Ord. No. 596, § 5, 5-27-14) 
ARTICLE V. - GAMBLING 

Sec. 10-150. - Lawful gambling permitted. 
    Lawful gambling conducted pursuant to M.S. ch. 349, is authorized within the city and shall be operated in accordance with the terms and conditions specified in this article, other applicable provisions of the City Code, and state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 156, § 1, 10-28-91) 
Sec. 10-151. - Authorized organizations. 
    An organization shall not be eligible to conduct lawful gambling in the city unless it meets the qualification in M.S. § 349.16, subd. 2. 
(Ord. No. 156, § 1, 10-28-91; Ord. No. 371, § 16, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 10-152. - Distribution of proceeds. 
(a)  Each organization licensed to conduct gambling within the city shall contribute to the city, for distribution by the city for lawful purposes, at least ten percent of the organization's net profits derived from lawful gambling. For purposes of this section, net profits are profits less amounts expended for allowable expenses. 
(b)  Each organization conducting lawful gambling within the city must expend at least 50 percent of its net profits derived from lawful gambling on lawful purposes conducted or located within the city or any municipality contiguous to the city. The contribution required in subsection (a) above shall be considered as part of the 50 percent expenditure. 
(c)  An organization that conducts gambling on fewer than five days in a calendar year is exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 156, § 1, 10-28-91; Ord. No. 371, § 17, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 10-153. - Filing of records; investigations. 
(a)  Every organization licensed to conduct gambling in the city shall file with the city manager or city manager's designee, upon request, all records and reports required to be filed within the state gambling control board pursuant to M.S. ch. 349, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(b)  Each organization licensed to conduct gambling in the city shall complete the city's investigation form and submit any additional information required by the city. 
(c)  Any organization leasing premises for the conducting of lawful gambling shall, upon request from the city manager or city manager's designee, file with the city a copy of the lease within one week after execution of the lease. The lease shall not provide for rental payments based on a percentage of receipts or profits from lawful gambling. 
(d)  Every gambling event in the city conducted by an organization under state license shall be open to inspection by city employees and the county sheriff's department. 
(e)  The city may inspect, at any reasonable time without notice or search warrant, all records of a licensed organization required to be maintained by the state gambling control board. 
(Ord. No. 156, § 1, 10-28-91; Ord. No. 298, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 10-154. - Qualifications. 
    The city council shall not adopt a resolution approving a premises permit or bingo hall license from any applicant which has an officer, director, or other person in a supervisory or management position, who: 
(1)  Has ever been convicted of a felony; 
(2)  Has ever been convicted of a crime involving gambling; 
(3)  Is not of good moral character and repute; 
(4)  Has ever been convicted of (i) assault, (ii) a criminal violation involving the use of a firearm, or (iii) making terroristic threats; or 
(5)  Owes delinquent local, state, or federal taxes, or is delinquent on any other city bill. 
(6)  Is in violation of any land use or zoning ordinance including the premises proposed to be licensed. 
(Ord. No. 156, § 1, 10-28-91) 
Secs. 10-155-10-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 375, § 1, adopted May 10, 2004, amended Art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI, §§ 10-160-10-180, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 193, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 1993. 

Sec. 10-160. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, to guard against the inception and transmission of disease, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(b)  The city council further finds that experience from other cities demonstrates that sexually oriented businesses conducted in private by members of the same or the opposite sex, and employing personnel with no specialized training, are susceptible to operation in a manner contravening, subverting or endangering the health, safety and welfare of members of the community by being the sites of acts of prostitution, illicit sex, and occasions of violent crimes, thus requiring close inspection, licensing, and regulation. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-161. - Classification. 
    The following are classified as sexually oriented businesses: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores, adult video stores, adult stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult conversation/rap parlors; 
(5)  Adult massage parlors; 
(6)  Adult motels; 
(7)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(8)  Adult saunas; 
(9)  Adult theaters; 
(10)  Escort agencies; 
(11)  Nude model studios; and 
(12)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-162. - License required. 
(a)  Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  Application form. An application for a sexually oriented business license must be made on a form provided by the city. 
(c)  Required information. An application shall be considered complete if it includes the information required in this section. The applicant shall be qualified according to the provisions of this article. The application shall be notarized. The application shall include the information called for in subsections (1) through (6), and where applicable, subsection (7), as follows: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used in the preceding five years. 
(2)  The current business address. 
(3)  Either a set of fingerprints suitable for conducting necessary background checks pursuant to this article, or the applicant's Social Security number, to be used for the same purpose. 
(4)  The name, business location, legal description, business mailing address and phone number of the proposed sexually oriented business. 
(5)  Written proof of age, in the form of either (i) a copy of a birth certificate and current photo, (ii) a current driver's license with picture, or (iii) other picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
(6)  The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license or permit held by the applicant relating to a sexually oriented business, and whether any such license or permit has been denied, revoked, or suspended, and if so, the reason or reasons therefore. 
(7)  The name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
    The information provided pursuant to subsections (1) through (7) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city clerk within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  Diagram of premises. The application for a sexually oriented business license must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who must comply with section 10-175 of this article shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of that section. 
(e)  Inspections. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this article and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the fire department and building official. 
(f)  Execution of application. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the individual must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten percent or greater interest in the business, and each officer, director, general partner, or other person who will participate directly in decisions relating to management of the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 10-163 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(g)  No Exemption. A person who possesses a valid business license is not exempt from the requirement of obtaining any required sexually oriented business license. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a business license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this article, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-163. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Temporary license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license, the city shall issue a temporary license to the applicant, which temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant the license. 
(b)  Approval of license. Within 30 days after the receipt of a completed application, the city manager or the city manager's designee shall either issue a license, or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license, to the applicant. The city shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or more of the following is found to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant is delinquent in the payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him or her or imposed upon him or her in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information required under section 10-162 or which is necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article within two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(5)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not been approved by the fire department and the building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(6)  The license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(7)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with this article. 
(8)  An applicant has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving any of the following offenses: 
1.  Prostitution as described in M.S. § 609.321; 
2.  Solicitation, inducement of promotion of prostitution as described in M.S. § 609.322; 
3.  Receiving profit derived from prostitution as described in M.S. § 609.322, subd. 1(3); 
4.  Other prohibited acts relating to prostitution as described in M.S. § 609.324; 
5.  Obscenity as described in M.S. § 617.241; 
6.  Sale, dissemination, distribution, display or exhibition of harmful materials to minors as described in M.S. §§ 617.293 and 617.294; 
7.  Sexual performance by a child as described in M.S. § 617.246; 
8.  Dissemination or possession of child pornography as described in M.S. § 617.247; 
9.  Indecent exposure as described in M.S. § 617.23; 
10.  Criminal sexual conduct as described in M.S. §§ 609.342, 609.343, 609.344, and 609.345; 
11.  Incest, as described in M.S. § 609.365; or 
12.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses: 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period. 
(9)  The proposed sexually oriented business would or does not comply with the city's zoning article. 
(c)  Conviction. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant. For purposes of this section, "conviction": 
(1)  Means a conviction or a guilty plea; and 
(2)  Includes a conviction of any business entity for which the applicant had, at the time of the offense leading to the conviction for a crime designated under this section, a management responsibility or a controlling interest. 
(d)  Time periods. An applicant who has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection 10-163(b)(8)a. may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by subsection 10-163(b)(8)b. has elapsed. 
(e)  License information and posting. The license, if granted, shall state the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-164. - License fees; license investigation fees. 
    The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license shall be set by the city council. The investigation fee for the purpose of issuing a license shall be set by the city council. In the event that the license is denied upon application, the license fee shall be refunded; however, no part of the license investigation fee shall be returned to the applicant. No part of the annual license fee shall be refunded if the license is suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-165. - Inspection. 
(a)  Inspection required. An applicant, operator, or licensee shall permit law enforcement officers and any other federal, state, county or city agency in the performance of any function connected with the enforcement of this article, normally and arguably conducted by such agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  Refusal. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or their agent or employee commits an offense if the person refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(c)  Exception. The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-166. - Expiration of license. 
(a)  Period of license and renewal. Each renewal license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses expire on June 30 of each year. Each license may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 10-162. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date. If the council determines good and sufficient cause is shown by the applicant for failure to file a timely renewal application, the council may, if other provisions of this article are complied with, grant the application. 
(b)  Denial of license renewal. If the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-167. - Suspension. 
    The city manager may suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days following written notice and an opportunity to be heard if the city manager determines that a licensee or an employee of a license has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with this article; 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; and 
(3)  Knowingly permitted unlawful gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-168. - Revocation. 
(a)  Intent to revoke. The city manager shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if a cause of suspension in section 10-167 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  Basis for revocation. The city manager shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if the city manager determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information to the city during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or operator has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or operator has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or operator knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection 10-163(b)(8)a. for which the time period required in subsection 10-163(b)(8)b. has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in subsection 10-163(b)(8)a., for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or operator has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the meaning as it is defined in M.S. § § 609.341, subd. 11(b). This subsection shall not apply to an adult motel, unless the licensee knowingly allowed sexual activities to occur either (i) in exchange for money, or (ii) in a public place or with public view; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem taxes, local lodging tax, or other taxes or fees related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  Appeal of conviction. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Exception. Subsection (b)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  Provisional license. When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in section 10-169, the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective, provided that, if the conditions of subsection 10-169(e) are met, a provisional license shall be granted pursuant to that section. If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(7), an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under subsection 10-163(b)(8)b. have elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-169. - Hearing; license denial, suspension, revocation; appeal. 
(a)  Notification. If the city manager determines that facts exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license under this article, the city manager shall notify the applicant or licensee ("respondent") in writing of the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, including the grounds therefore, by personal delivery or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the most current business address on file with the city. Within five working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the city manager, in writing, a response that shall include a statement of reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended, or revoked. Within three days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the city manager shall notify respondent in writing of the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation proceeding. 
(b)  Appeal and hearing. Within ten working days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the city shall conduct a hearing on respondent's appeal of the city manager's decision. The city council may appoint a committee of the council or an independent hearing officer to hear the matter, report findings of fact and a recommendation for disposition to the council. Hearings on the appeal shall be open to the public and the licensee or applicant shall have the right to appear and be represented by legal counsel and to offer evidence in its behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall make a final decision. If a response is not received by the city in the time stated or, if after the hearing, the city finds that grounds as specified in this article exist for denial, suspension, or revocation, then such denial, suspension, or revocation shall become final five days after the city sends, by certified mail, written notice that the license has been denied, suspended, or revoked. Such notice shall include a statement advising the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
    If the city council finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, then within five days after the hearing, the city manager shall withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, and shall so notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action and shall contemporaneously issue the license. 
(c)  Judicial review. Any decision of the city council shall be a final appealable order and the applicant or licensee ("aggrieved party") may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Stay of decision. The filing of an appeal stays the action and decision of the city council requiring, denying, suspending or revoking a license until 60 days after a final decision by the city council, to provide the aggrieved party sufficient time to appeal the city council's decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. If the aggrieved party appeals the city council's decision within the 60 days provided, the stay shall be extended until a final judicial decision is rendered in the matter. 
(e)  Provisional license. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of the denial, suspension, revocation, or licensure requirement, the city shall immediately issue the aggrieved party a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the aggrieved party to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented employee, as the case may be, and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the aggrieved party's action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement. 
(f)  Additional requirements. The city council may condition denial, suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of a license upon appropriate terms and conditions. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-170. - Transfer of license. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-171. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he or she acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-172. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he or she appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-173. - Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) of this section if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-174. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he or she rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he or she rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-175. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos, or live entertainment in viewing rooms. 
(a)  Requirements. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, live entertainment or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city or its designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the licensee, owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above, is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(9)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
(10)  No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths. 
(11)  No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms. 
(12)  The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist and shall cover or repair all openings or holes within 24 hours. 
(13)  The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(14)  The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board, or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor. 
(b)  Misdemeanor. A person having a duty under subsections (1) through (14) of subsection (a) above commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-176. - General restrictions for conduct within a sexually oriented business. 
(a)  Distance requirement for live entertainment. All performers, dancers, and persons appearing in a semi-nude condition or providing live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in the licensed facility or in areas adjoining the licensed facility where such entertainment can be seen by patrons of the licensed facility shall remain at all times a minimum distance of six feet from all patrons, customers, or spectators and shall dance or provide such entertainment on a platform intended for that purpose, which shall be raised at least two feet from the level of the floor on which patrons or spectators are located. 
(b)  Interaction with patrons. No dancer, performer, or person while semi-nude or providing live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in the licensed facility or in areas adjoining the licensed facility where the entertainment can be seen by patrons of the licensed facility shall knowingly or intentionally touch any spectator or patron or the clothing of any spectator or patron. 
(c)  Gratuity prohibition. No customers, spectator, or patron of a licensed facility shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or performer in a semi-nude condition and no dancer or performer in a semi-nude condition shall solicit or receive any pay or gratuity directly from any patron or spectator. 
(d)  Hours of operation. No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-177. - Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
    It shall be a misdemeanor for a person to knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity or engage in specified sexual activities. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-178. - Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business. 
    No licensee, operator or employee shall knowingly allow a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-179. - Exemptions. 
    It is a defense to prosecution under this article that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Minnesota; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 10-180. - Enforcement. 
    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of this article is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any person violating a provision of this article, upon conviction, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Secs. 10-181-10-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SALE AND DISPLAY OF LAWN FERTILIZERS 

Sec. 10-200. - Sale and display of lawn fertilizer. 
    No person, firm, corporation, franchise, or commercial establishment shall sell or display for sale any lawn fertilizer, liquid or granular, within the City of Chanhassen that contains any amount of phosphorus or other compound containing phosphorus, such as phosphate, unless: 
(1)  Phosphorus-free fertilizer is also available for sale. 
(2)  Phosphorus-free fertilizer and fertilizer with phosphorus are separately displayed with each display being clearly marked as to whether or not the fertilizer contains phosphorus. 
(3)  Displays of phosphorus-free fertilizer are of equal or greater size and prominence. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1, 7-22-02) 
Secs. 10-201-10-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS LICENSING 

Sec. 10-216. - Policy; license required; exceptions. 
(a)  Findings; policy. Massage therapy businesses are subject to abuses which are contrary to the morals, health, safety and general welfare of the community. Control of these abuses requires intensive efforts of the sheriff, as well as city departments. These efforts exceed those required to control and regulate other business activities licensed by the city. This concentrated use of city services tends to detract from and reduce the level of service available to the rest of the community and thereby diminishes the ability of the city to promote the general health, welfare, morals and safety of the community. 
(b)  License required. No person shall operate a massage therapy business, either exclusively or in connection with any other business, without being licensed as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Exceptions; license exceptions. The following people and businesses are exempt from the provisions of this chapter while performing activities covered by their professional licenses or professional affiliations: 
(1)  People licensed by the State of Minnesota to practice medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy, occupational therapy, podiatry and nursing, and people working solely for and under the direction of those individuals; 
(2)  Beauty culturists and barbers licensed by the State of Minnesota who do not hold themselves out to give massages, other than that customarily given in the field and limited to the face, neck and scalp for beautification purposes only; 
(3)  Health care facilities; 
(4)  Home occupations; 
(5)  A person or organization providing temporary massage services such as "chair massage" is not required to obtain a massage business license. 
(Ord. No. 584, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 10-217. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the terms defined in this section shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
    Health care facility: A person, association, business, organization or institution providing medical, surgical, dental, chiropractic, osteopathic or physical therapy services where practitioners are licensed by the State of Minnesota. 
    Massage therapy: The rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or rolling of the body of another with the hands or objects for the exclusive purpose of physical fitness, relaxation, and beautification and for no other purpose. 
    Massage therapy business: Any premises in which massage therapy is practiced, except a residence of the massage therapist that is used only by that massage therapist for the practice of massage therapy at the residence. 
(Ord. No. 584, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 10-218. - License; application. 
    Application for a massage therapy business license shall be made on forms provided by the city clerk. The application shall contain: 
(1)  The address of the property to be used; 
(2)  The names and addresses of the owner, lessee, if any, and the operator or manager; 
(3)  Such other information as the Carver County Sheriff may require for the purposes of conducting a background check. 
If the application is made on behalf of a corporation or a partnership, it shall be accompanied by appropriate business records showing the names and addresses of all individuals having an interest in the business and, in the case of a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and shareholders. Applicants shall furnish to the city with their application documents establishing the applicant's interest in the premises on which the business will be located. Documentation shall be in the form of a lease, deed, contract for deed or any other document which establishes the applicant's interest. If the application is by a natural person, it shall be signed and sworn to by such person; if by a corporation, by one of the officers; if by a partnership, by one of the partners; and if by an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof. 
(Ord. No. 584, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 10-219. - License and investigation fees. 
    The fee for a license is $50.00. The fee for the required background investigation is $250.00. The application, investigation, and license fees shall be paid when the application is filed. In the event that the application is denied or if the issued license is revoked, canceled, suspended or surrendered, no part of the license fee shall be returned to the applicant unless by city council action. A separate license shall be obtained for each place of business. The licensee shall display the license in a prominent place in the licensed business at all times. 
(Ord. No. 584, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 10-220. - Granting or denial of licenses. 
    License applications shall be reviewed by the sheriff's office and planning department. The review shall include background checks of the owner(s) and general manager(s) for a license and inspection of the premises covered by the application to determine whether the premises conform to all requirements of this chapter and the City Code. Licenses shall be granted or denied by the city council subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 584, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 10-221. - Conditions governing issuance. 
(a)  No license shall be issued if the applicant or any of its owners, managers, employees or agents is a person of bad repute. 
(b)  Licenses shall be issued only if the applicant and all of its owners, managers, employees and agents are free of convictions for offenses which involve moral turpitude or which relate directly to such person's ability, capacity or fitness to perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of the licensed activity. 
(c)  Licenses shall be issued only to applicants who have not, within seven years prior to the date of application, been denied licensure or who have not within such period had a same or similar license revoked. 
(d)  Licenses shall be issued only to applicants who have provided all of the information requested in the application, have paid the full license fee and have cooperated with the city in review of the application. 
(e)  If the applicant is a natural person, a license shall be granted only if such person is 18 years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 584, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 10-222. - Restrictions and regulations. 
(a)  Compliance with law. The licensee and the persons in its employ shall comply with all applicable regulations and laws of the city and state relating to safety and morals. 
(b)  Person in charge; manager. If the licensee is a partnership or a corporation, the applicant shall designate a person to be manager and in responsible charge of the business. The manager shall remain responsible for the conduct of the business until another suitable person has been designated in writing by the licensee. The licensee shall promptly notify the sheriff's department in writing of any such change indicating the name and address of the new manager and the effective date of such change. 
(c)  Hours. The licensed premises shall not be open for business nor shall patrons be permitted on the premises between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 584, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 10-223. - Revocation and suspension of license. 
    The license may be revoked, suspended or not renewed by the city council upon a showing that the licensee has engaged in any of the following conduct: 
(1)  Fraud, deception or misrepresentation in connection with the securing of the license. 
(2)  Habitual drunkenness or intemperance in the use of drugs, including but not limited to, the use of drugs defined in either federal or state laws, barbiturates, hallucinogenic drugs, amphetamines, benzedrine, dexedrine, or other sedatives, depressants, stimulants, or tranquilizers. 
(3)  Conduct contrary to the interests of the public health, safety, welfare or morals. 
(4)  Acts demonstrating or involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Failure to fully comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(6)  Conviction of prostitution or other offense involving moral turpitude by any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(7)  Engaging in any conduct which would constitute grounds for refusal to issue a license under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 584, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Secs. 10-224-10-250. - Reserved. 
Chapter 11 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES 

Sec. 11-1. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  No person shall be on or present in any public street, alley, park or other public or quasi-public place in the city between the following hours: 
(1)  Under the age of 12: 
a.  9:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday to 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
b.  10:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday to 5:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(2)  Age 12 through 14: 
a.  10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday to 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
b.  11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday to 5:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(3)  Age 15 through 17: 
a.  11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday to 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
b.  12:01 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday. 
(b)  The following shall constitute valid exceptions to the operation of the curfew: 
(1)  At any time if a minor is accompanied by his or her parent or an authorized adult. 
(2)  At any time, if a minor is involved in, or attempting to remedy, alleviate, or respond to an emergency. 
(3)  If the minor is engaged in a lawful employment activity, or is going to or returning home from his or her place of employment. 
(4)  If the minor is attending an official school, religious, or other social or recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a city or the county, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor. 
(5)  If the minor is going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a city or the county, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor. 
(6)  If the minor is on an errand as directed by his or her parent, without any detour or stop. 
(7)  If the minor is engaged in interstate travel. 
(8)  If the minor is on the public right-of-way boulevard or sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of the next-door neighbor if the neighbor has not complained to the police department about the minor's presence. 
(9)  If the minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution (or those similar rights protected by Article I of the Constitution of the State of Minnesota), such as free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly. 
(10)  If the minor is homeless or uses a public or semipublic place as his or her usual place of abode. 
(c)  A "quasi-public place" is defined as an area in private ownership which is established for the convenience of members of the public as invitees or business visitors and shall include, but shall not be limited to, parking lots, business establishments, shopping center areas, school and church grounds or arcade amusement centers. 
(d)  Subsections (a) and (b) do not apply when the minor: 
(1)  Is accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian, or other person having the minor's lawful care, custody and control; 
(2)  Is returning home by direct route from and within 30 minutes after, a school activity, an activity of a religious or supervised voluntary association, such as scouts, 4-H, community leagues, fraternal and social clubs, etc., or other community events. Examples of such events shall include but not be limited to, dances, community celebrations and carnivals; 
(3)  Is in a place or returning home from such place, connected with and required by some legitimate business, trade, profession or occupation in which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged; 
(4)  Is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel (with interstate travel to, through or from the city being excepted in all cases); 
(5)  Is upon an emergency errand or other legitimate business directed by the minor's parent, guardian, or other adult having the lawful custody of the minor; 
(6)  Is on the sidewalk or boulevard of his residence. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the lawful care, custody or control of any minor under the age of 18 years to allow or permit any such minor to violate the provisions of this section. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in charge of any place of amusement entertaining or refreshment, or other place of business, to permit any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter in such place during the hours prohibited by law or ordinance. 
(g)  This section shall not be construed as permitting the presence at any time of any person under 18 years in any place where this presence is prohibited by law or ordinance. 
(h)  Wherever the owner or person in charge or in control of any place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment, or other place of business shall find a minor under the age of 18 years loitering in such place of business during the hours prohibited by this section, he shall immediately order such minor to leave, and if such minor refuses to leave the place of business, the operator shall immediately inform the police department of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 43-A, §§ 1-6, 12-19-83; Ord. No. 372, §§ 1, 2, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 11-2. - Firearms. 
(a)  Prohibition. The shooting of firearms is prohibited except as provided in this section. 
(b)  Use of firearms. The shooting of firearms without a permit issued by the city is prohibited except under the following circumstances, unless otherwise prohibited by state or federal law: 
(1)  By law enforcement officers in the line of duty or military personnel in the line of duty. 
(2)  By any person to resist or prevent an offense which that person reasonably believes exposes himself or another to great bodily harm or death. 
(3)  By any person for firing blanks used solely for timing of athletic events. 
(4)  By any person while participating as an enrolled pupil in an approved firearms safety course, under the direct supervision of the course instructor. 
(5)  By a certified firearms safety training instructor while participating in an approved firearms safety course. 
(6)  By any person slaughtering farm animals which they own or with the owner's permission. 
(7)  By any person at a city-approved gun range and consistent with city ordinances and state and federal gun laws and regulations. 
(c)  Use of bow and arrow by permit. A person may shoot a bow and arrow pursuant to a permit issued by the city under the following conditions, unless otherwise prohibited by state or federal law: 
(1)  No bow may be discharged within 500 feet of any livestock, road, street, trail or building unless owned by that person or unless the person has the owner's written permission carried on his or her person. 
(2)  No bow may be discharged except on parcels ten acres or larger in size or smaller parcels if the city manager or manager's designee determines that a bow can be discharged safely on such smaller parcel. 
(d)  Use of shotgun by permit. A person may discharge a shotgun pursuant to a permit issued by the city on property designated on the city's "firearm shooting" map adopted by the city council. 
(e)  Permit application and conditions. 
(1)  Application for any permit required by this section shall be made on forms furnished by the city. The applicant shall furnish the information required by the application. A fee for the permit in the amount established in chapter 4 of the City Code shall be paid to the city. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued for a period exceeding one year. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued to any person under 16 years of age, unless the individual has been issued a valid firearms safety course completion certificate by the commissioner of natural resources pursuant to M.S. § 97.81. 
(f)  Prohibitions. Except as specifically allowed in subsections (b), (c) and (d): 
(1)  The shooting of a firearm is prohibited. 
(2)  Shooting a firearm by any person under the age of 16 is prohibited except when accompanied by a parent, adult guardian or certified safety training instructor. 
(Ord. No. 9B, §§ 1-9, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 207, § 1, 6-13-94; Ord. No. 345, § 1, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 372, §§ 3-7, 9, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 465, § 1, 7-28-08; Ord. No. 527, § 1, 8-22-11) 
Editor's note- See § 1-2 for definitions. 
State Law reference- Firearms regulation preemption, exceptions, M.S. § 471.633. 
Sec. 11-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 207, adopted June 13, 1994, repealed former § 11-3. Prior to repeal, § 11-3 pertained to shooting ranges and derived from Ord. No. 9B, adopted Aug. 3, 1981; and Ord. No. 9C, adopted May 20, 1985. 
Sec. 11-4. - Public possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  The definitions in M.S. § 340A.101 apply to this section. In this section: 
    Public property shall mean any public street, highway, school ground, playground, or other publicly owned property within the city except parks and lakes. 
    Semipublic property shall mean any parking lot operated incident to any commercial use of land, any auto service station, or any parochial or private school ground for which no special on-sale nonintoxicating malt liquor permit has been issued by the city. 
(b)  No person shall have in his possession while on public property or while on semipublic property any bottle or receptacle which contains intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating malt liquor which has been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor on any public property or semipublic property. However, 3.2 percent malt liquor may be consumed at public parks. 
(Ord. No. 57, § 5.02, 6-17-75; Ord. No. 57A, § 1, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 2H, § 7.19, 4-19-82; Ord. No. 372, § 8, 4-12-04) 
Cross reference- Consumption of nonintoxicating malt liquor on-premises when sale prohibited, § 10-34; consumption of intoxicating liquor on licensed establishments after hours of sale, § 10-82; removal of open containers of intoxicating liquor from licensed establishments, § 10-85; alcoholic beverages in parks, § 14-62. 
Sec. 11-5. - Littering. 
(a)  The definitions in section 11-4 apply to this section. 
(b)  No person shall dump or deposit bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans or refuse of any kind upon public property or semipublic property, except in trash containers designated by the owners of the property. 
(Ord. No. 57, § 5.04, 6-17-75; Ord. No. 57A, § 1, 9-20-76) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 16; litter in parks, § 14-66. 
State Law reference- Littering, M.S. § 169.42. 
Sec. 11-6. - Income limits for housing development in Tax Increment District No. 8. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  In order to address and alleviate the shortage of decent, safe, and sanitary housing of persons of low or moderate income in Chanhassen, and to provide for other redevelopment opportunities, the Downtown Chanhassen Redevelopment Project Area and Tax Increment Financing District No. 8, both located in downtown Chanhassen have been created. 
(2)  The Chanhassen Economic Development Authority will be considering assistance to housing facilities located within the TIF district. 
(3)  Tax Increment Financing District No. 8 is a "housing district" under section M.S. § 469.174, subd. 11 of the TIF Act. Accordingly, in compliance with the requirements of M.S. § 469.1761, subdivision of the TIF Act, the development must satisfy the income requirements for a qualified residential rental project as defined in section 142(d) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(4)  This section is intended to establish and declare the income requirements for the development. 
(b)  Income limitation requirements. 
(1)  No more than 20 percent of the fair market value of the minimum improvements may be used for any purpose other than low and moderate income housing. 
(2)  At least 20 percent of the units must be reserved for persons whose income is no more than 50 percent of the median for the Twin Cities metropolitan area. 
(3)  An additional 50 percent of the units must be reserved for persons whose income is no more than 110 percent of the median for the Twin Cities metropolitan area. 
(4)  At least ten percent of the units are reserved for persons whose income is no more than 150 percent of the median for the Twin Cities metropolitan area. 
(5)  Up to 20 percent of the units may be occupied or available for occupancy by any persons without regard to income limitations. 
(c)  Additional requirements. 
(1)  The limits described in subsections (b)(2), (b)(3) and (b)(4) above, must be satisfied commencing with the date on which at least ten percent of the units are occupied. 
(2)  Income for calculation of the limit described in subsection (b)(2) above, shall be adjusted for family size in accordance with section 142(d) of the Internal Revenue Code and related regulations. 
(3)  Income for occupants of units described in subsection (b)(3) above, need not be adjusted for family size, and shall be based on the state-wide gross income for a family of four. 
(Ord. No. 344, § 1, 6-14-03) 
Chapter 12 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Collection vehicles for solid waste, § 16-33; vehicles in parks, § 14-67; abandoned or junked vehicles, § 13-21 et seq.; parking vehicle near fire hydrant, § 9-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - State law adopted. 
    Minnesota Statutes ch. 169 as amended is adopted for the purpose of regulating the use of highways, streets and alleys as if fully set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 3H, § 1.01, 8-1-77) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, M.S. § 471.62. 
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions. 
    Any term used in this article that is defined in M.S. § 169.01 has the meaning given it by that section. 
(Ord. No. 3H, § 1.02, 8-1-77) 
Sec. 12-3. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; but if a minimum fine or imprisonment is prescribed by the M.S. ch. 169 for an offense, such penalty shall apply to a person convicted of the same offense under this article. 
(Ord. No. 3H, § 13, 8-1-77) 
State Law reference- Penalties to be identical to penalties in state law for similar offenses, M.S. § 169.022. 
Sec. 12-4. - Impounding of vehicles. 
    Any police officer may remove a vehicle from a street to a garage or other place of safety when the vehicle is left unattended and constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hinders snow removal or street improvement or maintenance operation. Such vehicle shall not be released until the fees for towing and storage are paid, in addition to any fine imposed for violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3H, § 6, 8-1-77) 
Sec. 12-5. - Driver's license; driving vehicle without consent. 
    No person shall drive or operate a vehicle upon any street or highway in the city without having in his possession, as required by the law, a valid driver's license or chauffeur's license. No person shall drive a motor vehicle belonging to another without the owner's consent. 
(Ord. No. 3H, § 2.01, 8-1-77) 
State Law reference- Operator's license required, M.S. §§ 171.02, 171.03. 
Sec. 12-6. - Commercial vehicles on certain streets. 
    The city council by resolution may designate streets on which travel by commercial vehicles in excess of a specific number of pounds gross weight is prohibited. The city maintenance superintendent shall erect appropriate signs on such streets. No person shall operate a commercial vehicle on such posted streets in violation of the restrictions stated. 
(Ord. No. 3H, § 4, 8-1-77) 
Sec. 12-7. - Truck routes. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  School buses when engaged in the act of transporting pupils to or from school; 
(2)  Emergency vehicles; 
(3)  Trucks belonging to the city; 
(4)  Trucks belonging to utility companies when actually engaged in the construction or repair of utility company facilities; 
(5)  Trucks delivering retail merchandise to homes on regular routes; 
(6)  Trucks employed in the removal of rubbish, trash or garbage, or in the pumping of private sewage disposal systems; 
(7)  Trucks securing from the city a special permit to travel upon city streets as provided in this section. 
(c)  No truck shall travel on any street except on those streets designated as truck routes. 
(d)  Truck routes shall consist of the following streets: 
(1)  All designated U.S. highways; 
(2)  All designated state highways; 
(3)  All designated county highways; and 
(4)  Municipal State Aid Roadways. 
(e)  Special permits may be obtained from the city for trucks in excess of the weight limits imposed herein by submitted to the city an application. Upon submission of a completed application, together with an agreement to pay for any damage caused to the streets because of the travel thereon by the truck, a special permit may be issued. 
(f)  The council shall cause appropriate signs to be posted designating the truck routes established herein. 
(Ord. No. 4, §§ 1-6, 7-24-67; Ord. No. 324, § 8, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 359, §§ 1-3, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 12-8. - Exhibition driving. 
(a)  No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate, or otherwise operate a motor vehicle within the city in a manner which causes unnecessary engine noise or backfire, squealing of tires, skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of sand or gravel, or in a manner simulating a race. 
(b)  Prime facie evidence of a violation of this section shall be any of the following: 
(1)  Unreasonable squealing or screeching sound emitted by the tires; 
(2)  The throwing of sand or gravel by the tires of said vehicle; 
(3)  Unreasonable skid, sway, or slide upon acceleration or stopping. 
(Ord. No. 3H, § 5, 8-1-77) 
Sec. 12-9. - Restriction on turns. 
(a)  The council may by resolution, whenever necessary to preserve a free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents, designate any intersection as one where the turning of vehicles to the left or to the right, or both, is to restricted at all times or during specific hours. The city shall mark, by appropriate signs, any intersection so designated. No intersection or state trunk highway shall be so designated until the consent of the commissioner of transportation to such designation is obtained. No person shall turn any vehicle at any such intersection contrary to the direction on such sign. 
(b)  The council may by resolution, whenever necessary to preserve the free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents, designate "No U-Turn" zones within the city. No person shall turn a vehicle so as to reverse its direction of travel on any street so designated "No U-Turn" zone. 
(Ord. No. 3H, §§ 7.01, 7.02, 8-1-77; Ord. N>o. 359, § 4, 12-8-03) 
State Law reference- Authority to restrict turns, M.S. § 169.19, subd. 1(f). 
Sec. 12-10. - Through streets; one-way streets. 
    The council may by resolution designate any street or portion of a street as a through highway or a one-way road where necessary to preserve the free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents. The city shall post appropriate signs at the entrance to such street. No state trunk highway shall be so designated unless the consent of the commissioner of transportation to such designation is first secured. 
(Ord. No. 3H, § 8, 8-1-77; Ord. No. 359, § 5, 12-8-03) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate through highways, M.S. § 169.04(a)(5); authority to designate one-way roadways, M.S. § 169.04(a)(4); through highways, M.S. § 169.20, subd. 3. 
Sec. 12-11. - Seasonal weight restrictions. 
    The city may prohibit the operation of vehicles upon any street under its jurisdiction or impose weight restrictions on vehicles to be operated on such street whenever the street, by reason of deterioration, rain, snow, or other climatic conditions, will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles on the street is prohibited or the permissible weights thereof reduced. The city shall erect and maintain signs plainly indicating the prohibition or restricts at each end of the portion of the street affected. No person shall operate a vehicle on a posted street in violation of the prohibition of restriction. 
(Ord. No. 3H, § 9, 8-1-77; Ord. No. 359, § 6, 12-8-03) 
State Law reference- Seasonal load restrictions authorized, M.S. § 169.87. 
Sec. 12-12. - Establishment of safety zones, lanes of traffic, etc. 
    To assist in the direction and control of traffic, to improve safe driving conditions at any intersection or dangerous location, and to warn pedestrians or drivers of motor vehicles of dangerous conditions or hazards, the city may establish safety zones, or lanes of traffic, and stop intersections, and may install stop signs, yield signs, warning signs, signals, pavement markings, or other similar devices. No regulation may be established on a state trunk highway unless the consent of the commissioner of transportation is first secured. 
(Ord. No. 3H, § 10, 8-1-77; Ord. No. 359, § 7, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 12-13. - No parking, stopping or standing zones. 
    The city council may by resolution designate certain streets or portions of streets as no parking or no stopping or standing zones, and may limit the hours in which the restrictions apply. The city maintenance superintendent shall mark by appropriate signs each zone so designated. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control device, no person shall stop or park a vehicle in an established no stopping or standing zone when stopping or standing is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 3H, § 11.04, 8-1-77) 
Cross reference- Parking, § 12-50 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate parking, M.S. § 169.04(a)(1). 
Sec. 12-14. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  The fire department is authorized to recommend to the city council the establishment of fire lanes on public or private property as may be necessary in order that the travel of fire equipment may not be interfered with, and that access to fire hydrants or buildings may not be obstructed. 
(b)  When a fire lane has been ordered to be established pursuant to this section it shall be marked by a sign bearing the words "No Parking-Fire Lane-by Order of Fire Department" or striped in a manner to indicate no parking. When the fire lane is on public property or a public right-of-way, the sign or signs shall be erected by the city, and when on private property they shall be erected by owner at his own expense within 30 days after he has been notified of the order. 
(c)  After a sign has been erected in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, no person shall park a vehicle or otherwise occupy or obstruct the fire lane. 
(Ord. No. 3H, § 11.01, 8-1-77; Ord. No. 3-J, § 1, 7-23-84) 
Cross reference- Parking near fire hydrant, § 9-1. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate standing or parking, M.S. § 169.04(a)(1). 
Sec. 12-15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 359, § 8, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, repealed § 12-15, which pertained to parking or standing of vehicles exceeding specified height and derived from Ord. No. 3H, § 11.02, adopted Aug. 1, 1977. 
Sec. 12-16. - Winter parking regulations. 
    On street parking is prohibited between November 1 and April 1 between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. On-street parking is also prohibited when there is two inches or more of snow on a street until the street has been plowed curb to curb. Representatives of the Carver County Sheriff's Department, Minnesota State Patrol, and community service officer shall have the authority to impound vehicles in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3H, § 11.05, 8-1-77; Ord. No. 3-I, § 1, 10-4-82; Ord. No. 185, § 1, 5-24-93; Ord. No. 359, § 9, 12-8-03) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate parking or standing of vehicles, M.S. § 169.04(a)(1). 
Sec. 12-17. - Parking of boat trailers on South Shore Drive, South Shore Court and Hill Street. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Parking restrictions. No person shall park a boat trailer on South Shore Drive, South Shore Court or Hill Street. The city engineer shall mark by appropriate signs each aforementioned street. 
(c)  Prima facie violation. The presence of any boat trailer parked on South Shore Drive, South Shore Court or Hill Street is prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the boat trailer committed or authorized the commission of the violation. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The minimum penalty for violation of this section shall be a fifty-dollar fine. The maximum penalty for violation of this section shall be the maximum penalty as set by state legislature for misdemeanors. 
(e)  Impoundment. Any police officer may remove or cause to be removed an empty boat trailer with or without the motor vehicle it is attached to from the street to a garage or other place of safety when a vehicle is parked in violation of this section. Such trailer and/or vehicle shall not be released until the fees for towing and storage are paid in addition to any fine imposed for violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 89, §§ 1.01-5.01, 5-9-88; Ord. No. 359, § 10, 12-8-03) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 89, adopted May 9, 1988, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1.01-5.01 as § 12-17 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 359, § 10, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, repealed subsection (a), which pertained to definitions. See § 1-2 for definitions. 
Cross reference- Boats and waterways, Ch. 6; parking, § 12-50 et seq. 
Secs. 12-18-12-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SNOWMOBILES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Snowmobiles, M.S. § 84.81 et seq.; local regulations authorized, M.S. § 84.87, subd. 3. 

Sec. 12-31. - Definitions. 
    The definitions in M.S. § 84.81 apply to this article. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 1, 1-11-71; Ord. No. 324, § 9, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 359, § 11, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 12-32. - Application of other laws; statutes adopted. 
    All city traffic ordinances shall apply to the operation of snowmobiles upon streets and highways. Minnesota Statutes §§ 84.81 to 84.88, except those provisions relating to required equipment, are adopted by reference as set out at length in this article. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 5, 1-11-71; Ord. No. 359, § 12, 12-8-03) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, M.S. § 471.62. 
Sec. 12-33. - Operation generally. 
    Except as otherwise specifically permitted and authorized, it is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile: 
(1)  On a public sidewalk or walkway provided or used for pedestrian travel, or on a boulevard within any public right-of-way; 
(2)  On private property of another without lawful authority or express consent of the owner or lessee; 
(3)  On any public or private school grounds except as permission is expressly obtained from responsible school authorities; 
(4)  On any other publicly-owned lands and ice, including but not limited to park property, playgrounds, lakes, recreation areas and golf courses, except areas previously listed or authorized for such use by the proper public authority, in which case such use shall be lawful and snowmobiles may be driven in and out of such areas by the shortest route. Authorized areas owned by the city shall be designated by resolution, provided that snowmobile operation shall be permitted on all public bodies of water, provided that the operation shall comply in all respects with all ordinances; 
(5)  So as to tow any person or thing on a public street or highway except through use of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile; 
(6)  At a speed greater than ten miles an hour when within 100 feet of any lake shore, except in channels, or of any fisherman, fish or ice house, nor shall operation be permitted within 100 feet of any sliding area or skating ring when in use, nor where the operation would conflict with the lawful use of property or would endanger other persons or property; 
(7)  In a manner so as to create a loud or unusual noise which disturbs or interferes with the peace and quiet of other persons. 
(Ord. No. 44, §§ 3.01-3.04, 3.08-3.10, 1-11-71; Ord. No. 359, § 13, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 12-34. - Operation on streets and highways. 
(a)  No person shall operate a snowmobile upon the roadway, shoulder or inside bank or slope of any trunk, county-state aid, or county highway, and in the case of a divided trunk or county highway, on the right-of-way between the opposing lanes of traffic, except as provided in this article, nor shall operation on any such highway be permitted where the roadway directly abuts a public sidewalk or property used for private purposes. No person shall operate a snowmobile within the right-of-way of any trunk, county-state aid, or county highway between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, except on the right hand side of such right-of-way and in the same direction as the highway traffic on the nearest lane of the roadway adjacent thereto. No snowmobile shall be operated at any time within the right-of-way of any interstate highway or freeway within this state. 
(b)  A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a street or highway except an interstate highway or freeway, provided: 
(1)  The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing; 
(2)  The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main traveled way of the highway; 
(3)  The operator of the snowmobile yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard; 
(4)  In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made at an intersection of such street or highway with another public street or highway; 
(5)  If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility, only if both front and rear lights are illuminated. 
(c)  No snowmobile shall be operated on streets or highways at a speed exceeding ten miles per hour. 
(d)  No snowmobile shall enter any uncontrolled intersection without making a complete stop. The operator shall then yield the right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians which constitute an immediate hazard. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any prohibition in this article, a snowmobile may be operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile impractical. 
(Ord. No. 44, §§ 2.01-2.05, 1-11-71) 
Sec. 12-35. - Leaving unattended. 
    Every person leaving a snowmobile in a public place shall lock the ignition, remove the key and take the same with him. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 7, 1-11-71) 
Sec. 12-36. - Chasing animals. 
    It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal, wild or domestic, with a snowmobile. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 8, 1-11-71) 
Sec. 12-37. - Littering and obstructions. 
(a)  No person shall deposit paper, litter, rubbish or debris on public or private property, or throw paper, litter, rubbish or debris from snowmobiles. 
(b)  No person shall place obstructions, including ice blocks, on publicly owned lands or frozen waters so as to interfere with the lawful use thereof by the public. 
(Ord. No. 44, §§ 9.01, 9.02, 1-11-71) 
Sec. 12-38. - Races. 
    No person shall conduct a snowmobile organized race at any place within the city without first having secured a permit therefore from the council. Written application shall be made to the council. The applicant shall give the information required on the form. A permit may be issued upon such terms, conditions and permit fees as the council may prescribe. Upon the granting of such permit, the provisions of subsection 12-33(7) may be waived by the council for the duration of the race. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 10.01, 1-11-71; Ord. No. 359, § 14, 12-8-03) 
State Law reference- Regulation of organized contests, etc., authorized, M.S. § 84.87, subd. 1a. 
Secs. 12-39-12-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING 

Sec. 12-50. - Parking in municipal parking lots-Permit. 
(a)  Required. On a space available basis, the city manager shall issue permits authorizing overnight parking in municipal parking lots. The permit shall specify the date and lot for which the overnight parking is permitted. The permit fee shall be established by resolution of city council. No individual shall be given a permit authorizing overnight parking for more than seven days in a calendar year. 
(b)  Prohibition. Without a permit issued by the city, no owner of a motor vehicle shall park or permit the same to be in a municipal parking lot between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. All municipal parking lots shall be signed with this parking restriction. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 1, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 359, § 15, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 12-51. - Same-Towing of vehicles in violation. 
(a)  Towing order required. Motor vehicles parked in violation of section 12-50 may be towed. Before the motor vehicle is towed, a representative of the Carver County Sheriff's Department, Minnesota State Patrol, or the Chanhassen Community Service must prepare, in addition to the parking citation, a written towing report describing the motor vehicle and the reasons for towing. The report must be signed by the officer and the tow driver. 
(b)  Four-hour waiting period. A motor vehicle parked in violation of section 12-50 may not be towed until four hours after issuance of the traffic ticket or citation. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 1, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 359, § 16, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 12-52. - Parking for the purpose of advertising or selling vehicles or merchandise. 
    It is unlawful for any person to park or leave a motor vehicle, boat, trailer, or recreational vehicle on any public property for the purpose of advertising such vehicle for sale or for the purpose of advertising for sale or selling merchandise thereon or therein. "Public property" means streets, highways, alleys, public right-of-ways, public parks, parking lots open to the public, and municipal parking lots. 
(Ord. No. 323, § 1, 6-25-01) 
Sec. 12-53. - Material and equipment in streets. 
    No automobile, boat, trailer, recreational vehicle, dumpster, storage container, construction equipment, construction materials, or landscape materials may be parked or deposited on a city street for more than 48 hours without written permit from the City of Chanhassen. 
(Ord. No. 323, § 2, 6-25-01) 
Chapter 13 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Special assessments for nuisance abatement, § 2-31. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to define, prevent and abate nuisances, M.S. § 412.221, subd. 23. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Definition. 
    In this article "nuisance" means a thing, act or use of property that: 
(1)  Annoys, injures or endangers the health, safety, comfort or repose of the public; 
(2)  Offends public decency; 
(3)  Unlawfully interference with the use of or obstructs, or tends to obstruct or render dangerous for passage a lake, stream, navigable river or public water, park, square, sidewalk, street, alley or highway; 
(4)  Depreciates the value of the property of the inhabitants of the city; 
(5)  In any manner renders the inhabitants of the city insecure in life or in use of property. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 1, 2-5-68) 
Sec. 13-2. - Illustrative enumeration. 
(a)  The following are nuisances affecting health, safety, comfort or repose: 
(1)  Accumulations of manure, animal feces, refuse, garbage, tin cans, bottles, junk, debris or other waste which are kept so as to result in offensive odors or unsightly conditions to the discomfort and annoyance of adjacent property owners or the public; 
(2)  Garbage cans and privy vaults which are not fly-tight; 
(3)  Dumping the contents of any cesspool, septic tank, privy vault or garbage can except at places authorized by law; 
(4)  All noxious weeds, tall grasses, and other rank growths; 
(5)  The throwing, dumping or depositing of any dead animals, manure, garbage, waste, decaying matter, ground, sand, stones, ashes, rubbish, tin cans, paper, or other material of any kind on private or public property; 
(6)  Dense smoke, noxious or offensive fumes or odors, gas, soot, or cinders in unreasonable quantities; 
(7)  Offensive trade and business as defined by statute or ordinance not licensed as provided by law; 
(8)  All public exposure of persons having a contagious disease; 
(9)  The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs unless such samples are placed in the hands of an adult person; 
(10)  All decayed, unwholesome, or contaminated food offered for sale to the public; 
(11)  Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after death; 
(12)  The keeping of horses, cattle, swine, sheep, goats, rabbits, dogs, or other animals or fowl so as to result in offense odors or disagreeable noises to the discomfort of adjacent property owners, and allowing any animal or fowl to run at large; "at large" means off the premises of the owner and not under restraint, and "owner" means any person who shall own, harbor, keep or have custody of an animal, or the parents or guardians of a person under 18 years of age who shall own, harbor, keep or have custody of an animal. 
Cross reference- Other animal nuisances, § 5-20. 
(13)  Placing paper, litter or debris on public or private property, or throwing paper, litter or debris from motor vehicles; 
(14)  Causing or permitting any unnecessary noises or annoying vibrations. 
(15)  The pollution of any public well, stream, river, lake, wetland, storm sewer or body of water by chemical, organic, industrial, agricultural, commercial, residential, sewage, yard, construction and animal wastes. 
(16)  Breeding sites of the Aedes Triseriatus (tree hole mosquito) including but not limited to: the basal holes of hardwood trees, unused tires (not mounted on wheels), pots, pans, cans, pails, bottles and other containers left outdoors in which water or debris may accumulate; 
(17)  All other acts, omissions, occupations and uses of property which are a menace to the health of the inhabitants of the city or a considerable number thereof. 
(b)  The following are nuisances affecting public morals and decency: 
(1)  Any vehicle used for the illegal transportation of intoxicating liquor; 
(c)  The following are nuisances affecting public peace and safety; 
(1)  Reserved; 
(2)  All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise to an extent exceeding one-half of their original value, or which are in such a hazardous condition or so situated as to endanger the safety of the public; 
(3)  All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances or materials stored or accumulated in any manner or in any amount other than that provided by law or ordinance; 
(4)  All use, possession or display of fireworks except as provided by law or ordinance; 
(5)  All buildings and structures, and all alterations thereof made, erected or altered in violation of ordinances concerning the manner of construction and the materials used therein; 
(6)  Obstructions and excavations affecting the use of public streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, except under such conditions as are provided by ordinance; and any other excavation left unprotected, uncovered or allowed to exist in such manner as to attract children or to constitute a hazard to the public; 
(7)  The piling, storing or keeping of old machinery, wrecked or junked vehicles, or other junk or debris upon open spaces; "junked vehicle" means a vehicle that is not registered and which does not possess a current state automobile license, but the license is not to be the sole factor determining the status of the vehicle; 
(8)  Obstructing traffic and the free use of public streets or sidewalks; 
(9)  All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over public streets or sidewalks, or so situated as to endanger public safety, not constructed and maintained as provided by law or ordinance, or without proper permit; 
(10)  Permitting rain, water, ice or snow to fall from any building on any public street or sidewalk or to flow across any public sidewalk; 
(11)  All dangerous unguarded machinery, equipment or other property in any public place, or so situated or operated on private property as to attract minor children; 
(12)  Placing entrance culverts, or doing any act which may alter or affect the drainage of public streets or alleys or the surface or grade of public streets, alleys or sidewalks without proper permit; 
(13)  Making repairs to motor vehicles, or tires in public streets or alleys, excepting only emergency repairs which will not unduly impede or interfere with traffic; 
(14)  Throwing, placing, depositing, or burning leaves, trash, lawn clippings, weeds, grass, or other material in the streets, alleys or gutters; 
(15)  Erecting, painting or placing of unauthorized traffic signs or advertising signs in streets, or alleys or on sidewalks; 
(16)  All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent a clear view of traffic approaching an intersection in sufficient time to bring a motor vehicle driven at a reasonable speed to a stop before the intersection is reached; 
(17)  Any dog which shall kill, wound or harass any other domestic animal; 
(18)  Any dog which habitually barks in such manner as to disturb the peace; 
(19)  Any dog which harasses, chases or molests horses, motor vehicles or persons; 
(20)  To leave any unused ice box, refrigerator, cooler or other box with a door thereon which will exclude air when shut; 
(21)  All other conditions, acts, or things which are liable to cause injury to the person or property. 
(22)  Reserved. 
(23)  Reserved. 
(24)  Nuisance light on residential properties. 
a.  Definitions. In this section: 
(i)  Direct glare means an excessive brightness contrast producing a sensation of visual discomfort resulting from insufficiently shielded light source in the field of view. 
(ii)  Intermittent light means any artificial light which flashes, revolves or fluctuates in such a manner that the variance is easily distinguished by personal observation. 
(iii)  Light source means a device (such as a lamp) which provides visible energy. 
(iv)  Light trespass means light emitted that is visible beyond the boundaries of the property on which the light source is located. 
(v)  Person means an individual, firm, partnership, trustee, agent, association, corporation, company, governmental agency, club or organization of any kind. 
b.  Direct glare and light trespass declared a nuisance. Glare, light trespass and intermittent artificial light impacting on residential properties between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., which cause loss of enjoyment, comfort or repose, and use of such properties as determined under subsection 13-2(24)c. of this section is declared a nuisance. 
c.  Nuisance determined. 
(i)  Light trespass shall be considered a nuisance when light produces two-tenths horizontal foot candles or more at approximately four feet from the ground or floor surface on other residential property at the property line. 
(ii)  Direct glare shall be considered a nuisance when an artificial light source has not been properly located, shielded, directed or controlled, and as a result there is a direct line of sight between the light source or its reflection and a point five feet above the ground or higher at the property line of other residential property if such intensity causes discomfort or annoyance. 
(iii)  Intermittent light shall be considered a nuisance when it impacts upon a habitable area of other residential property with such intensity and variance as to cause discomfort or annoyance. 
d.  Production of light nuisance prohibited. No artificial light source shall be installed, allowed to be installed or permitted on any property which light sources is an intermittent light source, or due to its intensity or physical characteristics, causes direct glare or trespasses onto a residential property in such a manner as to cause a nuisance during the hours of 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. 
e.  Responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of every installer of artificial lights and every owner or occupant of property on which artificial lights are installed to comply with subsection 13-2(24)d. of this section. 
f.  Exemptions. The provisions of subsections 13-2(24)d. and e. of this section shall not apply where: 
(i)  Such lights are caused to be installed by the federal, state or local government or agency, to light public ways or areas for public benefit; or 
(ii)  Such lights are required by law for safety reasons and there is no practical way to control them to eliminate the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 22, §§ 2-5, 2-5-68; Ord. No. 22A, § 1, 10-8-79; Ord. No. 22B, §§ 1, 2, 4-15-85; Ord. No. 159, § 1, 2, 11-18-91; Ord. No. 298, § 2, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 308, § 1, 7-24-00; Ord. No. 324, § 7, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 373, §§ 1-4, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 442, § 1, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 13-3. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce the provisions of this article, and the council may delegate to other officers or agencies of the city power to enforce particular provisions of this article, including the power to inspect private premises. The officers charged with enforcement of this article shall take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 6, 2-5-68) 
Sec. 13-4. - Abatement. 
(a)  Whenever, in the judgment of the officer charged with enforcement of this article, it is determined that a nuisance is being maintained or exists with the city, such officer shall notify in writing the person committing or maintaining such public nuisance and require him to terminate and abate said nuisance and to remove such conditions or remedy such defects. 
(b)  The written notice shall be served on the person committing or maintaining said nuisance in person or by certified mail. If the premises are not occupied and the address of the owner is unknown, service on the owner may be had by posting a copy of the notice on the premises. The notice shall require the owner or occupant of such premises, or both, to take reasonable steps within a reasonable time to abate and remove the nuisance, the steps and time to be designated in said notice, but the maximum time for the removal of the nuisance after service of the notice shall not in any event exceed 30 days. Service of notice may be proved by filing an affidavit of service in the office of the city clerk setting forth the manner and time of service of said notice. 
(c)  When an order so given is not complied with, such fact shall be reported forthwith to the council for such action as may be deemed advisable to abate and enjoin the further continuation of the nuisance. 
(d)  If after service of the notice, the person served fails to abate the nuisance or make the necessary repairs, alterations, or changes in accordance with the direction of the council, the council may cause such nuisance to be abated at the expense of the city and recover such expenditure, by civil action against the person or persons served. If service has been had upon the owner or occupant, the council may order the city clerk to extend such sum, as a special assessment against the property upon which the nuisance existed and to certify the same to the county auditor for collection. 
(Ord. No. 22, §§ 7, 8, 2-5-68) 
Sec. 13-5. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall cause or create a nuisance, or permit any nuisance to be created or to remain upon any premises owned or occupied by him, and any person who shall fail to comply with any order made under the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 9, 2-5-68; Ord. No. 22-A, § 2, 10-8-79) 
Secs. 13-6-13-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUNKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Abandoned motor vehicles, M.S. § 168B.01 et seq. 

Sec. 13-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle means a vehicle, as defined below, that has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on public property illegally or lacking vital component parts, or does not have a current license, or has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on private property without consent of the person in control of such property or in an inoperable condition such that it has no substantial potential further use consistent with its usual functions unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building. "Abandoned vehicle" also means a motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its owner to the city. A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. § 168.10, shall not be considered an abandoned vehicle. Vehicles on the premises of junkyards and automobile graveyards, which are defined, maintained and licensed in accordance with M.S. § 161.242, or which are licensed and maintained in accordance with local laws and zoning regulations, are not abandoned vehicles. 
    Vehicle means any machine as defined under M.S. § 169.01, and includes snowmobiles and trailers. 
(Ord. No. 48, § 2.01, 5-15-72; Ord. No. 395, § 4, 5-9-05) 
Sec. 13-22. - Entry upon private property for removal or abatement. 
    Any person, at the direction of the city clerk, police chief, or any other police officer of the city is authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(Ord. No. 48, § 10, 5-15-72) 
Sec. 13-23. - Prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall park, store, or leave, or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any abandoned vehicle upon any property, including private property, within the city unless: 
(1)  Such vehicle is completely enclosed within a building; 
(2)  Such vehicle is stored or parked on private property in connection with a duly licensed or authorized commercial enterprise operated and conducted pursuant to law when such parking or storing of vehicles is necessary to the operation of the commercial enterprise; or 
(3)  Such vehicle is stored or parked on private property of the owner thereof, or a member of his family, for the purpose of making repairs thereto, provided that at all times while said vehicle is so stored at least one-half of the total number of wheels of said vehicle are in contact with the ground and only one such vehicle be so stored or parked at any one time, such vehicle may be so stored or parked for a period not to exceed 14 days, after which time the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned. 
(b)  Any person who abandons a motor vehicle, without the consent of the person in control of such property, or any person who fails, neglects or refuses to remove the abandoned vehicle or to house such vehicle and abate such nuisance in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 48, §§ 3.01, 4.01, 11, 5-15-72) 
ARTICLE III. - WEEDS AND GRASS 

Sec. 13-24. - Prohibition. 
    Weeds and grass in excess of eight inches in length on any occupied or unoccupied lot or parcel of land less than one acre in size in the City of Chanhassen is a public nuisance and is prohibited. On vacant property where it would be physically difficult to mow because of topography or other physical constraints, the height limitation on weeds and grass shall only apply to a ten-foot wide strip abutting the lot line of the property. Noxious weeds or plants, as identified and defined by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture, are also a public nuisance and are prohibited. Native grasses and wild flowers indigenous to Minnesota, planted and maintained on any occupied lot or parcel of land as part of a garden or landscape treatment, are exempt from this article. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 464, § 1, 6-9-08) 
Sec. 13-25. - Cutting, removal or chemical treatment. 
    The owner, lessee or occupant of any lot or parcel of land shall cut and remove or chemically treat all such weeds, grass, brush, or other rank, poisonous or harmful vegetation as often as necessary to comply with the provisions of this section. Cutting, removing or chemically treating such weeds, grass, brush, or other rank, poisonous or harmful vegetation at least once in every three weeks, between May 15 and October 15 in a given year, is deemed to be in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 13-26. - Violation. 
(a)  After giving the owner or occupant of a lot not in compliance with the previous sections seven days' advance written notice of the noncompliance, the city may cut, or cause to be cut the grass, weeds or plants and may assess the cost against the property in accordance with M.S. § 429.101. The notice shall provide that if there are any further violations within the calendar year in which the notice is sent the city will continue to cut, or cause to be cut, the grass, weeds or plants through the remainder of the calendar year each time there is a violation without further notice. 
(b)  The violation of any provision of this article is a misdemeanor and the violator shall be fined or penalized not more than the maximum levels established by the State of Minnesota for misdemeanor offenses. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 464, § 2, 6-9-08) 
ARTICLE IV. - CONTROL AND PREVENTION OF DISEASED TREES 

Sec. 13-27. - Declaration of policy. 
    The City of Chanhassen has determined that the health of the trees within the municipal limits is threatened by epidemic diseases and pests. It has further determined that the loss of trees growing upon public and private property will substantially depreciate the value of property within the city and impair the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the public. It is declared to be the intention of the council to control and prevent the spread of these diseases and pests, and this article is enacted for that purpose, and to conform to the policies and procedures embodied in M.S. chs. 18 and 89, as amended, and rules promulgated there under. 
(Ord. No. 229, § 1, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 628, § 5, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 13-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 373, § 5, adopted Apr. 12, 2004, repealed § 13-28, which pertained to creation of a forester position and the qualifications and duties of the forester and derived from Ord. No. 229, § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 1994. 
Sec. 13-29. - Tree disease program. 
    It is the intention of the city council to conduct a program of plant pest control pursuant to the authority granted by M.S. § 18G.01. This program is directed specifically at the control and elimination of tree diseases and pests and is undertaken at the recommendation of the commissioner of agriculture. The city forester shall act as coordinator between the commissioner of agriculture and the city in the conduct of this program. 
(Ord. No. 229, § 1, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 395, § 5, 5-9-05; Ord. No. 628, § 5, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 13-30. - Nuisances declared; abatement; firewood storage. 
    Nuisances declared . The following are public nuisances whenever they may be found within the City of Chanhassen: 
(1)  Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the Dutch elm disease fungus Opiostoma ulmi or O. novo-ulmi or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Eichh.), S. schevyrewi or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh). 
(2)  Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood, or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed as provided in M.S. § 18G.04. 
(3)  Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the oak wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum . 
(4)  Any dead tree in the red oak group, or part of any such tree, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood, or other red oak material from which the bark has not been removed. 
(5)  Other trees with epidemic diseases or any insect and/or pest that threatens the health of trees. 
(6)  Any tree which, in the opinion of the tree inspector has become or threatens to become a hazard so as to adversely affect the public safety, whether such tree shall be on public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 229, § 1, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 628, § 5, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 13-31. - Abatement. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit any public nuisance as defined in section 13-30 to remain on any premises owned or controlled by such person or entity within the City of Chanhassen. Such nuisance may be abated in the manner prescribed by this article in addition to the criminal penalties provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 229, § 1, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 628, § 5, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 13-32. - Elm and oak wood storage. 
    Stockpiling and storage of elm logs and branches with bark intact or tight-barked wood from an infected tree in the red oak group is prohibited except during the period September 15 through April 1 of the following year. Only during this period shall such storage be permitted. Authorization for storage per this article shall only be permitted for residential premises. 
(Ord. No. 229, § 1, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 628, § 5, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 13-33. - Inspection and investigation. 
(a)  Annual inspection. The forester shall inspect all premises and places with the city as often as practicable to determine whether any condition described in section 13-30 of this article exists thereon. He/she shall investigate all reported incidents of infestation by Dutch elm fungus or elm bark beetles, or oak wilt, or other epidemic diseases or pests of trees or hazardous trees. 
(b)  Entry of private premises. The forester or his/her duly authorized agents may enter upon private premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned him/her under this article. 
(c)  Diagnosis. The forester or his/her duly authorized representative shall identify diseased or infested trees by generally accepted field symptoms such as, but not limited to, wilting, yellowing of leaves, evidence of larva or insects, or staining of wood. Laboratory confirmation by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture will be used only when it is necessary. 
(d)  The tree inspector shall assess potentially hazardous trees. A hazard tree is a tree that has structural defects in the roots, stem or branches that may cause the tree or part thereof to fail, where such failure may cause personal injury or property damage to a target. A "target" includes, but is not limited to people, vehicles, buildings, property, etc. Trees without targets are not considered hazards even if they are likely to fail and can be considered beneficial to habitat protection. 
(Ord. No. 229, § 1, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 628, § 5, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 13-34. - Abatement of tree disease nuisances. 
    In abating the nuisances defined in section 13-30, the forester shall cause the infected or infested tree or wood to be chemically-treated, removed, burned, or otherwise effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of epidemic diseases and pests of trees, including, but not limited to, Dutch elm disease fungus, elm bark beetles, and oak wilt disease. Such abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance with current technical and expert opinions and plans as may be designated by the commissioner of agriculture. 
(Ord. No. 229, § 1, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 628, § 5, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 13-35. - Procedure for removal of infected or hazard trees and wood. 
(a)  Forester's abatement order. Whenever the forester finds with reasonable certainty that one or more of the infestations defined in section 13-30 exists in any trees or wood in any public or private place, the owner shall be notified by mail and ordered to remove, not more than 20 days from the date of the mailing of such notice, the same in a manner approved by the forester. If the forester identifies a hazard tree, the property owner shall be notified by mail and by leaving a notice on the property that the nuisance must be abated within a specified time. If the owner fails to comply with the order, the city manager may act to abate the nuisance. In the event that the owner cannot be contacted, the city shall send notice by certified mail to the last known address of the owner of record, and shall then proceed forthwith to abate the nuisance. 
(b)  Methods of disposal of diseased or infested trees. All diseased or infested trees including the above ground parts thereof shall be properly disposed of by such methods including debarking, chipping, and utilization as recommended by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture. 
(c)  Removal and disposal of diseased trees in the red oak group. All diseased oak trees in the red oak group that wilt in July and August shall be identified, marked, and removed by April 1 of the following year in order to eliminate any spore formation on them the following May or June. Trees in the northern red oak group include the northern red oak ( Quercus rubra ), northern pin oak ( Quercus ellipsoidalis ), black oak ( Quercus velutina ), and scarlet oak ( Quercus coccinea ). Methods of disposal include chipping and utilization. 
(d)  Control of overland spread of oak wilt. To control the overland spread of the disease, the city shall avoid pruning or other mechanical damage during the most susceptible period of April, May and June. The city forester may determine that emergency pruning by utility companies is necessary during this susceptible period if trees interfere with utility lines. If wounding is unavoidable during this period, as in the aftermath of a storm or when the tree interferes with utility lines, a tree wound dressing shall be applied. 
(e)  Stumps of diseased elms and oaks and other trees affected by arboreal disease. Stumps of all elm and oak trees shall be removed or debarked to the ground line to eliminate all possibilities of beetle habitation or possibilities of spore formation. 
(f)  Special assessments. From time to time, the city shall list the total unpaid costs of abatement attributable to such separate lot or parcel of land in this city. The council then may spread said costs or any portion thereof against the property involved as a special assessment under M.S. ch. 429 and other pertinent statutes, for certification to the county auditor and collection the following year along with current taxes. The council may consider deferments for hardship. The assessment may be deferred on homestead property if the owner is a person 65 years of age or older who is retired and/or by virtue of total or permanent disability for whom it would be a hardship to make the payments for tree removal(s). 
(Ord. No. 229, § 1, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 628, § 5, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 13-36. - Interference prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the forester or his/her agents while they are engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this article. 
Sec. 13-37. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation who violates this article is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 229, § 1, 11-28-94) 
ARTICLE V. - GRAFFITI 

Sec. 13-38. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The City Council of the City of Chanhassen is enacting this article to help prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the removal of graffiti from public and private property. The council is authorized to enact this article pursuant to its police powers. 
(b)  The council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community. Unless the city acts to remove graffiti from public and private property, the graffiti tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti, and entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the city. 
(c)  The city council intends, through the adoption of this article, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement. The council does not intend for this article to conflict with any existing anti-graffiti state laws. 
(Ord. No. 311, § 1, 10-23-00) 
Sec. 13-39. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of defacing property. 
    Broad-tipped marker means any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is not water soluble. 
    Etching equipment means any tool, device or substance that can be used to make permanent marks on any natural or manmade surface. 
    Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property, or despite advance authorization is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the city council. 
    Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade surface. 
    Paint stick or graffiti stick means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least one-fourth of an inch in width. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 311, § 1, 10-23-00) 
Sec. 13-40. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Defacement. It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or manmade surface on any publicly-owned property or, without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any privately-owned property. 
(b)  Possession of graffiti implements. Unless otherwise authorized by the owner or occupant, it is unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while: 
(1)  Within 200 feet of any graffiti located in or on a public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public building or structure owned or operated by a governmental agency; or 
(2)  Within 200 feet of any graffiti located in any public place, or on private property, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 311, § 1, 10-23-00) 
Sec. 13-41. - Graffiti as nuisance. 
(a)  Declaration. The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of this article is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and, therefore, is subject to the removal and abatement provisions specified in this article. 
(b)  Duty of property owner. It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the graffiti has been applied and any person who may be in possession or who has the right to possess such property to at all times keep the property clear of graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 311, § 1, 10-23-00) 
Sec. 13-42. - Removal of graffiti. 
(a)  By perpetrator. Any person applying graffiti on public or private property has the duty to remove the graffiti within 24 hours after notice by the city or private owner of the property involved. This removal must be done in a manner prescribed by the city manager, chief of police, city engineer or their designees. Any person applying graffiti is responsible for the removal or for the payment of the removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal will constitute an additional violation of this article. Where graffiti is applied by a person under 18 years old, the parents or legal guardian will also be responsible for such removal or for the payment for the removal. 
(b)  By property owner or city. If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator according to subsection (a), the city may order that the graffiti be removed by the property owner or any person who may be in possession or who has the right to possess such property, pursuant to the nuisance abatement procedure in City Code section 13-4. If the property owner or responsible party fails to remove offending graffiti within the time specified by the city, the city may commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal in accordance with City Code section 13-4. 
(Ord. No. 311, § 1, 10-23-00) 
Secs. 13-43-13-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NOISE 

Sec. 13-50. - Definitions. 
    General. When used in this article, words and phrases in this section have the meanings given in chapter 1 of the City Code. Any other word or phrase used in this article, and defined in regulations of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Noise Pollution Control Rules Chapter 7030, has the meaning given in those regulations. 
(Ord. No. 373, § 6, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 13-51. - Noises prohibited. 
(a)  General prohibition. No person shall make or cause to be made any distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of any persons or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their property's value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of the following subdivisions. 
(b)  Motor vehicles. Minnesota Statutes §§ 169.69 and 169.693 (motor vehicle noise limits) and Minnesota Rules parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as these statutes and rules may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in the city in violation of the motor vehicle noise limits herein adopted. 
(c)  Horns, audible signaling devices, etc. No person shall sound any signaling device on any vehicle except as a warning of danger, as required by M.S. § 169.68. 
(d)  Exhaust. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge the exhaust or permit the discharge of the exhaust from any motor vehicle except through a muffler that effectively prevents abnormal or excessive noise and complies with all applicable state laws and regulations. 
(1)  Engine retarding brakes. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck to intentionally use an engine retarding brake on any public highway, street, parking lot or alley within the city which causes abnormal or excessive noise from the engine, except in an emergency. 
(2)  Vehicle noise signage. Signs stating "VEHICLE NOISE LAWS ENFORCED" may be installed at locations deemed appropriate by the city council to advise motorists of the prohibitions contained in this section, except that no sign stating "VEHICLE NOISE LAWS ENFORCED" shall be installed on a state highway without a permit from the Minnesota Department of Transportation. The provisions of this section are in full force and effect even if no signs are installed. 
(e)  Defective vehicles or loads. No person shall use any vehicle so out of repair or so loaded as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise. 
(f)  Loading, unloading, unpacking. No person shall create loud and excessive noise in loading, unloading, or unpacking any vehicle. 
(g)  Radios, tape player, compact disc player, paging system, etc. 
(1)  General prohibition. No person shall use or operate or permit the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, tape player, compact disc player, paging system, machine, or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a distinctly and loudly audible manner as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet, comfort, safety or welfare of any persons or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their property value. 
(2)  Nighttime prohibition. Operation of any such set, instrument, machine, or other device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a structure or building shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(h)  Participation in noisy parties or gatherings. No person shall participate in any party or other gathering of people giving rise to noise, unreasonably disturbing the peace, quiet, or repose of another person. When a police officer determines that a gathering is creating such a noise disturbance, the officer may order all persons present, other than the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disperse immediately. No person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by a police officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of such premises who has knowledge of the disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that the disturbance is stopped. 
(i)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising, etc. No person shall operate or permit the use or operation of any loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other device for the production or reproduction of sound on a street or other public place for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any commercial establishment or vehicle, without a written permit from the city. Application shall be made on forms provided by the city. The application shall require the hours and location of the proposed use. if the proposed use complies with this article and other ordinances, the permit shall be granted. Permit fees shall be established in chapter 4 of the Chanhassen City Code. 
(j)  Animals. No person owning, operating, having charge of, or occupying any building or premise shall keep or allow to be kept one or more animals that unreasonably disturbs the comfort or repose of any person by its frequent or continued noise. For purposes of this subsection, "disturbs the comfort or repose of any person by its frequent or continued noise" shall include, but is not limited to any one of the following: 
(1)  The noise from one or more animals occurs at a time between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and can be heard from a location outside the building or property where the animal or animals are being kept, and the animal or animals have made such noises intermittently for more than three minutes with one minute or less lapse of time without such noise during the three-minute period; or 
(2)  The noise from one or more animals can be heard 500 feet from the location of the building or property where the animal or animals are being kept, and the animal or animals have made such noises intermittently for more than three minutes with one minute or less lapse of time without such noise during the three-minute period; or 
(3)  The noise from one or more animals can be heard from a location outside the building or property where the animal or animals are being kept, and the animal or animals have made such noises intermittently for a period of at least five minutes with one minute or less lapse of time without such noise during the five-minute period. 
(Ord. No. 373, § 6, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 13-52. - Hourly restriction on certain operations. 
(a)  Recreational vehicles and snowmobiles. No person shall, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., drive or operate any snowmobile or other recreational vehicle not licensed for travel on public highways. 
(b)  Domestic power equipment. No person shall operate a power lawn mower, power hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, leaf blower/vacuum, drill or other similar domestic power maintenance equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(c)  Construction, maintenance and repair activities. No person shall engage in or permit construction, maintenance or repair activities creating noise, including, but not limited to, the use of any kind of electric, diesel, pneumatic, or gas-powered machine or other power equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Saturday, and no such activity is permitted on Sundays or on the following public holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
Construction activities in conjunction with new developments and city improvement projects, including but not limited to, grading, utility installation and street paving, requiring the use of heavy equipment shall be permitted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any weekday and 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. No such activity is permitted on Sundays or public holidays. 
Residential construction, repairs or maintenance, including lawn maintenance, conducted by the homeowner or occupant shall be permitted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Sundays and public holidays. The use of electronic insect deterrents (aka, "bug zappers") is limited to use between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. during the seven days of the week. 
(d)  Exceptions. The following uses and activities are exempt from this section as specified below: 
(1)  Snow removal motor vehicles, equipment and operations are exempt from subsections 13-52(b) and (c). 
(2)  Excavation/grading operations are exempt from subsection 13-52(c), but must comply with section 7-45. 
(3)  Outdoor recreational uses are exempt from subsections 13-52(b) and (c). 
(4)  Parking lot sweeping/cleaning vehicles, equipment, and operations are exempted from subsection 13-52(c). 
(Ord. No. 373, § 6, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 407, § 1, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 430, § 1, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 433, § 1, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 628, § 6, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 13-53. - Exemption for emergency work. 
    Noise created exclusively in the performance of emergency work to preserve the public health, safety, or welfare necessary to restore a public service or eliminate a public hazard shall be exempt from the provisions of this article for a period not to exceed 24 hours after the work is commenced. The city manager or his or her designee may grant an extension of the 24-hour exemption as it deems appropriate. Persons responsible for such work shall inform the city manager or his or her designee of the need to initiate such work or, if the work is commenced during nonbusiness hours of the city, at the beginning of the first business day thereafter. Any person responsible for such emergency work shall take all reasonable actions to minimize the amount of noise. 
(Ord. No. 373, § 6, 4-12-04) 
Sec. 13-54. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notice of certain violations. When the city determines that a noise exceeds the maximum sound level permitted under this article, written notice of the violation shall be given to the owner or occupant of the premises where the noise originates and such person shall be ordered to correct or remove each specified violation within such reasonable time as is prescribed in the notice. The failure to remove or correct any such violation within the time so prescribed constitutes a violation of this article. 
(b)  Civil remedies. This article may be enforced by injunction, action for abatement, or other appropriate civil remedy. 
(c)  Criminal penalties. Any violation of this article involving the operation of a motor vehicle, other than a violation of subsection 13-51(c), which occurs in a motor vehicle, is a petty misdemeanor. Every person who violates any other provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor. In all cases the city shall be entitled to collect its costs of prosecution, including reasonable attorneys' fees, to the extent authorized by law. Each act of violation and each day a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 373, § 6, 4-12-04) 
Secs. 13-55-13-80. - Reserved. 
Chapter 14 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Boats and waterways, Ch. 6; planning and development, Ch. 15; park land dedication, § 18-79. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish, improve, maintain, etc., parks, parkways and recreational facilities, and to protect and regulate their use, M.S. §§ 412.491, 429.021 subd. 1; authority for city to operate a program of public recreation and playgrounds, M.S. § 471.15 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 360, § 1, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, repealed Art. II, which pertained to the park and recreation commission and derived from Ord. No. 17, §§ 1 and 2, adopted Jan. 15, 1968. See § 2-46.05 for provisions relating to the park and recreation commission. 

Secs. 14-16-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 198 adopted Feb. 14, 1994, specifically repealed §§ 14-31, 14-32, 14-35-14-37, inclusive of the substantive sections of former Art. III, relative to park acquisition and development fund. Prior to repeal, Art. III consisted of §§ 14-31 and 14-32, derived from Ord. No. 14A, §§ 1, 4.03, adopted May 16, 1977 and Ord. No. 14-B, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 1979. Sections 14-33-14-55 were previously reserved. 

Secs. 14-31-14-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARK RULES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Operation of snowmobiles in parks, § 12-33(4). 

Sec. 14-56. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 360, § 2, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, repealed § 14-56, which pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. 59, § 1, adopted July 21, 1975. See § 1-2 for definitions. 
Sec. 14-57. - Violations. 
    Any person found violating this article by any peace officer or his deputy and who upon such officer's request to cease and desist from such violation fails or refuses to do so may be requested to leave the park and if necessary may be ordered or removed from the park by the peace officer. Such denial of continued use and enjoyment of the parks to violators shall also apply to enforcement of any rules and regulations promulgated by the city provided such rules and regulations are consistent with this article. In addition or in the alternative, any person convicted of violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 3, 7-21-75) 
Sec. 14-58. - Public gathering permits. 
    A permit shall be obtained from the city before participating in any of the following activities in a city park: 
(1)  Carnivals; 
(2)  Community celebrations; 
(3)  Gatherings of 50 or more persons, including picnics and political gatherings; and 
(4)  Contests and exhibitions, including, among other things, those that require exclusive use or charging admission. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 31, 7-21-75; Ord. No. 360, § 3, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 14-59. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 360, § 4, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, repealed § 14-59, which pertained to parking permits for parking in Lake Ann Park and derived from Ord. No. 59, § 31, adopted July 21, 1975. 
Sec. 14-60. - Operating hours. 
    No person shall park, be in or remain in, or leave any vehicle in any park, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. This section does not apply to those vehicles or persons involved in organized activities which are authorized to remain in a park by the city. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 4, 7-21-75) 
Sec. 14-61. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    Except for malt beverages and wine, no person shall consume or have in his possession while within any city park any bottle or receptacle which contains intoxicating liquor which has been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially consumed. 
(Ord. No. 57, § 5.02, 6-17-75; Ord. No. 57A, § 1, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 2H, § 7.19, 4-19-82; Ord. No. 134, § 1, 11-11-90; Ord. No. 360, § 5, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 3-28-05) 
Sec. 14-62. - Camping. 
    No person shall set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter, nor shall any person leave in any park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle, such as a housetrailer, camptrailer, campwagon or the like, without the written permission of the city. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 12, 7-21-75) 
Sec. 14-63. - Destructive devices. 
    No air-rifles, BB guns, slingshots, explosives, fireworks, or devices capable of discharging blank ammunition shall be brought into or used in park areas, except discharge of a bow at an archery range in accordance with park rules and by peace officers while executing their lawful duties. City sanctioned firework displays are exempt from this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 14, 7-21-75; Ord. No. 345, § 2, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 360, § 6, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 14-64. - Water pollution. 
    Discharge in waters of any pond, stream or any other body of water, of any substance, or liquid or solid, or any matter or thing which is a pollutant is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 16, 7-21-75) 
Sec. 14-65. - Animals. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) below, no person shall be permitted to take any animal, excluding but not limited to dogs and cats, into a park. This prohibition shall not apply to properly harnessed or leashed service animals, from a recognized service training program, assisting totally or partially blind or deaf persons or persons with a physical or sensory disability, or to a dog used by law enforcement officers, or persons training a dog or other animal to be a service animal or in rescue action. 
(b)  Walking leashed dogs is allowed on city trails and streets, except in public beach areas. The person having control of the dog shall immediately remove any feces left by the dog. The person in control of the dog must have in their possession equipment for picking up and removing the feces. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 23, 7-21-75; Ord. No. 233, § 1, 2-27-95; Ord. No. 305, § 2, 7-10-00; Ord. No. 360, § 7, 12-8-03) 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 5. 
Sec. 14-66. - Fires. 
(a)  No person shall start any fire in any park, except fires may be made by picnic parties in the park, but only in freestanding barbecue grills or in the places in said parks provided for the purpose and so designated by the city. Any person who starts any such fire is charged with the duty of completely extinguishing such fire or fires before leaving such park. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit or restrict the enforcement of ordinances regulating air pollution control and setting ambient air quality standards. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to have any fires on the ice of any park waters; provided, however, that manufactured heaters burning liquid fuel may be used. 
(Ord. No. 59, §§ 26, 30, 7-21-75) 
Sec. 14-67. - Use of vehicles. 
(a)  No person in any park shall ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding 15 miles per hour, except upon such roads as the city council may designate by posted signs, for speedier travel. 
(b)  No person when using a park shall interfere with the passage of vehicles. 
(c)  No vehicle is permitted on any foot walk, lawn, or any other grounds of city parks except in such areas or upon such trails, paths or roadways as are specifically designated by posted signs for traffic or parking purposes. 
(d)  No driver of any vehicle shall tow or push any toboggan, sled, ice skater, bicycle or any other sliding or coasting device, nor shall a driver permit any person to board or alight from nor hang onto said vehicle when said vehicle is in motion. 
(e)  No vehicle of any kind shall be permitted to drive across or on park lands except on roadways, except such vehicles and machines as operated by the city. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the use of snowmobiles in any area of a park so designated by resolution or ordinance. 
(f)  No person shall ride any bicycle upon any trail or sidewalk in such manner as to interfere with any pedestrian thereon. 
(g)  Any unoccupied vehicle found in violation of the provisions of this article may be removed and impounded at owner's expense by any police officer or duly authorized person in accordance with the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 32, 7-21-75) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 14-68. - Glass receptacles. 
    No person shall have in his or her possession a glass bottle, glass container, or glass receptacle within a city owned beach or city owned skateboard facility. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 1, 6-10-91; Ord. No. 391, § 2, 3-28-05) 
Sec. 14-69. - Authorized persons exempt. 
    Law enforcement officers and city employees acting in their official capacities, or others acting under their direction or control, are exempted from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 254, § 1, 6-24-96) 
Sec. 14-70. - Public swimming beaches. 
    No person shall fish in an area designated for swimming. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 7, 12-11-17) 
Secs. 14-71-14-95. - Reserved. 
Chapter 15 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Housing and redevelopment authority, § 2-56 et seq.; boats and waterways, Ch. 6; shooting ranges, § 11-3; neighborhood park acquisition and improvement, § 14-31 et seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 18; zoning, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Municipal planning, M.S. § 462.351 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 15-1-15-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 354, § 1, adopted Nov. 24, 2003, repealed Art. II, which pertained to the planning commission and derived from Ord. No. 28A, §§ 1, 2.01, 2.02, 3.01, 3.02 and 4, adopted Mar. 15, 1982. See § 2-46.03 for provisions relating to the planning commission. 

Secs. 15-16-15-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICIAL MAPS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; parks and recreation, Ch. 14; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 17; subdivisions, Ch. 18; municipal water supply and distribution system, § 19-16 et seq.; municipal sanitary disposal and treatment systems, § 19-41 et seq.; zoning, Ch. 20; amendment of zoning map, § 20-41; zoning map, § 20-202. 

Sec. 15-20. - Purpose. 
    Land that is needed for future street purposes and as sites for other necessary public facilities and services is frequently diverted to nonpublic uses which would have been located on other lands without hardship or inconvenience to the owners. When this happens, public uses of land may be denied or may be obtained only at prohibitive cost or at the expense of dislocating the owners and occupants of the land. Identification on an official map of land needed for future public uses permits both the public and private property owners to adjust their building plans equitably and conveniently before investments are made which will make such adjustments difficult to accomplish. It is the purpose of this article to provide a uniform procedure for the proper use of official maps as authorized by the Minnesota Municipal Planning Act, M.S. §§ 462.351 to 462.364. 
(Ord. No. 104, § 1, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 354, § 2, 1-24-03) 
Sec. 15-21. - Official map defined. 
    "Official map," as used in this article, means a map adopted in accordance with this article showing existing streets, proposed future streets, and the area needed for widening of existing streets of the city. An official map may also show the location of existing and future land and facilities within the city. An official map may cover the entire city or any portion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 104, § 1, 5-22-89) 
Sec. 15-22. - Initiation of proceedings. 
    Proceedings for adoption, amendment, or repeal of an official map or any part thereof may be initiated by: 
(1)  A recommendation of the planning commission; or 
(2)  Action by the city council on its own initiative, recommendation of an advisory commission, or request of an outside governmental body. 
(Ord. No. 104, § 1, 5-22-89) 
Sec. 15-23. - Sketch maps and reports. 
    Every proposal or request for an official map or its amendment or repeal, however initiated, shall be accompanied by a sketch map or plat showing the lands proposed to be included and the public purpose to be served. 
(Ord. No. 104, § 1, 5-22-89) 
Sec. 15-24. - Reference to planning commission. 
    Except when proceedings have been initiated by recommendation of the planning commission, every proposed official map or change in a map shall be referred to the planning commission for advice and recommendation thereon, and such recommendation shall be submitted to the city council within 45 days after reference to the planning commission along with the report of the commission on the effect of the proposal on the comprehensive plan of the city. If no recommendation is received by the council from the planning commission within 45 days after reference of the proposal to the commission by the council, the council may take such action as it may deem proper upon the proposal without further action by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 104, § 1, 5-22-89) 
Sec. 15-25. - Notice and hearing. 
(a)  Notice. Upon receiving the recommendation of the planning commission or after 45 days from the submission of the proposal to the planning commission without a recommendation from the commission, the council may call a public hearing on the proposal. A notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a description of property to be included in the mapped streets and public grounds shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At least ten days prior to the hearing the clerk shall also mail a copy of the notice to each owner of land situated within or abutting any street or other public ground shown on the official map. For purposes of this notice, the owners shall be determined by the records of the county auditor and the notice shall be addressed to the last known address as shown by the auditor's records. Failure to serve any such notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(b)  Hearing. At the time and place specified in the notice, the council shall hear evidence and arguments concerning the proposal. The hearing may be continued, from time to time, without further notice. The council may direct the planning commission to conduct a hearing and following the hearing to report its recommendation to the council. 
(Ord. No. 104, § 1, 5-22-89) 
Sec. 15-26. - Preparation and filing of maps. 
    The official map or maps shall be prepared in sufficient detail to permit the establishment of future acquisition lines on the ground. In unplatted areas a minimum of a centerline survey shall be made prior to the preparation of the final draft of the official map. After enactment of any ordinance adopting an official map or amending or repealing a previous office map ordinance, a certified copy of the official map or section to which the ordinance relates together with an attached copy of the ordinance shall be filed with the county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 104, § 1, 5-22-89) 
Sec. 15-27. - Effect. 
    After an official map has been adopted and filed, the issuance of building permits by the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article. The city shall deny every application for a permit to construct a new building or structure or expand an existing building or structure within an area designated on the official map for street or other public purposes. Whenever any street or highway is widened or improved or any new street is opened, or any interest in lands for other public purposes is acquired by the city, the city is not required in such proceedings to pay for any building or structure placed without a permit or in violation of conditions of a permit within the limits of the mapped street or outside of any building line that may have been established upon the existing street or within any area thus identified for public purposes. The adoption of an official map does not give the city any right, title, or interest in areas identified for public purposes thereon, but the adoption of the map does authorize the city to acquire such interest without paying compensation for buildings or structures erected in such areas without a permit or in violation of the conditions of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 104, § 1, 5-22-89) 
Sec. 15-28. - Appeals. 
    Whenever a building permit is denied pursuant to this article, the board of appeals and adjustments shall, upon appeal filed with it by the owner of the land, grant a permit for building in an area designated on the official map for a street or other public purpose in any case in which the board finds, upon the evidence and the arguments presented to it: 
(a)  That the entire property of the appellant of which the area designated for public purposes forms a part cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless such a permit is granted, or 
(b)  That, balancing the interest of the city in preserving the integrity of the official map and of the comprehensive city plan and the interest of the property owner in the use of his property and in the benefits of ownership, the grant of such permit is required by considerations of justice and equity. 
The board of appeals and adjustments shall hold a public hearing upon the appeal after notice of the hearing has been published in the official newspaper once at least ten days before the hearing. If the board authorizes issuance of a permit, it shall specify the exact location, ground area, height and other details as to the extent and character of the building for which the permit is granted. If the board authorizes issuance of a permit, the council or other board or commission having jurisdiction shall have six months from the date of the decision of the board to institute proceedings to acquire such land or interest therein, and if no such proceedings are started within that time, the city shall issue the permit if the application otherwise conforms to local ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 104, § 1, 5-22-89) 
Sec. 15-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 354, § 3, adopted Nov. 24, 2003, repealed § 15-29, which pertained to publishing and filing of this article and derived from Ord. No. 104, § 1, adopted May 22, 1989. 
Sec. 15-30. - Adoption of map-Highway 101. 
    The map entitled "Official Map of Highway 101," a copy of which is attached to Ordinance No. 105 and made a part of this section by reference, showing existing streets, proposed future streets, and the area needed for widening existing streets within the city is hereby adopted and designated as the official map of the portion of the city shown on the map. 
(Ord. No. 105, § 1, § 7-24-89) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 17. 
Sec. 15-31. - Same-Highway 212. 
    The map entitled "Official Map of Highway 212," a copy of which has been prepared by the Minnesota Department of Transportation and is available for inspection at city hall, showing existing streets, proposed future streets, and the area needed for widening existing streets within the city is hereby adopted and designated as the official map of the portion of the city shown on the map. 
(Ord. No. 114, § 1, 12-4-89) 
Chapter 16 - SOLID WASTES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Littering, § 11-5; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Waste management, M.S. § 115A.01 et seq.; littering, M.S. § 169.42. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 376, § 1, adopted May 10, 2004, repealed § 16-1, which pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. 51, § 1, adopted Aug. 14, 1972; and Ord. No. 113, § 1, Dec. 4, 1989. 
Sec. 16-2. - Disposal generally. 
(a)  All persons shall dispose of refuse and garbage as provided in this chapter. Refuse and garbage shall be disposed of at least once each week from residential and multifamily dwellings. Refuse and garbage of any commercial establishment shall be disposed of at least once each week, and at more frequent intervals if deemed necessary to protect the public health, and on order of the city. Refuse or garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate on any property within the city so as to constitute a nuisance by reason of appearance, odor, sanitation, or so as to create a fire or health hazard. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of refuse upon any property within the city except at an approved sanitary landfill site or disposal depot. An approved sanitary landfill site or disposal depot is a site for the disposal of refuse or garbage, which site has been approved by the city, and which is licensed and operated in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state. 
(Ord. No. 51, §§ 2, 5.07, 8-14-72; Ord. No. 376, § 2, 5-10-04) 
Secs. 16-3-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-21. - Container storage. 
    Garbage and refuse containers shall be so located so as to be out of the public view except on the day of pickup. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 3.09, 8-14-72) 
Secs. 16-22-16-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTORS 

Sec. 16-31. - License. 
(a)  Required. No person shall haul mixed municipal solid waste or recyclables collected in the city without first securing a license from the city. 
(b)  Validity. The license shall be valid for one calendar year and shall expire on December 31 of each year unless revoked sooner. 
(c)  Application. An applicant for a license shall make application to the city manager through forms and procedures prescribed by the city manager. 
(d)  Fee. The annual license fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(e)  Issuance. The city manager shall issue licenses only after receipt and review of all required forms and fees. Upon review of the documents submitted, the city manager shall issue a license if the documents comply with the provisions of this article. An applicant denied a license by the city manager may have the decision reviewed by the city council. The applicant shall request review by the city council in writing ten days after denial of the license. 
(f)  Exemptions; conditions. The license requirements of this article shall not apply to persons who haul garbage, refuse, or recyclables from their own residences or business properties, provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Garbage is hauled in containers equipped with tightfitting covers and which are also watertight on all sides and the bottom; 
(2)  Refuse and recyclables are hauled in a manner that prevents leakage or any possibility of a loss of cargo; 
(3)  Garbage and refuse is only dumped or unloaded at designated sanitary landfills or other facilities authorized by the county; 
(4)  Recyclables are only dumped or unloaded at a recycling facility, an organized recycling drive, or through licensed collectors; and 
(5)  Yard waste is privately composted, or is only dumped or unloaded at a composting facility authorized by the county, or through a licensed collector. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 4, 8-14-72; Ord. No. 113, § 2, 12-4-89) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits, miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10. 
Sec. 16-32. - No vested rights. 
    No collector licensed pursuant to this chapter shall acquire a vested right in the license. The city may, upon finding that public necessity requires, determine to establish other means of refuse collection. 
(Ord. No. 113, § 6, 12-4-89) 
Editor's note- Section 6 of Ord. No. 113 added § 16-37. Inasmuch as there existed a section containing identical provisions, the editor has included the provisions of Ord. No. 113, § 6, as amending § 16-32. 
Sec. 16-33. - Operating requirements. 
    A licensed hauler must comply with the following requirements. Failure to observe these provisions may be a basis for suspension or revocation of a license: 
(1)  Manner . The licensee shall operate in a manner consistent with its application materials and shall provide notice to the city within ten days of any change in the information. 
(2)  Hours of collection. No collection of mixed municipal solid waste, recyclable materials or yard waste shall be made except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Operations during these hours may also be conducted on Saturday to accommodate recognized national holidays or a special pickup. Customers shall be reasonably notified of the specific day and hours for collection of their yard waste, mixed municipal solid waste, and/or recyclables and the licensee shall collect the materials within those time periods. 
(3)  Vehicles; maintenance . Each licensed hauler shall only use vehicles and equipment so constructed that the contents will not leak or spill. The vehicles and equipment shall also be kept clean and as free from offensive odors as possible, and shall not stand in any street, alley, or public place longer than is reasonably necessary to collect mixed municipal solid waste, yard waste, and/or recyclables. The license shall also ensure that the collection site is left tidy and free of litter. 
(4)  Opportunity to recycle; collection . Each licensed hauler shall provide its customers with an opportunity to recycle through the weekly or bi-weekly curbside collection of targeted recyclables. Any hauler providing bi-weekly recycling pickup must provide, at a minimum, a 35-gallon, enclosed container for residential customers. The curbside collection of targeted recyclables shall be on the same day as the collection of the customer's mixed municipal solid waste, but may occur at a different time within that day. The targeted recyclables collection shall be from a location at or near the customer's mixed municipal solid waste collection site, or such other location mutually agreeable to the hauler and the customer. The licensee may specify how a customer is to place and prepare their targeted recyclables for collections. The licensee must provide this information to their customers in writing on an annual basis. In addition, annually the hauler shall provide their customers with their material recovery facility's recycling rate. The city must also be provided a copy of this information on an annual basis. The licensee is also deemed the owner of the recyclables and upon collections the licensee may market them. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent a licensee from offering curbside collection for other recyclable materials, in addition to the targeted recyclables. 
(5)  Monthly report on mixed recyclables . Each licensee shall submit a monthly report to the city of the weight, in tons, of mixed recyclables collected by the licensee in Chanhassen. The report shall be provided on or before the 20th day of the month following the close of the previous month and shall be on a form provided by the city. The report shall also identify the estimated weight of each type of collected recyclable, distinguish residential collection tonnage from commercial/industrial tonnage, the location of the recycling facilities or end markets to which all materials are delivered, the recycling rate of the facility, and describe how the weights were calculated. Upon written notice to the licensee, the city may require similar reports on other materials picked up by the licensee. 
(6)  Charges for service . Licensed mixed municipal solid waste haulers may not charge their customers a flat fee rate. To the extent possible, charges shall be based upon the volume or weight of mixed municipal solid waste that is collected. Licensed haulers may not impose greater charges on residents or businesses that recycle than on those who do not recycle. 
(7)  Recyclables . Recyclables may not be disposed of at a landfill or incinerated. All recyclables must be recycled. Licensed haulers shall not mix source-separated materials with mixed municipal solid waste or handle source-separated materials in any way that reduces the reusability or marketability of the source-separated material. Licensed haulers must notify the customer if recyclable materials are contaminated or not sorted correctly. The notification must be in writing stating the violation and corrective measures and it must be presented at the time of collection. 
(8)  Designated sanitary landfill . Mixed municipal solid waste collected from sources other than public entities may only be disposed of at a designated sanitary landfill or other facility authorized by the county. All mixed municipal solid wastes collected from any public entity within Chanhassen must be managed according to the Carver County Waste Management hierarchy. 
(Ord. No. 51, §§ 5.01, 5.04, 5.05, 8-14-72; Ord. No. 113, § 3, 12-4-89; Ord. No. 126, § 1, 3-26-90; Ord. No. 200, § 1, 4-11-94; Ord. No. 376, § 3, 5-10-04; Ord. No. 513, § 1, 11-22-10) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12. 
Sec. 16-34. - Duty to provide service. 
    A licensed garbage and refuse collector shall pick up all garbage and refuse of his customers which has been deposited for collection in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 5.08, 8-14-72) 
Sec. 16-35. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
    The city manager may suspend or revoke the license of any person whose conduct is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Suspension or revocation may also be based on other health, safety and welfare concerns arising out of the performance of the licensee, its employees and agents, and/or its vehicles and equipment. Revocation or suspension of a license by the manager shall be preceded by a public hearing conducted in accordance with M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.69. The city manager may appoint a hearing examiner or the manager may conduct the hearing. The hearing notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the hearing, include notice of the time and place of the hearing, and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city manager may appeal the decision to the city council by filing written notice with the city clerk within ten days after the manager's decision is made. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 5.03, 8-14-72; Ord. No. 113, § 4, 12-4-89; Ord. No. 126, § 2, 3-26-90) 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. 113 amended § 16-35 to read as set out herein. Prior to amendment, § 16-35 pertained to hours of collection; similar provisions are included in § 16-33. 
Sec. 16-36. - Scavenging prohibited without license. 
    It is unlawful for any person or business to scavenge, collect, or otherwise remove mixed municipal solid waste, recyclables, or yard waste that has been placed at the curb or in recycling containers, without a license from the city and an account relationship with the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 113, § 5, 12-4-89) 
Sec. 16-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- The provisions of § 6 of Ord. No. 113 were included as amending § 16-32. See the editor's note following that section. 
Sec. 16-38. - Designation of additional targeted recyclables. 
    Additional recyclable materials may be designated as targeted recyclables by resolution of the city council after the effective date of this chapter. The designation process will be as follows: 
(1)  Each licensed collector shall be given 120 days' written notice of proposed additions to the list of targeted recyclables. The notice will specifically describe the material(s) proposed for addition and also described how the addition might affect the duties and obligations of a licensee. 
(2)  Each licensed collector shall also be given written notice at least ten days in advance of the time and date of the city council meeting that will consider the proposed addition to the list of the targeted recyclables. 
(3)  Notice shall be deemed given by mail, to the address provided on the most recent license application or renewal form. 
(Ord. No. 113, § 7, 12-4-89) 
Chapter 17 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 12; fee for street vacation and easement vacation, etc., § 15-2; use of official maps, § 15-20; adoption of maps of highways, § 15-30 et seq.; storm sewers, § 19-96 et seq. 
State Law reference- General authority relative to streets, M.S. § 412.221, subd. 6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 17-1-17-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 629, § 1, adopted Dec. 11, 2017, repealed Art. II, §§ 17-17-17-23 entitled "Excavations,", which derived from: Ord. No. 27, §§ 1-7, 9, 10, adopted Apr. 29, 1968; and Ord. No. 361, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 8, 2003. See Art. V for similar provisions. 

Secs. 17-16-17-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOVING BUILDINGS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Moving buildings, M.S. § 221.81. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-31. - General standards. 
    All used buildings moved into or within the city shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minnesota State Building Code. 
(2)  The building is well maintained and in a good state of repair as determined by the building official. 
(3)  Chapter 20 of the City Code, City of Chanhassen, Minnesota. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 19(6-19-4), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 361, § 4, 12-8-03) 
Secs. 17-32-17-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 17-41. - Required. 
    No one may move a building into or within the city except upon issuance of a permit issued by the city and from all regulating agencies. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 19(6-19-1), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 361, § 5, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 17-42. - Application. 
(a)  A person required to obtain a permit by this division shall file an application with the city, accompanied by a fee in the amount established by resolution. 
(b)  The application shall be referred to the city building official for approval. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 19(6-19-2), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 361, § 6, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 17-43. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 361, § 7, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, repealed § 17-43, which pertained to hearings on applications and derived from Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 19(6-19-3), adopted Dec. 15, 1986. 
Sec. 17-44. - Issuance. 
    The city shall approve a permit pursuant to this division subject to such reasonable conditions as may be appropriate if the standards set forth above are met. If the building does not satisfy the requirements for a permit, the city may issue a permit on condition that the building is brought into compliance within a reasonable period of time as determined by the city. The city may further condition approval upon the applicant furnishing a letter of credit satisfactory to the city sufficient to cover the necessary work to bring the building into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 19(6-19-5), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 361, § 8, 12-8-03) 
Secs. 17-45-17-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL 

Sec. 17-50. - Snow and ice removal from sidewalks. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to require the owners or occupants of real property to maintain public sidewalks abutting their property to prevent a public nuisance affecting the safety of the general public. 
(b)  Responsibility for removal of snow and ice. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of real property to fail to remove snow and ice from sidewalks abutting their property within 12 hours after the snow and ice has been deposited. 
(c)  Special assessments. After giving the owner or occupant of real property not in compliance with this section two days' advanced written notice of noncompliance, the may cause the snow or ice to be removed and may assess the cost against the property owner in accordance with M.S. § 429.101. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of up to $100.00. 
(2)  A separate violation occurs each day that a violation hereunder continues. 
(Ord. No. 361, § 9, 12-8-03) 
Secs. 17-51-17-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 629, § 1, adopted Dec. 11, 2017, set out provisions intended for use as Art. II, §§ 17-1-17-30. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. V, §§ 17-71-17-101. 

Sec. 17-71. - Findings, purpose and election to manage the public rights-of-way. 
(a)  To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances. 
(b)  Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new article of this Code relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This article imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this article, persons excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this article provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  This article shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws, Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the "Act"), and 2017 Session Laws, Chapter 94, and subsequent legislative amendments to the Act, and the other laws governing applicable rights of the city and users of the right-of-way, as amended. This article shall also be interpreted consistent with Minnesota Rules 7819.0050-7819.9950 and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560 and subsequent amendments thereto where possible. Those laws and rules are hereby adopted by reference, and to the extent any provision of this article cannot be interpreted consistently with the Act or Minnesota Rules, that interpretation most consistent with applicable statutory and case law is intended. This article shall not be interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(d)  Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-72. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions apply in this article of this Code. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this article. Defined terms remain defined terms, whether or not capitalized. 
    Abandoned facility. A facility no longer in service or physically disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user. 
    Applicant. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way. 
    City. The City of Chanhassen, Minnesota. For purposes of this article, city also means the city's elected officials, officers, employees and agents. 
    Collocate or collocation. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing wireless support structure or utility pole that is owned privately, or by the city or other governmental unit. 
    Commission. The state public utilities commission. 
    Congested right-of-way. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04, subd, 3, over a continuous length in excess of 500 feet. 
    Construction performance bond. Any of the following forms of security provided at permittee's option: 
  Individual project bond; 
  Cash deposit; 
  Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. § 15.73, subd. 3; 
  Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city; 
  Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city; 
  A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city. 
    Degradation. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation or disturbance did not occur. 
    Degradation cost. Subject to Minnesota Rules 7819.1100 means the cost to achieve a level of restoration, as determined by the city at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in Minnesota Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950. 
    Degradation fee. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation cost. 
    Delay penalty. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established by permit. 
    Department. The department of public works of the city. 
    Director. Unless otherwise assigned by the city manager, the director of the department of public works of the city, or her or his designee. 
    Emergency. A condition that: (1) poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property; or (2) requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to restore service to a customer. 
    Equipment. Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain facilities in any right-of-way. 
    Excavate. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any part of a right-of-way. 
    Excavation permit. The permit which, pursuant to this article, must be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way, public ground, or other property under the control and authority of the city. An Excavation permit allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way or property described in such permit. 
    Excavation permit fee. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the costs as provided herein. 
    Facility or facilities. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required to provide utility service. 
    Five-year project plan. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction within the next five years. 
    High density corridor. A designated portion of the public right-of-way within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a common conduit system or other common structure. 
    Hole. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length less than the width of the pavement. 
    Local representative. A local person or persons, or designee of such person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this article. 
    Management costs. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way or small wireless facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed after providing notice and the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-of-way or small wireless facility permits. Management costs do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way, unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the city including fees tied to or based on customer counts, access lines, or revenues generated by the right-of-way or for the city, the fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123; M.S. §§ 237.162 or 237.163; or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to this article. 
    Micro-wireless facility. A small wireless facility that is no larger than 24 inches long, 15 inches wide, and 12 inches high, and whose exterior antenna, if any, is no longer than 11 inches. 
    Obstruct. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way. 
    Obstruction permit. The permit which, pursuant to this article, must be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way, for the duration specified therein. 
    Obstruction permit fee. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the costs as provided herein. 
    Patch or patching. A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in nature. A patch consists of: (1) the compaction of the subbase and aggregate base, and (2) the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A patch is considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the city's five-year project plan. 
    Pavement. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete, aggregate, or gravel. 
    Permit. Has the meaning given "right-of-way permit" in M.S. § 237.162. 
    Permittee. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by the city under this article. 
    Person. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state, however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign, whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or political. 
    Probation. The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions of this article. 
    Probationary period. One year from the date that a person has been notified in writing that they have been put on probation. 
    Public ground or property. City owned, controlled or managed property including easement areas. 
    Public right-of-way or right-of-way. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane or public sidewalk in which the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements of the city. A right-of-way does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other non-wire telecommunications or broadcast service. 
    Registrant. Any person who: (1) has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located in any right-of-way, or (2) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way. 
    Restoration cost. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota Public Utilities Commission Rules. 
    Restore or restoration. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation. 
    Right-of-way permit. Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this article. 
    Right-of-way user. 
(1)  A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by M.S. § 237.162, subd. 4; or 
(2)  A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the public right-of-way. 
    Service or utility service. Includes: (1) those services provided by a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, subds. 4 and 6; (2) services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including transporting of voice or data information; (3) services of a cable communications systems as defined in M.S. ch. 238; (4) natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services provided by the city; (5) services provided by a cooperative electric association organized under M.S. ch. 308A; and (6) water, and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling or heating services. 
    Service lateral. An underground facility that is used to transmit, distribute or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a common source to an end-use customer. A service lateral is also an underground facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a customer's premises. 
    Small wireless facility. A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and 
(2)  All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility provided such equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or concealment; or a micro-wireless facility. 
    Supplementary application. An application made to excavate or obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already been issued. 
    Telecommunications right-of-way user. A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the right-of-way that is used or is intended to be used for providing wireless service, or transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes of this article, a cable communication system defined and regulated under M.S. ch. 238, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy services, a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under M.S. chs. 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized under M.S. ch. 308A, are not telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this article except to the extent such entity is offering wireless service. 
    Temporary surface. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of pavement included in the city's two-year plan, in which case it is considered full restoration. 
    Trench. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement. 
    Two-year project plan. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction within the next two years. 
    Utility pole. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate telecommunications or electric service. 
    Wireless facility. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network, including equipment associated with wireless service, a radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and a small wireless facility, but not including wireless support structures, wireline backhaul facilities, or cables between utility poles or wireless support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a specific antenna. 
    Wireless service. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of wi-fi, whether at a fixed location or by means of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including cable service. 
    Wireless support structure. A new or existing structure in a right-of-way designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as reasonably determined by the city. 
    Wireline backhaul facility. A facility used to transport communications data by wire from a wireless facility to a communications network. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-73. - Administration and utility coordination committee. 
(a)  The director is the principal city official responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder. 
(b)  The city may create an advisory utility coordination committee. Participation on the committee is voluntary. It will be composed of any registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information and, by making recommendations regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the process of performing construction work therein. The city may determine the size of such committee and shall appoint members from a list of registrants that have expressed a desire to assist the city. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-74. - Registration and right-of-way occupancy. 
(a)  Registration. Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the city. Registration will consist of providing application information. 
(b)  Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any part thereof, in any right-of-way without first being registered with the city. 
(c)  Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their property and the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements for planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens under this article. However, nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the provisions of the M.S. ch. 216D, Gopher One Call Law. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-75. - Registration information. 
(a)  Information required. The information provided to the city at the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Each registrant's name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers. 
(2)  The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of registration. 
(3)  A certificate of insurance or self-insurance: 
a.  Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the city; 
b.  Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the: (i) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, and (ii) placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities and collapse of property; 
c.  Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages; 
d.  Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; 
e.  Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this article; 
f.  The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies; 
g.  If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate that is required to be filed with the Secretary of State as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State; 
h.  A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other authorization or approval from the applicable state or federal agency to lawfully operate, where the person is lawfully required to have such authorization or approval from said commission or other state or federal agency. 
(b)  Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at all times by providing to the city information as to changes within 15 days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of any change. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-76. - Reporting obligations. 
(a)  Operations. Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for underground facilities with the city. Such plan shall be submitted using a format designated by the city and shall contain the information determined by the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way. 
    The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a "next-year project"); and 
(2)  To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five years following the next calendar year (in this section, a "five-year project"). 
    The term "project" in this section shall include both next-year projects and five-year projects. 
    By January 1 of each year, the city will have available for inspection in the city's office a composite list of all projects of which the city has been informed of the annual plans. All registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list. 
    Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and all other registrants of all such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of another registrant listed by the other registrant. 
(b)  Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-77. - Permit requirement. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way, or install or place facilities in the right-of-way, without first having obtained a right-of-way permit from the city to do so. In the discretion of the director, permits may be designated or limited by nature of the use or type of facility and include but are not limited to the following types: 
(1)  Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. 
(2)  Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project. 
(3)  Small wireless facility permit. A small wireless facility permit is required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless support structure, to collocate a small wireless facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless facility in the specified portion of the right-of-way, to the extent specified therein, provided that such permit shall remain in effect for the length of time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked. 
The city may use the permit process established under this article to manage excavations, obstructions, small wireless facility placement or other uses of public property other than rights-of-way as authorized by the council, but nothing herein grants any person any right to use public property other than by express permission of the city. 
(b)  Permit extensions. No person may excavate, obstruct or occupy the right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless: (i) such person makes a supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit, and (ii) a new permit or permit extension is granted. 
(c)  Delay penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000 subp. 3 and notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(d)  Permit display. Permits issued under this article shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the city. 
(e)  Exceptions. An excavation or other right-of-way permit under this article is not required of a licensed plumber who has secured a permit for the installation of water or sanitary sewer services or an individual sewage treatment system. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-78. - Permit applications. 
    Application for a permit is made to the city. Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions: 
(1)  Registration with the city pursuant to this article; 
(2)  Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed facilities; 
(3)  Payment of money due the city for: 
a.  Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management costs; 
b.  Prior obstructions or excavations; 
c.  Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city; 
d.  Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable. 
(4)  Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110 percent of the amount owing; 
(5)  Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction performance bond inadequate under applicable standards. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-79. - Issuance of permit; conditions. 
(a)  Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this article, the city shall issue a permit. 
(b)  Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to, M.S. §§ 216D.01-216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560. 
(c)  Small wireless facility conditions. 
(1)  In addition to subsection (b), the erection or installation of a wireless support structure, the collocation of a small wireless facility, or other installation of a small wireless facility in the right-of-way, shall be subject to the following conditions: A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications, and at the height indicated in the applicable permit application. 
(2)  No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way shall exceed 50 feet in height without the city's written authorization, provided that the city may impose a lower height limit in the applicable permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to protect the right-of-way and its current use, and further provided that a registrant may replace an existing wireless support structure exceeding 50 feet in height with a structure of the same height subject to such conditions or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable permit. 
(3)  No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet above its wireless support structure. 
(4)  Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support structure in the right-of-way, the city may impose separation requirements between such structure and any existing wireless support structure or other facilities in and around the right-of-way. 
(5)  Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support small wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such structure. 
(6)  Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure. 
(7)  The portion of a small wireless facility attached to the wireless support structure shall match the color of the wireless support structure. When an exact match is not possible, unobtrusive colors shall be used. 
(8)  Ground-mounted equipment and facilities shall be screened from view by landscaping to the extent practical. 
(9)  In districts zoned for residential use, all ground-mounted equipment and facilities shall be placed underground to the extent practical. When underground installation is not practical, all ground-mounted equipment shall be screened from adjacent residential uses by landscaping. 
(d)  Small wireless facility agreement. A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on a small wireless support structure owned or controlled by the city, or any other city asset in the right-of-way, after the applicant has executed a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement with the city. The standard collocation agreement shall require payment of the following unless a lower amount is established by council: 
(1)  $150.00 per year for rent to collocate on the city structure. 
(2)  $25.00 per year for maintenance associated with the collocation; 
(3)  A monthly fee for electrical service as follows: 
a.  $73.00 per radio node, less than or equal to 100 maximum watts; 
b.  $182.00 per radio node over 100 maximum watts; or 
c.  The actual costs of electricity, if the actual cost exceed the foregoing. 
The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the required small wireless facility permit, provided, however, that the applicant shall not be additionally required to obtain a license or franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit does not supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the city and applicant. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-80. - Action on small wireless facility permit applications. 
(a)  Deadline for action. The city shall approve or deny a small wireless facility permit application within 90 days after filing of such application. The small wireless facility permit, and any associated building permit application, shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the application within the review periods established in this section. 
(b)  Consolidated applications. An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless facility permit application addressing the proposed collocation of up to 15 small wireless facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by a local government unit, provided that all small wireless facilities in the application: 
(1)  Are located within a two-mile radius; 
(2)  Consist of substantially similar equipment; and 
(3)  Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures. 
In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the city may approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not use denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless facilities in the application. 
(c)  Tolling of deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small wireless facility permit application may be tolled if: 
(1)  The city receives applications from one or more applicants seeking approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within a seven-day period. In such case, the city may extend the deadline for all such applications by 30 days by informing the affected applicants in writing of such extension. 
(2)  The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information and the city provides written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within 30 days of receipt the application. Upon submission of additional documents or information, the city shall have ten days to notify the applicant in writing of any still-missing information. 
(3)  The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing to toll the review period. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-81. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Excavation permit fee. The city shall impose an excavation permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover: 
(1)  Management costs; 
(2)  Degradation costs, if applicable. 
(b)  Obstruction permit fee. The city shall impose an obstruction permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover management costs. 
(c)  Small wireless facility permit fee. The city shall impose a small wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover: 
(1)  Management costs; and 
(2)  City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated with collocation of small wireless facilities. 
(d)  Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The city may allow applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of billing. 
(e)  Nonrefundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city has revoked for a breach as stated herein are not refundable. 
(f)  Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-82. - Right-of-way patching and restoration. 
(a)  Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under this article. 
(b)  Patch and restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The city may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to restore the right-of-way itself. 
(1)  City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, following such restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs associated with correcting the defective work. 
(2)  Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.3000. 
(3)  Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities. 
(c)  Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city and shall comply with Minnesota Rule 7819.1100. 
(d)  Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work shall be completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city, not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable under this article. 
(e)  Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the city at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under the construction performance bond. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-83. - Joint applications. 
(a)  Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time. 
(b)  Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on their applications. 
(c)  With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by two or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a permit would still be required. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-84. - Supplementary applications. 
(a)  Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area: (i) make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required thereby, and (ii) be granted a new permit or permit extension. 
(b)  Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the permit end date. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-85. - Other obligations. 
(a)  Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other applicable rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to, M.S. §§ 216D.01-216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work. 
(b)  Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work. 
(c)  Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the permit. 
(d)  Trenchless excavation . As a condition of all applicable permits, permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited to, horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in M.S. ch. 216D and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560 and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing underground utilities before excavating, as determined by the director. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-86. - Denial of permit. 
(a)  Reasons for denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions of this article or if the city determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use. 
(b)  Procedural requirements. The denial of a permit must be made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city must notify the applicant in writing within three business days of the decision to deny a permit. If an application is denied, the right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the city and resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within 30 days of receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted application within 30 days after submission. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-87. - Installation requirements. 
    The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota Rules 7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163. Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560 and these ordinances. Service lateral installation is further subject to those requirements and conditions set forth by the city in the applicable permits and/or agreements referenced in this article. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-88. - Inspection. 
(a)  Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance Minnesota Rule 7819.1300. 
(b)  Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work. 
(c)  Authority of director. 
(1)  At the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety or well-being of the public. 
(2)  The director may issue an order to the permittee for any work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the director that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the director may revoke the permit pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-89. - Work done without a permit. 
(a)  Emergency situations. 
(1)  Each registrant shall immediately notify the director of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Excavators' notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this article for the actions it took in response to the emergency. 
(2)  If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency. 
(b)  Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by the City Code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-90. - Supplementary notification. 
    If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the city of the accurate information as soon as this information is known. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-91. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit; 
(2)  An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens; 
(3)  Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way permit; 
(4)  The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the permittee's control; or 
(5)  The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the breach. 
(c)  Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan, acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. Permittee's failure to so contact the city, or permittee's failure to timely submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, permittee's failure to so contact the city, or permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year. 
(d)  Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly outside of the permit authorization. 
(e)  Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits a breach as outlined above, permittee's permit will automatically be revoked and permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for emergency repairs. 
(f)  Revocation of a small wireless facility permit shall be made in writing within three business days of the decision to revoke the permit and shall document the basis for the revocation. 
(g)  Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-92. - Mapping data. 
(a)  Information required. Each registrant and permittee shall provide mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minnesota Rules 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within 90 days following completion of any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the director accurate maps and drawings certifying the "as-built" location of all equipment installed, owed and maintained by the permittee. Such maps and drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all facilities and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city's electronic mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by the director. Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this subsection shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder's registration. 
(b)  Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minnesota Rules 7560.0150 subpart 2, shall require the permittee's use of appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals and the service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the director reasonably requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the director evidence satisfactory to the director of the installed service lateral locations. Compliance with this subsection (b) and with applicable Gopher State One Call Law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals installed after December 31, 2005 shall be a condition of any city approval necessary for: 
(1)  Payments to contractors working on a public improvement project including those under M.S. ch. 429; and 
(2)  City approval under development agreements or other subdivision or site plan approval under M.S. ch. 462. The director shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such information to the city. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information on the service laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit issued for the work or future permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-93. - Location and relocation of facilities. 
(a)  Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with the Act, with other applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities. 
(b)  Undergrounding. Unless otherwise agreed in a franchise or other agreement between the applicable right-of-way user and the city, or as specified in the permit, facilities in the right-of-way must be located or relocated and maintained underground. 
(c)  Corridors. 
(1)  The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or other permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue. 
(2)  Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no later than at the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the registrant. 
(d)  Nuisance. One year after the passage of this article, any facilities found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a useable condition. 
(e)  Limitation of space. To protect health, safety and welfare, or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to be in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-94. - Pre-excavation facilities location. 
    In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01-216D.09 ("One Call Excavation Notice System") before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal and vertical placement of all said facilities. Any registrant whose facilities are less than 20 inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-95. - Damage to other facilities. 
    When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a registrant's facilities to protect it, the city shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damage. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during the city's response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant's facilities. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-96. - Right-of-way vacation. 
    Reservation of right. If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minnesota Rules 7819.3200. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-97. - Indemnification and liability. 
    By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this article, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.1250. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-98. - Abandoned and unusable facilities. 
(a)  Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide information satisfactory to the city that the registrant's obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way under this article have been lawfully assumed by another registrant. 
(b)  Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is waived by the city. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-99. - Appeal. 
    A right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) has been denied a permit; (3) has had a permit revoked; (4) believes that the fees imposed are not in conformity with M.S. § 237.163, subd. 6; or (5) disputes a determination of the director under this article may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision reviewed, upon written request, by the city council. The city council shall act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided the right-of-way user has submitted its appeal with sufficient time to include the appeal as a regular agenda item. A decision by the city council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-100. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
    A permittee's rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances as necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 17-101. - Severability. 
    If any portion of this article is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. Nothing in this article precludes the city from requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to requirements set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 629, § 1, 12-11-17) 
Secs. 17-102-17-135. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 7; neighborhood park acquisition and improvement, § 14-31 et seq.; planning and development, ch. 15; use of official maps, § 15-20; zoning, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt subdivision regulations, M.S. § 462.358; plats, M.S. § 505.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 369, § 1, adopted Feb. 23, 2004, repealed § 18-1, which pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. 33-D, § 3, adopted Feb. 25, 1985; and Ord. No. 324, § 10, adopted July 9, 2001. 
Sec. 18-2. - Compliance. 
    All subdivisions of land shall comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 2, 2-25-85) 
Sec. 18-3. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The city may withhold, revoke or deny any permits, approvals or any action required or if there is a violation of this chapter. Each week during which violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. The city may apply to the district court for injunctive relief for violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 15, 2-25-85) 
Sec. 18-4. - Restrictions on filing and recording conveyances. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 18-37, no conveyances of land shall be filed or recorded if the land is described in the conveyance by metes and bounds or by reference to an unapproved registered land survey or to an unapproved plat. The foregoing provision does not apply to a conveyance if the land described: 
(1)  Was a separate parcel of record on February 20, 1969; 
(2)  Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered into prior to February 20, 1969; or 
(3)  Was a separate parcel of not less than two and one-half acres in area and 150 feet in width on January 1, 1966; or 
(4)  Was a separate parcel not less than five acres in area and 300 feet in width on July 1, 1980; or 
(5)  Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of not less than five acres and having a width of not less than 300 feet and its conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots or parcels, any one of which is less than five acres or 300 feet in width; or 
(6)  Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land of not less than 20 acres having a width of not less than 500 feet and its conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots or parcels, any one of which is less than 20 acres in area or 500 feet in width. 
(b)  Any owner or agent of the owner of land who conveys a lot or a parcel in violation of the provisions of this section shall pay the city a penalty of not less than $100.00 for each parcel so conveyed. The city may enjoin such conveyance or may recover such penalty by civil action. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 12, 2-25-85) 
Secs. 18-5-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-21. - Building permits. 
    No building or other permits will be issued by the city for grading, buildings, structures or improvements to any lot unless there has been full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 14, 2-25-85) 
Sec. 18-22. - Variances. 
    The city council may grant a variance from the regulations contained in this chapter as part of the plat approval process following a finding that all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The hardship is not a mere inconvenience; 
(2)  The hardship is caused by the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the land; 
(3)  The condition or conditions upon which the request is based are unique and not generally applicable to other property; 
(4)  The granting of a variance will not be substantially detrimental to the public welfare and is in accord with the purpose and intent of this chapter, the zoning ordinance and comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 11, 2-25-85) 
Secs. 18-23-18-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLATTING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 18-36. - Generally. 
    Notice requirement and procedures set forth in this chapter in excess of those required by state law are directory. Failure to comply with such procedures will not invalidate the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 4.3, 2-25-85) 
Sec. 18-37. - Exemption. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  The city council may approve a metes and bounds subdivision of a lot into two lots if both resulting lots meet the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance and abut a public or private street. To the extent possible, the new boundary line shall be parallel to a previously existing lot line. The city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed subdivision after notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing has been published once in the official newspaper, and a proposed development notification sign has been erected on the subject property by the applicant, both at least ten days before the date of hearing. Written notice shall also be mailed by the city to the applicant and all owners of record within 500 feet of the outer boundaries of the subdivision. Failure to post a proposed development notification sign or to give notice or defects in the notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings. At least three weeks prior to the hearing the applicant shall submit to the city: 
(1)  A survey (prepared and signed by a registered land surveyor); 
(2)  A list of property owners within 500 feet of the boundaries of the parcel to be subdivided; 
(3)  Except as waived by the city, all information required for plats. 
(c)  Upon approval of an administrative or metes and bounds subdivision, the city shall notify the applicant of the approval and within 30 days thereafter, the applicant or the city attorney shall file the documents with the county recorder and furnish the city evidence of such recording. Failure to comply shall be cause for revoking the city's approval. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 4.2, 2-25-85; Ord. No. 240, § 1, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 324, § 11, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 329, §§ 1, 2, 10-22-01; Ord. No. 369, §§ 2, 3, 2-23-04) 
Sec. 18-38. - Preapplication consultation. 
    Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, the applicant shall consult with the city to discuss the proposal. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 4.1, 2-25-85) 
Sec. 18-39. - Preliminary plat-Generally. 
(a)  After the preapplication consultation and at least 30 days prior to the meeting of the planning commission at which action is desired, the applicant may file with the city an application for preliminary plat approval. The application shall be accompanied by copies of the plat in such number as required by the city, an eight and one-half by eleven-inch reduction of each sheet, an electronic format file of the plans, and proof of ownership satisfactory to the city. A list of property owners within 500 feet of the property will be prepared by the city. The applicant shall pay the application fee established by city council. All required data, documentation plans, copies and fees must be submitted before the application will be considered complete. Rejection of the plat by the city council, or abandonment or withdrawal of the proposed plat by the subdivider, shall not entitle the applicant to the return of all or any part of the application fee. 
(b)  The city may refer copies of the preliminary plat to other agencies and utility companies for their review, comments and recommendations. 
(c)  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat after notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing has been published once in the official newspaper, and a proposed development notification sign has been erected on the subject property, both at least ten days before the date of hearing. Written notice shall also be mailed by the city to the applicant and all owners of record within 500 feet of the outer boundaries of the preliminary plat. Failure to post a proposed development notification sign or to give notice or defects in the notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings. The community development director may require an expanded mailing list for sites fronting on lakeshore where the development would be visible over a larger area. The applicant is responsible for meeting with affected homeowners. 
(d)  The planning commission shall make a recommendation on the preliminary plat to the city council within 45 days from the date of the opening of the public hearing, unless the applicant consents on the record to a continuance. The planning commission may recommend approval, approval subject to conditions or that the preliminary plat be denied. If denial is recommended, the reasons for that recommendation shall be stated in the record. 
(e)  Following action by the planning commission, the city council shall consider the preliminary plat. The city council shall make its decision within 120 days following receipt by the city of the properly completed application, unless the subdivider consents on the record to a continuance. The city council may: 
(1)  Grant approval of the preliminary plat, with or without modification or conditions; or 
(2)  Refer the preliminary plat to the planning commission or appropriate city staff, officers or departments for further investigation; or 
(3)  Disapprove the preliminary plat. If the plat is not approved, the city council shall state the reasons for denial on the record. 
(f)  The findings necessary for city council approval of the preliminary plat and the final plat shall be as follows: 
(1)  The proposed subdivision is consistent with the zoning ordinance; 
(2)  The proposed subdivision is consistent with all applicable city, county and regional plans including but not limited to the city's comprehensive plan; 
(3)  The physical characteristics of the site, including but not limited to topography, soils, vegetation, susceptibility to erosion and siltation, susceptibility to flooding, and stormwater drainage are suitable for the proposed development; 
(4)  The proposed subdivision makes adequate provision for water supply, storm drainage, sewage disposal, streets, erosion control and all other improvements required by this chapter; 
(5)  The proposed subdivision will not cause environmental damage; 
(6)  The proposed subdivision will not conflict with easements of record; 
(7)  The proposed subdivision is not premature. A subdivision is premature if any of the following exists: 
a.  Lack of adequate stormwater drainage. 
b.  Lack of dedicated and improved public streets. 
c.  Lack of adequate sanitary sewer systems or no ISTS (individual sewer treatment system). 
d.  Lack of adequate off-site public improvements or support systems. 
(g)  The city shall notify the applicant of the city council's action, stating the conditions of approval or reasons for disapproval. 
(h)  An applicant may at his own risk, apply to process the preliminary and final plats simultaneously. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 4.1, 2-25-85; Ord. No. 240, § 2, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 369, §§ 4-6, 2-23-04; Ord. No. 432, §§ 1, 2, 9-25-06) 
Sec. 18-40. - Same-Data required. 
    Unless waived by the city because of the limited size and nature of the proposal, the following shall be furnished with a preliminary plat: 
(1)  Identification and description: 
a.  Proposed name of subdivision, which shall not duplicate or be similar in pronunciation or spelling to the name of any other plat in the county. 
b.  Legal description. 
c.  Names and addresses of the record owner, subdivider, land surveyor, engineer, designer of the plat, and any agent having control of the land. 
d.  Graphic scale not less than one inch to 100 feet. 
e.  North arrow. 
f.  Key map including area within one mile radius of plat. 
g.  Date of preparation. 
(2)  Existing conditions: 
a.  Boundary lines of proposed subdivision. 
b.  Existing zoning classifications for land within and abutting the subdivision. 
c.  Acreage and lot dimensions. 
d.  Location, right-of-way width, and names of existing or platted streets; locations of parks, buildings and structures, railroad right-of-way, easements, section lines and corporate boundaries within the proposed subdivision and to a distance 150 feet beyond. 
e.  Boundary lines of adjoining platted or subdivided land, within 150 feet, identified by name and ownership including all contiguous land owned or controlled by the subdivider. 
f.  Topographic data within the property to be subdivided and 100 feet beyond the property boundary, showing contours as follows: two-foot intervals where slope is ten percent or less; five-foot intervals where slope is ten to 15 percent; ten-foot intervals where slope is greater than 15 percent. All areas of the subdivision to be platted with a slope greater than 25 percent must be clearly indicated. However, on undevelopable sections or larger acre lots topographic data may be reduced to significant physical characteristics, such as top and toe of slope, if in the opinion of the city the area is viewed as unsuitable for future subdivision. Location and elevations of on-site and abutting water courses, lakes, wetlands, rivers, streams, and marshes at date of survey and their ordinary high water mark plus approximate high and normal water elevations shall also be shown. A wetland delineation report and surveyed wetland line for all jurisdictional wetlands on or within 100 feet of the property boundary shall be submitted. The delineation shall be no more than three years old, unless accompanied by documentation demonstrating the delineation has been reviewed in the past three years and is accurate or revised to reflect changes on-site. Floodplain areas, location of wooded areas, rocky outcrops, power transmission poles and lines and other significant physical features shall also be shown. 
g.  Location, size and approximate grade of proposed public sewer and water mains. If public sewer is not available, the developer shall provide community sewage treatment system (CSTS) for subdivisions in excess of two lots. If public sewer and water are not available, the developer shall provide site evaluation data required by "Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080 Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Standards" and Chapter 19, Article IV, of the Chanhassen City Code, to determine the suitability of the site for individual sewage systems. The following data is required for review: 
1.  Location of two drainfield sites per lot or per CSTS site. 
2.  Two soil borings on each drainfield site for a total of four soil borings per lot or per CSTS site and two percolation tests per drainfield site for a total of four percolation tests per lot or CSTS site. 
3.  The infiltration area shall be based on the anticipated wastewater generated from all sources that could use the CSTS. 
4.  All plans for a CSTS shall be prepared by a licensed designer and qualified Minnesota Professional Engineer. 
h.  An accurate soil report indicating soil conditions, permeability and slope. 
i.  Utilities on or adjacent to the property, including location, size and invert elevation of public sanitary and storm sewers, catch basins and manholes; location and size of water mains and hydrants; location of gas mains, high pressure lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone lines, and street lights. The direction, distance to, and size of such facilities shall be indicated. 
j.  Location of any wetlands. 
k.  Within the Bluff Creek Overlay (BCO) District, the application shall also include: 
1.  Identified boundaries of the primary zone and secondary zone on a drawing depicting existing conditions and on a site plan depicting the proposed development pattern. 
2.  Calculations and/or drawings that identify the allowable density (number of units or building coverage) under this Code, including lands lying in the primary and secondary zone. Calculation of allowable density shall specifically exclude lands classified as bluffs, floodplains and designated wetlands. Calculation of allowable lot cover may include bluffs and floodplains but shall specifically exclude designated wetlands. 
(3)  Proposed design features: 
a.  Layout of proposed streets showing the proposed names, the right-of-way widths, centerline gradients and typical cross-sections. Street names shall be assigned or approved by the city. 
b.  Location and width of proposed trails, sidewalks and utility easements. 
(4)  Supplementary information: 
a.  Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of buildings with number of proposed dwelling units or type of business or industry to reveal the effect of the proposed development on traffic, fire hazards and density of population. 
b.  Any proposed protective covenants. 
c.  A drainage plan for the area indicating the direction and rate of natural stormwater runoff and those unaltered areas where stormwater collects and percolates into the ground. A proposed drainage plan for the developed site indicating the direction and rate of runoff, the path of all stormwater discharge to the public stormwater infrastructure and those areas where stormwater will collect and percolate into the ground shall also be included. Stormwater management shall be consistent with the city's surface water management plan. 
d.  A proposed grading plan shown at contour intervals appropriate to the topography or spot elevations indicating the relationship of proposed changes to existing topography and remaining features. 
1.  All proposed retaining walls must be shown on the plan. The top and bottom elevations of the wall must be noted. 
i.  The design shall comply with the Minnesota Department of Transportation (MnDOT) standards for retaining walls. 
ii.  Retaining walls over six feet in height located within ten feet of any public way (sidewalk, street, trail, alley, etc.) shall have a fence or other barrier, such as a berm or landscaping, to impede access to the retaining wall when the public way is adjacent to the top of the retaining wall. 
iii.  Fences or berms shall be installed no closer than 18 inches from a sidewalk or trail. 
iv.  Landscaping between staged retaining walls should be low or no maintenance. 
v.  The following materials are prohibited: Smooth face concrete (poured in place), however, stamped or patterned concrete face may be acceptable, masonry (mortared), railroad ties and timber. 
vi.  Maintenance and repair of retaining walls, which cross lot lines, built in conjunction with the subdivision shall be the responsibility of the developer, and upon completion of the project, the homeowners association. 
2.  The preliminary and final grading plans must be 50 scale or larger. The grading plan must comply with the following design standards as well as the requirement of chapter 7 of the Chanhassen City Code: 
i.  The lowest floor elevation must be minimum three feet above the highest known groundwater elevation and must meet the minimum requirements set forth in subsection 20-481(e)(1). 
ii.  If an emergency overflow route is adjacent to the property, the lowest building opening must be minimum one foot above the emergency overflow. 
iii.  The style of home (e.g., slab on grade, split entry, lookout, walkout, full basement) must be noted on the plan. 
iv.  The standard lot benching detail for each proposed style of home must be shown. 
v.  Drain tile service must be provided to all properties where runoff will flow from the back to the front of the lot. 
vi.  Identify proposed soil stockpile areas and note stabilization measures that will be taken. 
vii.  Custom graded lots may be allowed subject to the city engineer's approval. 
e.  If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning shall be specified. 
f.  Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that proposed for the subdivision, a general development plan of the remaining property depicting the possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and the future subdivision. The plan shall address the overall land use, traffic circulation, utility easement configurations, and general lot layouts. 
g.  A soil erosion and sediment control plan, as well as a copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), as required by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) as part of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permitting process. The plan shall include a timing schedule and sequence of operation indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the particular development segment and the estimated time of exposure of each area prior to completion of effective erosion and sediment control measures. Gradients of waterways, design of velocity and erosion control measures, and landscaping of the erosion and sediment control system shall also be shown. 
h.  A vegetation preservation and protection plan to provide stabilization of erosion or sediment-producing areas. 
i.  Required variances. 
j.  Water distribution system. 
k.  Proposals for street lighting, curb and gutters, sidewalks and boulevard improvements. 
l.  Such other information as may be requested by the city. 
m.  Photocomposite images, artistic renderings, or site elevations which depict the visual impact of the proposed development's design, landscaping, street layout, signage, pedestrian ways, lighting, buildings, or other details that affect land use within the city shall be submitted. Such images and renderings shall be from key vantage points and provide an undistorted perspective of the proposed development from abutting properties, less intensive land uses, and/or from entryway locations. Appropriate levels of resolution for the visualization shall be used from flat shading for massing studies and preliminary design to photorealistic imaging for final design. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 59.2(7), 2-25-85; Ord. No. 33E, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 203, § 1, 5-9-94; Ord. No. 240, § 3, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 286, § 1, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 324, § 12, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 369, §§ 7, 8, 2-23-04; Ord. No. 410, §§ 1, 2, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 422, § 1, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 432, § 3, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 471, § 1, 8-25-08; Ord. No. 628, § 8, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 18-41. - Final plat-Generally. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in the development contract for phased development, within one year after the date of the city council approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall file an application for approval of the final plat. In addition to the application the subdivider shall submit: 
(1)  Copies of the plat in such quantities as is required by the city; 
(2)  Two Mylar copies of the plat; 
(3)  One (200) scale copy of the plat; 
(4)  One inch equals 200 feet scale Mylar reductions of the final plat with just street names and lot and block numbers; 
(5)  A digital copy in .dxf format and a digital copy in .tif format of the final plat shall be submitted. The digital files must be in the current Carver County coordinate system. 
If the final plat application is not filed within this period, the preliminary plat will be considered void unless for good cause shown an extension is requested in writing by the subdivider and granted by the city council prior to the one-year anniversary date of the preliminary plat approval. The application for final plat approval shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the meeting of the city council at which action is desired. 
(b)  The final plat shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and to all conditions set forth in the approval of the preliminary plat as modified during final plat approval. 
(c)  The city council shall review the final plat and shall approve or disapprove it within 60 days of receipt of the completed application. 
(d)  No final plat shall be recorded by the city until the plat is in a form acceptable for recording with the county, the proper filing fees have been paid to the city, a development contract has been signed, appropriate security has been furnished, and no other payments to the city related to the development are outstanding. 
(e)  Upon approval of the final plat by the city council, the city shall notify the applicant of the approval and within 30 days thereafter, the applicant or the city attorney shall file the final plat with the county recorder and furnish the city evidence of such recording. Failure of the applicant to comply shall be cause for revoking the city's approval. 
(f)  The developer shall pay the city a fee established by city council to reimburse the city for the cost of updating the city's base maps and geographic information systems (GIS) data base files and converting the plat and record drawings into an electronic format. 
(g)  The developer shall reimburse the city for the cost the city incurred in preparation of environmental review including environmental assessment worksheets, environmental impact statements, alternative urban area-wide review and alternate reviews. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 4.1, 2-25-85; Ord. No. 240, § 4, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 273, § 1, 9-8-97; Ord. No. 324, § 13, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 342, § 1, 4-14-03; Ord. No. 369, § 9, 2-23-04; Ord. No. 392, § 1, 4-11-05; Ord. No. 410, § 3, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 437, § 1, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 18-42. - Same-Development contract. 
    Before the city signs a final plat and before the developer constructs any of the required improvements set forth in section 18-78, the developer shall enter into a development contract with the city. The contract shall delineate the conditions under which approval is given. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 10, 2-25-85) 
Secs. 18-43-18-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 18-56. - Generally. 
    The proposed subdivision shall conform to the comprehensive plan, the design standards, and chapter 20 of the City Code. The design standards set forth in this article are minimum requirements. The city may impose additional or more stringent requirements concerning lot size, streets and overall design as deemed appropriate considering the property being subdivided. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, §§ 6.1, 6.9, 2-25-85; Ord. No. 369, § 10, 2-23-04) 
Sec. 18-57. - Streets. 
(a)  Streets shall be dedicated on the plat to the public. The location and design of streets shall consider existing and planned streets, reasonable traffic circulation, topographic conditions, runoff of stormwater, public convenience and safety and the proposed land uses of property to be served. 
(b)  Street right-of-way widths shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and official map, and shall conform to county and state standards for trunk highways. If no such plans or standards are applicable, right-of-way and pavement widths shall not be less than the following: 
Street
Classifications Right-of-Way
Widths (feet) Roadway/
Pavement
Width (feet) Minor arterial 100 36 Collector 80 36 Local street (rural residential) 60 24 Local street (urban residential) 60 31 Local street (commercial/industrial) 60 36 Cul-de-sac, turnaround radius (urban/residential) 60 45.5 Cul-de-sac, turnaround radius (rural residential) 60 40 Cul-de-sac, turnaround radius (commercial/industrial) 60 48 Private Street serving residential development with a density of less than 4 units per acre 30 20 Private Street serving residential development with a density equal to or greater than 4 units per acre 40 24 Private Street serving commercial, office, office industrial or mixed-use development 40 26  
(c)  Insofar as practical, streets shall intersect at right angles. In no case shall the angle formed by the intersection of two streets be less than 60 degrees. Intersections having more than four corners are prohibited. 
(d)  A tangent of at least 300 feet shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
(e)  When connecting street lines deflect from each other at one point by more than ten degrees they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to ensure a sight distance within the right-of-way of not less than 500 feet for arterials, 300 feet for collectors, and 100 feet for all other streets. 
(f)  Proper design shall consider required turning radius of vehicles for access points or entrances to and from a highway using standards adopted by the state department of transportation. 
(g)  All centerline grades shall be at least five-tenths percent and shall not exceed five percent, for arterials and seven percent for all other streets and alleys. Whenever possible, grades within 30 feet of intersections or railroad crossings shall not exceed three percent. 
(h)  Different connecting street grades shall be connected with vertical curves. The vertical curve length shall conform to the requirements of the Minnesota Department of Transportation Road Design Manual, latest revision. 
(i)  Local streets shall have a centerline offset of not less than 300 feet. Offset intersections shall be avoided. 
(j)  The alignment shall discourage through traffic. 
(k)  The length of the cul-de-sac shall be measured from the intersection of the cul-de-sac and street's centerlines to the center point of the cul-de-sac turnaround radius ( see diagram below ). The maximum length of a street terminating in a cul-de-sac shall be 800 feet. The city manager or their designee may approve a cul-de-sac exceeding 800 feet if they determine that one or more of the following necessitate a length in excess of 800 feet: 
(1)  There are opportunities for a secondary access to adjacent properties in the future. The cul-de-sac must comply with the temporary cul-de-sac standards specified in subsection (t) of this section, and should address an identified system deficiency outlined in the transportation section of the city's comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Topography which would require substantial grading and/or the loss of significant trees that would alter the physical character of the property and/or surrounding parcels. 

(l)  Where a proposed subdivision is adjacent to a limited access highway, arterial or collector street, there shall be no direct vehicular or pedestrian access from individual lots to such highways or streets. To the extent feasible access to arterial streets shall be at intervals of not less than one-fourth mile and through existing and established crossroads. Access along collector streets will be restricted and controlled on the final plat. 
(m)  Half streets shall be prohibited except where it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, in which case the dedication of a half street may be permitted or required. The probable length of time elapsing before dedication of the remainder shall be a factor considered in making this determination. 
(n)  Public streets to be constructed in subdivisions located inside the metropolitan urban service area line, as identified in the city comprehensive plan shall be constructed to urban standards as prepared by the city engineer's office. Streets to be constructed in subdivisions located outside the metropolitan urban service area shall conform to the rural standard requirements as prepared by the city engineer's office. The construction of private streets is prohibited except as specified in subsection (p) of this section. 
(o)  Private streets may be permitted in commercial, office, office industrial, residential with a density equal to or greater than four units per acre or mixed-use developments if the city finds the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  The prevailing development pattern makes it unfeasible or inappropriate to constrict a public street. In making this determination the city may consider the location of existing property lines and homes, local or geographic conditions and the existence of wetlands. 
(2)  After reviewing the surrounding area, it is concluded that an extension of the public street system is not required to serve other parcels in the area, improve access, or to provide a street system consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  The use of a private street will permit enhanced protection of the city's natural resources including wetlands and forested areas. 
(p)  Private street standards. If the use of a private street is to be allowed, it shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  The common sections of a private street serving two units or more in a development with a density of less than four units per acre must be built to a seven-ton design, paved to a width of 20 feet, utilize a maximum grade of ten percent, and provide a turnaround area acceptable to the fire marshal based upon guidelines provided by applicable fire codes. Private streets serving residential developments with a density equal to or greater than four units per acre shall be built to a seven-ton design, paved a minimum width of 24 feet, utilize a maximum grade of ten percent, and provide a turnaround acceptable to the fire marshal based on applicable fire codes. Private streets serving commercial, office, office industrial or mixed-use development shall be built to a nine-ton design, paved a minimum width of 26 feet, utilize a maximum grade of ten percent, and provide a turnaround area acceptable to the fire marshal based on guidelines provided by applicable fire codes. Private streets serving a residential component only, within a mixed-use development may be built to a seven-ton design, paved a minimum width of 24 feet, utilize a maximum grade of ten percent, and provide a turnaround acceptable to the fire marshal based on applicable fire codes. Plans for the street shall be submitted to the city engineer. Upon completion of the private street, the applicant shall submit a set of "as-built" plans signed by a registered civil engineer. 
(2)  Private streets must be maintained in good condition and plowed within 24 hours of a snowfall greater than two inches. Covenants concerning maintenance shall be filed against all benefiting properties. Parking on the private street or otherwise blocking all or part of the private street shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Private streets that are not usable by emergency vehicles because of obstructions, snow accumulation, or poor maintenance are a public safety hazard. The city may remedy such conditions and assess the cost back to the property pursuant to M.S. § 429.101, subd. 1(C). 
(4)  The private street design shall include adequate drainage facilities to convey storm runoff which may require hydrologic calculations for a ten-year storm event. Private streets serving residential developments with a density equal to or greater than four units per acre, commercial, office, office industrial, or mixed-use districts, shall include concrete curb and gutter. 
(5)  Street addresses or city-approved street name sign, if required, must be posted at the point where the private street intersects the public right-of-way. 
(6)  The private street shall be designed to minimize impacts upon adjoining parcels. The city may require revised alignments, specific building orientation, increased setbacks, and landscaping to minimize impacts. An erosion control plan should be completed and approved prior to construction. 
(7)  The private street serving residential development with a density of less than four units per acre, must be located within a strip of property at least 30 feet wide extending out to the public right-of-way or covered by a 30-foot wide easement that is permanently recorded over all benefited and impacted parcels. Neither the area within the easement for the private street, nor the lot coverage of the private street shall be included within the calculation of the lot area or lot coverage of the lot in which the easement is located. Once the private street terminates, the area of the easement and lot coverage of the driveway shall be included in the calculation of lot area and lot coverage for the lot. 
(8)  Private streets serving residential development with a density equal to or greater than four units per acre, commercial, office, office industrial, or mixed use districts, must be located within a strip of property at least 40 feet wide extending out to the public right-of-way or covered by a 40-foot wide easement that is permanently recorded over all benefited and impacted parcels. Neither the area within the easement for the private street, nor lot coverage of the private street shall be included within the calculation of the lot area or lot coverage of the lot in which the easement is located. Once the private street terminates, the area of the easement and lot coverage of the driveway shall be included in the calculation of lot area and lot coverage for the lot. 
(9)  Maintenance and repair of private utilities located within the private street shall be the responsibility of the benefiting property. 
(10)  Private streets are required to use traffic control that is consistent with the current version of the Minnesota Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices as per subsection 20-1103(b). 
(q)  Private reserve strips controlling public access to streets shall be prohibited. 
(r)  Flag lots may be permitted in residential districts with a density of less than four units per acre, if the criteria in variance section 18-22 are met and upon consideration of the following: 
(1)  The prevailing development pattern makes it unfeasible or inappropriate to construct a public/private street. In making this determination, the city may consider the location of existing property lines and homes, local or geographic conditions and the existence of wetlands. 
(2)  After reviewing the surrounding area, it is concluded that an extension of the public or a private street system is not required to serve other parcels in the area, improve access, or to provide a street system consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  The use of a flag lot will permit enhanced protection of the city's natural resources, including wetlands and protected areas. 
(4)  Sufficient open space is preserved or other provisions are made to offset the increased percentage of lot coverage that will be contained within the neck portion of the lots. 
(s)  Private streets serving up to four lots may be permitted in residential developments with a density of less than four units per acre if the criteria in variance section 18-22 are met and upon consideration of the following: 
(1)  The prevailing development pattern makes it unfeasible or inappropriate to construct a public street. In making this determination, the city may consider the location of existing property lines and homes, local or geographic conditions and the existence of wetlands. 
(2)  After reviewing the surrounding area, it is concluded that an extension of the public street system is not required to serve other parcels in the area, improve access, or to provide a street system consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  The use of a private street will permit enhanced protection of the city's natural resources, including wetlands and protected areas. 
(t)  Temporary culs-de-sac must be constructed at all locations where a street stub will be constructed and will be extended in the future. The temporary cul-de-sac must be 90 feet in diameter and lie within platted right-of-way or easement. The developer must submit an escrow for the cost of removing the temporary cul-de-sac and vacating the easement (if applicable). 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 6-2, 2-25-85; Ord. No. 125, § 1, 3-26-90; Ord. No. 135, §§ 1, 2, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 209, § 1, 6-27-94; Ord. No. 240, § 5, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 324, §§ 14-17, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 369, § 11, 2-23-04; Ord. No. 410, §§ 4-6, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 432, § 5, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 522, §§ 1-5, 5-23-11; Ord. No. 619, §§ 3, 4, 2-27-17; Ord. No. 628, §§ 9-13, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 18-58. - Alleys. 
    Alleys are prohibited except for fire lanes in commercial and industrial developments or if approved as a part of a PUD. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 6.3, 2-25-85; Ord. No. 240, § 6, 7-24-95) 
Sec. 18-59. - Blocks. 
    The length and width of blocks shall be sufficient to provide convenient and safe access, circulation, control and street design. Blocks shall not be longer than 1,800 feet, or shorter than 300 feet except where topography of surrounding development limits ability to strictly comply or as specifically approved by the city council to foster innovative design consistent with sound planning principles. Pedestrian ways may be required on blocks longer than 900 feet or in other areas to provide access to schools, parks and other destination points. Easements for pedestrian ways shall be at least 20 feet wide and shall be located to minimize intersections with streets. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 6.4, 2-25-85) 
Sec. 18-60. - Lots. 
(a)  All lots shall abut for their full required minimum frontage on a public street as required by the zoning ordinance; or be accessed by a private street; or a flag lot which shall have a minimum of 30 feet of frontage on a public street. 
(b)  Side lines of lots shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines or substantially radial to curved street lines. 
(c)  Lots shall be graded to drain away from building locations. 
(d)  Lots shall be placed to preserve and protect natural amenities, such as vegetation, wetlands, steep slopes, watercourses and historic areas. 
(e)  Remnant lots are prohibited. 
(f)  Street arrangements for the proposed subdivision shall not cause undue hardship to owners of adjoining property in subdividing their own land. 
(g)  Double frontage lots with frontage on two parallel streets or reverse frontage shall not be permitted except where lots back on an arterial or collector street. Such lots shall have an additional depth of at least ten feet to accommodate vegetative screening along the back lot line. Wherever possible, structures on double frontage lots should face the front of existing structures across the street. If this cannot be achieved, then such lots shall have an additional depth of ten feet to accommodate vegetation screening along the back lot line. 
(h)  Lot layouts should take into consideration the potential use of solar energy design features. 
(i)  Driveway grades shall be a minimum of one-half percent and a maximum grade of ten percent. 
(j)  Proposed house sizes shall be shown on the subdivision plan and shall be designed to accommodate residents' future house expansion (e.g., porches) and accessory structures (e.g., decks and patios) as well as the driveway and sidewalks to building entrances. If house plans are not known, then a 60-foot by 60-foot building pad and a 30-foot wide access driveway shall be used. The maximum permitted lot coverage shall be calculated for each lot and the permitted houses and structures shall be limited to those sizes. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 6.5, 2-25-85; Ord. No. 240, § 7, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 324, § 18, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 410, § 7, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 628, § 14, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 18-61. - Landscaping and tree preservation requirements. 
(a)  Required landscaping/residential subdivision. 
(1)  Each lot shall be provided with a minimum of one deciduous or conifer tree to be placed in the front yard. The type of tree shall be subject to city approval. Coniferous trees must be at least eight feet high and deciduous trees must be at least 21/2 inches in diameter at the time of installation. This requirement may be waived by the city where the applicant can demonstrate that a suitable tree having a minimum diameter of 21/2 inches for deciduous and eight-foot height for conifers is located in an appropriate location on the lot. The following trees may be used to meet planting requirements: 
Scientific Name Common Name Overstory Trees Acer saccharum spp. Maple, all varieties, except platanoides Carya ovata Shagbark Hickory Celtis occidentalis Hackberry Juglans nigra Black Walnut Quercus spp. Oak, all varieties Aesculus glabra Ohio Buckeye Betula nigra Birch, River Betula papyrifera Birch, paper Catalpa speciosa Northern Catalpa Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo Gleditsia triacanthos inermis, spp. Honeylocust, thornless - all varieties Gymnocladus dioicus Coffeetree, Kentucky Tilia spp. Linden, all varieties Ulmus spp. ELM, DED-resistant varieties Ornamental Trees Acer ginnala* Maple, Amur Amelanchier spp. Serviceberry or Juneberry Crataegus spp. Hawthorn, all varieties Malus spp. Crabapple, assorted flowering-Varieties Ostrya virginiana Ironwood Populus tremuloides Aspen Sorbus spp. Ash, Mountain, all varieties Phellodendron amurense Amur Corktree Prunus cerasifera "Newport" Plum, Newport Prunus triloba Plum, flowering or Rose Tree of China Prunus virginiana "Schubert" Chokeberry, Schubert Syringa reticulata Lilac, Japanese tree Conifers Abies balsamea Fir, Balsam Abies concolor Fir, Concolor Larix laricina Tamarack Picea abies Spruce, Norway Picea glauca Spruce, White Picea glauca densata Spruce, Black Hills Pinus nigra Pine, Austrian Pinus ponderosa Pine, Ponderosa Pinus resinosa Pine, Norway Pinus strobus Pine, White Pinus sylvestris Pine, Scotch Pseudotsuga menziesii Fir, Douglas Thuja occidentalis Arborvitae Thuja occidentalis "Techny" Techny Arborvitae  
* These trees shall be restricted; quantities and location must be approved by the city in a landscape plan. 
(2)  The tree(s) must be installed prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy or financial guarantees acceptable to the city must be provided to ensure timely installation. 
(3)  All areas disturbed by site grading and/or construction must be seeded or sodded immediately upon completion of work to minimize erosion. When certificates of occupancy are requested prior to the satisfaction of this requirement, financial guarantees acceptable to the city must be provided. 
(4)  No dead trees or uprooted stumps shall remain after development. On-site burial or burning is not permitted. 
(5)  Landscaped buffers around the exterior of the subdivision shall be required by the city when the plat is contiguous with collector or arterial streets as defined in the comprehensive plan and where the plat is adjacent to more intensive land uses. Required buffering shall consist of berms and landscape material consisting of a mix of trees and shrubs and/or tree preservation areas. No fences will be permitted between the required buffer and the collector or arterial street. Where appropriate, the city may require additional lot depth and area on lots containing the buffer so that it can be adequately accommodated and the homes protected from impacts. Lot depths and areas may be increased by 25 percent over zoning district standards. The landscape plan must be developed with the preliminary and final plat submittals for city approval. Appropriate financial guarantees acceptable to the city shall be required. 
(b)  It is the policy of the city to preserve natural woodland areas throughout the city and with respect to specific site development to retain as far as practical, substantial tree stands which can be incorporated into the overall landscape plan. 
(c)  No tree removal shall be permitted except as approved in a subdivision, planned unit development or site plan application. Removal of trees prior to city approval will result in the issuance of a citation. The cleared area shall be replanted at a rate of two times the DBH inches (DBH means diameter measured at breast height, 4 5/10 feet above the ground) of trees removed, if known, or one tree per 1,089 square feet of replacement area with the required replacement area calculated at two times the canopy coverage area that was removed. Additionally, the development review process shall be halted and the developer shall be required to resubmit revised existing site condition and tree inventory plans and new landscaping plans incorporating the additional planting requirements. 
(d)  The following standards shall be used in evaluating subdivisions and site plans: 
(1)  It is a policy of the City of Chanhassen to protect the integrity of the natural environment through the preservation, protection, and planting of trees. The city finds that trees provide many benefits including: stabilization of the soil by the prevention of erosion and sedimentation, reduction of stormwater runoff and the costs associated therewith, improvement of air quality, reduction of noise pollution, control of urban heat island effect, protection and increase of property values, protection of privacy, energy conservation through natural insulation, control of drainage and restoration of denuded soil subsequent to construction and grading, protection from severe weather, providing habitat for birds and other wildlife, conservation and enhancement of city's physical and aesthetic environment, reforestation of open lands, and general protection and enhancement of the quality of life and general welfare of the city. It is therefore the purpose of this section to provide regulations related to the cutting, removal, or killing of trees on construction and development sites and to ensure the protection and preservation of the natural environment and beauty of the City of Chanhassen. 
(2)  Prior to the submittal of development plans, a tree survey of the site shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect, licensed forester, or other professional approved by the city. This survey shall include the species, DBH size, condition, location of all trees over ten inches in diameter and any damaged or diseased trees on site. All significant special, damaged or diseased trees shall be tagged and identified by number on the survey. A delineation of the existing canopy coverage area(s) which outlines all areas covered by tree canopy shall be included as part of the survey. Additionally, all damaged and diseased trees shall be cataloged with the nature and extent of any damage or disease specified. 
a.  Based on this survey and either site observation and measurement or a current aerial photograph (taken within one year of the date of plan submittal) interpretation, the following shall be calculated: 
1.  Base line canopy coverage. 
2.  Minimum canopy coverage requirements. 
b.  The following table shall be used to determine the minimum amount of canopy coverage that must be maintained or provided on-site as part of the development. It shall represent the minimum canopy coverage, consisting of existing tree canopy and/or additional trees required for the site. Existing wetland areas, bluff areas, and dedicated park land located on site shall be excluded from the calculation of site area in the determination of site coverage. If a forested area is to be dedicated to the city for park land, then this area shall not be included in the base line canopy coverage area calculation nor shall it count towards the minimum canopy coverage for the site. 
  Base Line Canopy Coverage Per Acre Comprehensive Plan 
Designation 80-100% 60-79% 40-59% 20-39% 19% or less Commercial/industrial/institutional 28% 25% 20% 14% 10% High density residential 35% 30% 25% 20% 15% Medium density 
residential 40% 35% 30% 25% 20% Low density residential 55% 46% 35% 30% 25% Large lot residential 68% 56% 43% 35% 25%  
Base line canopy coverage is the canopy coverage existing at the time the development application is filed with the city. Minimum canopy coverage is determined by using the matrix. 
c.  Priority shall be given to retaining stands of trees and undisturbed wooded lands over individual specimen trees that will be incorporated into the development. No more than ten percent of the canopy retention requirement may be met by an individual tree that is not included within a designated woodland area. 
d.  For developments that do not meet the minimum canopy coverage, the developer shall be required to develop a forestation plan to bring the total canopy coverage up to the minimum requirement. Where existing woodlands are removed or there is a loss of trees that would otherwise be used to meet the canopy coverage retention requirement, the developer shall develop a woodland replacement plan. The replacement plan must designate an area at least one and two-tenths (1.2) times the removed canopy coverage area that shall be planted with replacement trees for those removed. These plans shall locate additional trees either as a continuation of existing stands of trees that are to be preserved or create new stands of trees in desirable locations such as along roadway corridors, on the north and west perimeters of the development, in common open areas, or adjacent to park facilities. 
e.  The following criteria shall be followed in establishing minimum canopy coverage: 
1.  When planting trees, one tree shall be deemed to provide 1,089 square feet of required canopy coverage; 
2.  Trees must be from the approved list of desirable species (preference given for trees designated as native); 
3.  No more than ten percent of the trees may be from any one tree species and no more than 20 percent of the trees may be from any one genus; 
4.  Overstory trees shall be at least 21/2-inch caliper and understory trees shall be a minimum of 11/2-inch caliper; 
5.  Conifer trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height; 
6.  Plant materials used for the reforestation shall be of a similar species as vegetation found on-site; 
7.  Trees shall be used that are appropriate to the soil conditions found on site; 
8.  Trees shall be from certified nursery stock as defined and controlled by M.S. §§ 18.44 through 18.61, the Plant Pest Act; and 
9.  Not less than 75 percent of the total trees required shall be overstory species. 
(3)  In order to calculate the tree removal area of the single-family detached development the applicant must include the front 105 feet of each lot within the tree removal area of the development. If a front setback variance is approved as part of the subdivision review process, the depth of the area calculated for tree removal on the lot may be reduced by the amount of the front yard setback variance. 
(4)  Minimizing the tree loss should be achieved by any combination of the following: 
a.  Realignment of streets, utilities and lot lines. 
b.  Consideration of alternative utility configurations such as the use of ejector pumps, force mains, or revised home elevations to minimize grading. 
c.  Reductions in roadway width and right-of-way and increase in street grade up to ten percent when the applicant can demonstrate that significant tree preservation is directly related to the modification. 
d.  Use of private streets in lieu of public streets. 
e.  Variation in street radius and design speed. 
f.  Modified grading plans. 
g.  Within PUDs, the city council may consider waiving minimum lot area requirements and/or density transfers as long as it can be demonstrated by the applicant that tree preservation can be enhanced. In no case shall overall project densities exceed what is allowed by the comprehensive plan. The greater the level of preservation, the greater flexibility will be considered by the city. 
h.  Within PUDs, variations to building setback lines, provided a minimum 20-foot building separation is maintained between buildings on adjacent lots. The setback variations shall be established and recorded as part of the plat approval. 
(5)  Trees designated for preservation shall be protected by snow fences with clearly marked signage specifying that the area is off limits for construction activities, or other means acceptable to the city, prior to land preparation or construction activities. Protective barriers in locations determined by the city must remain in place until all construction activities are terminated. No equipment, chemicals, soil deposits, or construction materials shall be placed within the protective barriers. All understory trees and natural vegetation should be preserved within the boundaries of the protective areas. Where this protection area cannot be maintained or would otherwise render lots undevelopable, an alternate protection, mitigation or tree replacement plan may be considered and approved by the city. This plan may include the use of retaining walls, installation of aeration systems, requirement for post-construction deep root fertilization and soil aeration, or construction vehicle ramp systems. 
(6)  At the city's discretion, conservation easements may be required to protect designated tree preservation areas. Such easements shall be permanently marked and signed as a conservation area with low profile monumentation acceptable to the city. A monument is required for each 300 linear feet of tree conservation area. Within designated woodland areas, the city shall encourage the use of indigenous grasses and plant species to more closely resemble a natural area. Homeowners associations shall be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation in common areas. Individual property owners shall be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation on their property. The planting of trees in excess of those required by this section is permitted within the designated woodland area. 
(7)  During the removal process, trees shall be removed so as to prevent blocking of public rights-of-way or interfering with overhead utility lines. 
(8)  The removal of diseased and damaged trees is permissible only if they cannot be saved. These trees shall not be counted when computing the base line tree canopy coverage. 
(9)  If any protected significant trees are removed or killed or there is a loss of trees as the result of construction activities, the city requires replacement at the rate of two diameter inches per each inch of DBH of the removed, killed, or lost trees. The replacement trees shall be at least 21/2 inches in diameter and will be species that conform to the "list of desirable tree species" for Planting in Chanhassen. No more than ten percent of the trees may be from any one tree species. Other species or sizes may be used as replacement trees subject to approval by the city. Alternately, at the city's discretion, if a developer removes trees within a protected area, the canopy coverage area shall be calculated for that area and a replacement area two times the canopy coverage area that was removed shall be planted. One tree shall be planted for each 1,089 square feet of required replacement area. Trees shall be from the list of desirable tree species, no more than ten percent of trees from any one tree species, average 21/2-inch diameter, a similar species as vegetation existing on-site, and appropriate to the soil conditions. For any replacement trees that cannot be planted on the original site due to space restrictions, the developer shall pay the city the value of the trees, including material and installation, in to the community tree planting fund. 
(10)  Financial guarantees acceptable to the city shall be required to ensure satisfactory installation of landscaping requirements. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 6.6, 2-25-85; Ord. No. 153, § 2, 11-4-91; Ord. No. 204, §§ 1, 2, 5-9-94; Ord. No. 240, § 7, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 250, § 1, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 255, § 1, 7-22-96; Ord. No. 324, § 19, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 378, § 1, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 395, § 6, 5-9-05; Ord. No. 410, § 8, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 432, § 6, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 458, §§ 1-3, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 595, §§ 3-5, 5-12-14) 
Cross reference- Landscaping and tree removal, § 20-1176 et seq. 
Sec. 18-62. - Erosion and sediment control. 
(a)  The development shall conform to the topography and soils to create the least potential for soil erosion. 
(b)  The smallest practical increment of land shall be exposed at any one time during development. 
(c)  Detailed requirements for each plat shall be set forth in the development agreement. 
(d)  Subdivision development shall conform to the city's surface water management plan and section 19-145 of the Chanhassen City Code. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 6.7, 2-25-85; Ord. No. 178, § 1, 10-26-92; Ord. No. 318, § 1, 4-23-01; Ord. No. 443, §§ 1, 2, 2-12-07; Ord. No. 524, § 2, 6-27-11) 
Sec. 18-63. - Surface water management. 
(a)  All subdivisions shall comply with the city's surface water management plan dated August 2006, which is incorporated herein by this reference. 
(b)  In accordance with the city's surface water management plan as a condition of subdivision approval, subdividers shall pay a water quality and water quantity connection charge. The charge shall be based upon the gross area of the subdivision less the area to be dedicated to the city for ponding, parks and wetland, and right-of-way for state highways, county roads, and local arterial roadways. The connection charges per acre for water quality and water quantity are outlined in subsection 4-30(c)3. The subdivision will be given a credit for on-site stormwater quality improvements that are designed to treat runoff from the subdivision to NURP standards. The credit will be calculated using the following formula: The per acre water quality connection charge will be multiplied by the on-site drainage area for water quality treatment facilities. This value will then be multiplied by 50 percent. The subdivision will also be given a credit for on-site stormwater quality improvements that are oversized to treat runoff from property outside the subdivision to NURP standards. The credit will be calculated using the following formula: The per acre water quality connection charge will be multiplied by the off-site drainage area for water quality treatment facilities. This value will then be multiplied by 50 percent. Credit will not be granted if the stormwater from contributing off-site areas is already treated to NURP standards. The water quality connection charges that correspond to the land uses that contribute to the stormwater ponds will be used to calculate credits. 
    The charge for lots oversized due to individual on-site sewage disposal and water systems will be reduced to the charge that would be imposed on a one-half-acre lot. An additional charge will then be imposed if the lot is further subdivided less a credit for the charge previously paid. The charge shall be paid in cash before the subdivision is approved by the city unless the city and subdivider agree that the charge may be assessed against the property. Property being subdivided shall be exempt from the water quality and water quantity connection charges imposed by this section if the charges were paid or assessed in conjunction with a previous subdivision of the property and if the property is not being zoned to a classification with a higher charge. 
(c)  Within the Bluff Creek Overlay (BCO) District, meet the additional purpose, intent and standards of the BCO District. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 6.8, 2-25-85; Ord. No. 225, § 1, 10-24-94; Ord. No. 286, § 2, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 324, § 20, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 389, § 1, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 443, §§ 3, 4, 2-12-07) 
Secs. 18-64-18-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EASEMENTS, DEDICATION OF LAND OR CASH CONTRIBUTION FOR PUBLIC PURPOSE AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 18-76. - Easements. 
(a)  All easements shall be dedicated by appropriate language on the final plat in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Easements at least ten feet wide along all street right-of-way lines, five feet along both sides of rear and side lot lines, shall be provided for utilities where necessary. If appropriate, easements of lesser or greater width may be required by the city. All utility easements shall have continuity of alignment from block to block. 
(c)  Easements shall be provided along each side of the centerline of any water course or drainage channel, to a width sufficient to provide proper maintenance and protection and to provide for stormwater run-off from a 100-year storm of 24 hours' duration. Where necessary, drainage easements corresponding to lot lines shall be provided. Such easements for drainage purposes shall not be less than 20 feet in width. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 7, 2-25-85) 
Sec. 18-77. - Dedication of land or contribution in cash for public purposes. 
    In every plat or subdivision the developer may be required to dedicate to the public streets, easements for sewers, electric, gas, water facilities, stormwater drainage, holding ponds and similar utilities and improvements. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 8, 2-25-85; Ord. No. 85, § 1, 3-14-88) 
Sec. 18-78. - Required improvements. 
(a)  The subdivider shall submit engineering plans and specifications satisfactory to the city for all required improvements, as listed or as specified in this chapter. These improvements must be initiated within one year of final plat approval and completed within two years. 
(b)  The following public improvements are required in every plat: 
(1)  All subdivision boundary corners, block and lot corners, street intersection corners and points of tangency and curvature shall be marked with durable iron or steel monuments meeting the minimum requirements of state law. The city may, when a subdivision is essentially complete, require a development to have the plat restaked to replace the original monuments destroyed or obliterated during the construction process. 
(2)  As a rule, the surface water discharge rate from the subdivision is to be retained at the predevelopment rate for a 100-year, 24-hour storm event through the use of surface water detention/retention facilities or other appropriate means as approved by the city engineer. 
(3)  Every roadway shall have an adequate sub-base and shall be improved with a bituminous or concrete surface in accordance with the design standards specified by the city for urban or rural sections. Except in areas where lot widths exceed 100 feet or topography or tree cover dictates otherwise, grading shall provide for easy installation of sidewalks. 
(4)  Concrete curb and gutter shall be required for all urban street sections. 
(5)  Sidewalks may be required. The following criteria shall be used in determining if sidewalks are to be included in a development: 
a.  Sidewalks that connect to existing sidewalks within adjacent developed areas. 
b.  Sidewalks that connect neighborhoods to adjacent schools, parks and neighborhood commercial areas. 
c.  Sidewalks that connect neighborhoods to existing neighborhoods, within adjacent developed areas, and proposed trails as shown in the City of Chanhassen Comprehensive Plan. 
d.  Sidewalks that are located in residential areas with long blocks or many dwelling units on the street(s), or commercial or industrial areas. 
(6)  Where a public water supply is available within a reasonable distance of the proposed subdivision the subdivider shall be required to provide a connection to the public system. Service connections shall be stubbed into the property line and all necessary fire hydrants shall be provided. Extensions of the public water supply systems shall be designed to provide public water service to each lot and shall be in accordance with applicable city requirements. 
(7)  Street lighting of a type approved by the city shall be required at intersections and other locations. 
(8)  If available, public sanitary sewer main and service connections shall be approved by the city engineer and installed to serve all lots in the subdivision. In unsewered areas, facilities for sewage disposal, which meet applicable city ordinance requirements for individual sewage disposal systems must be provided. 
(9)  A system that will adequately accommodate the surface water runoff within the subdivision, as required by this chapter, shall be provided. 
(10)  Street signs of standard design approved by the city shall be installed at each street intersection. Regulatory signs shall be installed as required. 
(11)  Where any proposed plat adjoins a natural lake, pond, river, stream, including streams which flow only intermittently, or wetland, the city may require that a strip of land running along all sides thereof which are contiguous to such lake, pond, stream, or wetland be dedicated to the city for public use, or subject to a perpetual easement in favor of the city for the purpose of protecting its hydraulic efficiency and natural character and beauty. There shall also then be granted to the city the right of ingress to and egress from the dedicated land. 
(12)  All utility lines for telephone and electrical service shall be placed underground or where this is not feasible shall be placed in rear lot line easements when carried on overhead poles. 
(13)  Arterial and collector roadways abutting a proposed subdivision must be improved in accordance with the city's adopted five-year capital improvement plan. If there is a nexus between the need for the improvement and the subdivision, the subdivider must construct the improvement or pay a proportionate fee to allow the city to construct the improvement. If the construction work is undertaken by the subdivider, the city will reimburse the subdivision 40 percent of the cost for reconstructing a two lane roadway section and 50 percent of the cost of widening a roadway from two lanes to four lanes, or upgrading a roadway from a rural design to an urban section. In lieu of the subdivider performing the construction work, at the city's option, the subdivider shall pay an equivalent fee to the city, based upon estimated construction costs. The fee shall be deposited in a dedicated fund for the purpose for which it was collected. 
(14)  The developer is required to install public improvements including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer, water main, storm sewer and urban streets to the property boundary to provide future extension to adjacent properties. 
(c)  Prior to the city signing the final plat and prior to the construction of any improvements or site grading, the developer shall provide the city with a letter of credit or cash escrow to insure that all improvements required by this chapter will be installed and paid for at no city expense. For improvements to be installed by the developer, the developer is obligated to install and complete all such improvements at his or her own expense and under the supervision and inspection of the city. For improvements which the city agrees to install, the developer shall pay the cost of such improvements through payment of special assessments. As security to the city for installation of the improvements or the payment of special assessments, the developer shall be required to file a cash escrow or letter of credit in an amount and form acceptable to the city to cover the cost of all improvements and special assessments. 
(Ord. No. 33-D, § 9, 2-25-85; Ord. No. 33-E, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 324, § 21, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 369, § 12, 2-23-04; Ord. No. 402, § 1, 9-29-05; Ord. No. 422, § 2, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 432, § 7, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 612, § 1, 12-14-15) 
Sec. 18-79. - Park land dedication requirements. 
(a)  As a prerequisite to subdivision approval, subdividers shall dedicate land for parks, playgrounds, public open spaces and trails and/or shall make a cash contribution to the city's park fund and trail fund, as provided by this section. 
(b)  Land to be dedicated shall be reasonably suitable for its intended use and shall be at a location convenient to the people to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of proposed park and recreation areas shall include, size, shape, topography, geology, hydrology, tree cover, access and location. 
(c)  The park and recreation committee shall recommend to the city council the buildable land dedication and cash contribution requirements for proposed subdivisions. 
(d)  If the property being subdivided was previously subdivided, a credit will be given for similar requirements satisfied in conjunction with the previous subdivision. Requirements will be calculated based upon the increase in the population calculation and any change from residential to nonresidential or nonresidential to residential. 
(e)  When a proposed park, playground, recreational area, school site or other public ground has been indicated in the city's official map or comprehensive plan and is located in whole or in part within a proposed subdivision, it shall be designated as such on the plat and shall be dedicated to the appropriate governmental unit. If the subdivider elects not to dedicate an area in excess of the buildable land required hereunder for such proposed public site, the city may consider acquiring the site through purchase or condemnation. 
(f)  Land area conveyed or dedicated to the city shall not be used in calculating density requirements of chapter 20 and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of open space requirements for planned unit developments. 
(g)  Where private open space for park and recreation purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision, such areas may be used for credit, at the discretion of the city council, against the requirement of dedication for park and recreation purposes, provided the city council finds it is in the public interest to do so. 
(h)  The city, upon consideration of the particular type of development, may require larger or lesser parcels of buildable land to be dedicated if the city determines that present or future residents would require greater or lesser land for park and playground purposes. 
(i)  In residential subdivisions, one acre of buildable land shall be conveyed to the city by warranty deed for every 75 people the subdivided land could house based upon the following population calculations: 
Single-family detached dwelling per lot 3.5 persons Two-family dwelling per dwelling unit 3.0 persons Apartment, townhouses, condominiums and other dwelling units, per bedroom 1.0 persons  
(j)  In subdivisions other than residential subdivisions, either a cash donation equal to ten percent of the fair market value of the buildable land being subdivided or a combination thereof, shall be conveyed to the city. 
(k)  In lieu of a park land donation, the city may require an equivalent cash donation based upon average buildable land value in the city. The cash dedication requirement shall be established annually by the city council. 
(l)  In lieu of a trail donation, trail construction, or trail easement dedication, the city may require a cash donation for the trail system. The cash dedication requirement shall be established annually by the city council. 
(m)  The city may elect to receive a combination of cash, land and development of the land for park use. The fair market value of the buildable land, at the time of final subdivision approval, the city wants and the value of the development of the land shall be calculated. That amount shall be subtracted from the cash contribution required by subsection (k) above. The remainder shall be the cash contribution requirement. 
(n)  "Fair market value" shall be determined as of the time of final subdivision approval in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The city and the developer may agree as to the fair market value; or 
(2)  The fair market value may be based upon a current appraisal submitted to the city by the subdivider at the subdivider's expense. 
(3)  If the city disputes such appraisal, the city may, at the subdivider's expense, obtain an appraisal of the property by a qualified real estate appraiser, which appraisal shall be conclusive evidence of the fair market value of the land. 
(o)  Planned developments with mixed land uses shall make cash and/or land contributions in accordance with this section based upon the percentage of land devoted to the various uses. 
(p)  Park dedication fees shall be paid at the time of final subdivision recording. 
(q)  The cash contributions for parks and trails shall be deposited in either the city's park and recreation development fund or multipurpose pedestrian trail fund and shall be used only for park acquisition or development and trail acquisition or development. 
(r)  If a subdivider is unwilling or unable to make a commitment to the city as to the type of building that will be constructed on lots in the proposed subdivision, then the land and cash contribution requirement will be a reasonable amount as determined by the city council. 
(s)  Wetlands, ponding areas and drainage ways accepted by the city shall not be considered in the park land and/or cash contribution to the city. 
(t)  Subdividers of land abutting streets that have been designated in the city's comprehensive trail plan for the installation of a trail shall be required to dedicate the land for the trail to the city and construct the trail. An appropriate trail fee credit shall be granted. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 2, 3-14-88; Ord. No. 182, §§ 1, 2, 3-8-93; Ord. No. 198, § 1, 2-14-94; Ord. No. 369, § 13, 2-23-04; Ord. >No. 410, §§ 9, 10, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 412, § 1, 2-13-06; Ord. No. 471, § 2, 8-25-08) 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, Ch. 14; neighborhood park acquisition and improvement, § 14-31 et seq.; official maps, § 15-20 et seq. 
Chapter 19 - WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 19-1-19-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Power of city council to provide and regulate the use of wells, cisterns, reservoirs, waterworks and other means of water supply, M.S. § 412.221, subd. 11; power of city council to compel connections to sewer and water mains, M.S. § 412.221, subd. 31; waterworks systems, M.S. § 444.075. 

Sec. 19-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 168, adopted Apr. 27, 1992, repealed former § 19-16, which pertained to penalties and derived from Ord. No. 6, § 9.01, adopted Mar. 11, 1985. 
Sec. 19-17. - Access to premises. 
    The owner or occupant of premises served by the water supply system shall give city personnel access to the premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections in connection with the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 3.04, 3-11-85) 
Sec. 19-18. - Service shut off and on. 
(a)  Water shall not be shut off for nonpayment of a water bill until notice of an opportunity for a hearing has first been given the occupant of the premises involved. The notice shall state that if payment is not made before a day stated in the notice, but not less than 30 days after the date on which the notice is given, the water supply to the premises will be shut off. The notice shall also state that the occupant may, before such date, demand a hearing on the matter. If the customer requests a hearing before the date specified, a hearing shall be held on the matter by the city council at its next regular meeting, but not to exceed three weeks after the date on which the request is made. If as a result of the hearing, the city council finds that the amount claimed to be owing is actually due and unpaid and that there is no legal reason why the water supply of the delinquent customer may not be shut off, the city may shut off the supply. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to turn on or off any water control valve installed on the city water supply system on city property, right-of-way, or easement. This includes, but is not limited to, all fire hydrants, water main control valves, water service control valves for industrial and commercial properties and curb stops for residential water services. The following are exempted by this prohibition: 
(1)  City employees that are authorized to maintain the city water distribution system, or who have administrative approval. 
(2)  Emergency personnel affiliated with the city for use in emergency situations. This includes the fire department. 
(3)  Persons having written approval in their immediate possession from the utility superintendent. 
(4)  Plumbers may turn on water service control valves and curb stops located on private property after the water meter is installed. 
Properties with water turned on without authorization shall be charged a $100.00 service and water use fee. Properties with new structures under construction shall be required to pay the fee before the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 10.01, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 168, § 1, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 362, § 1, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 19-19. - Use required; wells prohibited. 
(a)  Issuance of building permits for new construction where the property is adjacent to a municipal watermain, or in a block through or to which the watermain extends, or is within 150 feet of the water system shall be conditioned upon connection to said municipal water system, unless in the opinion of the city it is neither feasible nor practical to make such connection. 
(b)  The drilling of new wells shall not be permitted for existing dwellings which can be serviced by the municipal water system. Upon failure of a private water supply, connection to the municipal system shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 1.01, 3-11-85) 
State Law reference- Authority to require connections, M.S. § 412.221, subd. 31. 
Sec. 19-20. - Lateral connection charges. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued to tap or connect with any watermain of the city either directly of indirectly from any lot or tract of land unless the city clerk shall have certified: 
(1)  That the lot or tract of land, or portion of said lot or tract, to be served by such connection to tap has been assessed for the cost of construction of the watermain with which the connection is made; or 
(2)  If no assessment has been levied for said construction cost, that proceedings for levying such assessment have been or will be commenced in due course; or 
(3)  If no assessment has been levied, and no assessment proceedings will be completed in due course, that a sum equal to the portion of cost of constructing said watermain has been paid to the city pursuant to subsection (b). 
(b)  The applicant shall pay a lateral connection fee that is just and equitable in an amount established by the city council. The amount of the charge shall be automatically adjusted each year on January 1 to reflect construction cost changes in the local Minneapolis region as evidenced by the Engineering News-Record Construction Cost Index. 
(c)  Upon written request of the owner of the benefited property showing good cause, the city council may provide that the lateral connection charge be specially assessed against the benefited property payable in semiannual installments for a term of eight years at an interest rate that is two percent above the prime rate. Unless deferred payment is so authorized, all connection charges shall be payable in full prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 7, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 236, § 1, 3-27-95; Ord. No. 261, § 1, 1-27-97; Ord. No. 362, § 2, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 589, § 1, 12-9-13) 
Sec. 19-21. - Trunk hook-up charges. 
(a)  In addition to the lateral connection charges set forth herein, a trunk hook-up charge, unless charged as a part of a public improvement project, shall be imposed against each lot or tract of land, or portion thereof, served by the system for wells, pumping stations, water storage facilities, equipment of the city water system, and the replacement of existing water facilities. The amount of this charge shall be automatically adjusted each year on January 1 to reflect construction cost changes to the local Minneapolis region as evidenced by the Engineering News-Record Construction Cost Index. 
(b)  The number of unit trunk hook-up charges to be levied against each benefited lot or tract of land, portion thereof, shall be established using the following criteria: 
(1)  Single-family houses, townhouses, condominiums, mobile homes and duplex units shall each comprise one unit for each dwelling unit; 
(2)  Other buildings and structures shall be assigned one water trunk hook-up charge (unit) for each sewer availability charge (SAC) as estimated by the Metropolitan Council Environmental Service. 
(c)  The number of unit trunk hook-up charges to be levied against the premises may thereafter be revised conditioned upon the Metropolitan Council Environmental Service revising the number of sewer availability charges accordingly. 
(d)  Upon written request of the owner of the benefited premises showing good cause, the water trunk hook-up charge may be specially assessed against the benefited property payable in semiannual installments over a four-year period at an interest rate that is two percent above the prime rate. Unless deferred payment is so authorized, all trunk hook-up charges shall be payable in full prior to the issuance of a building permit for new construction on the property. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 8.01, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 261, § 2, 1-27-97; Ord. No. 278, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 362, § 3, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 589, § 2, 12-9-13) 
Sec. 19-22. - Persons authorized to make connections, etc.; bond. 
(a)  Work which in any way affects the city's water lines or connections thereto shall be performed in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code as adopted by the city. 
(b)  In the event that the permitted work includes any direct contact with the city's water system or the alteration of a city street, the plumber shall file with the city a copy of the master plumber's bond and certificate of insurance as required by the Minnesota Plumbing Code. Bond and insurance requirements may be waived by the building official for: 
(1)  Persons seeking plumbing permits for work on premises owned and occupied as a residence by permittee. 
(2)  Master plumber seeking plumbing permits on premises owned and occupied by permittee's employer. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 2.01, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 168, § 3, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 362, § 4, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 19-23. - Permit for connections, etc. 
(a)  Required . Work which is regulated by the Minnesota Plumbing Code, or that affects the city water lines or city sanitary sewer system shall not be performed without first obtaining a written permit from the city in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code as adopted by the city. 
(b)  Fees . The fees to be paid the city for plumbing permits shall be determined in accordance with chapter 4 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 2.01, 2.02, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 168, § 4, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 278, § 2, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 362, § 5, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 19-24. - Meters. 
(a)  Except for the extinguishment of fires, no person except authorized city personnel shall use water from the water supply system or permit water to be drawn therefrom, unless the same shall be metered by meters furnished by the city which meters shall remain the property of the city. A meter charge equal to the cost of the meter and accessories, including administrative costs, shall be paid upon each application for permit to connect to the water supply system. 
(b)  The city shall, at its expense, maintain and repair all meters when rendered unserviceable through ordinary usage, and shall replace meters when necessary. When replacement, repair or adjustment of any meter is made necessary by the act or neglect of the consumer, all cost incurred thereby shall be charged against the consumer, and water service may be discontinued until such cost has been paid. In the event city personnel determine that a water meter or remote have been tampered with to intentionally affect the true meter reading, a fine of $50.00 shall be included on the next quarterly billing and the bill shall include an adjustment to include the estimated usage not recorded due to the meter tampering. Repeated tampering shall be grounds for shutoff of the water service in the manner provided in section 19-18. 
(c)  Installation of remote water meter readers shall be required on all structures serviced by the municipal water system. 
(d)  Property owners shall allow reasonable access for maintenance and repair of water meters and/or remote water meter readers. Reasonable access means the following: 
(1)  Providing a clear and uninterrupted path to and around the meter; 
(2)  Containing children and animals that may threaten or inhibit work away from the path to and around the meter; 
(3)  Providing a time for an appointment for any meter work to occur within two weeks of notice by the city of the need for work and providing the presence of a responsible adult during the appointment. Failure to allow for reasonable access as provided herein shall result in a charge of $100.00 per month to be included on the quarterly billing. 
(e)  Radio read meters. Installation of a radio read capacity water meter shall be required on all structures served by the municipal water system. If a property owner does not authorize entry onto the property to allow installation of the meter, a $100.00 per month surcharge will be applied on the water bill for the property. If a property owner fails to allow proper service of or tampers with either the meter or radio transmitter thereby interfering with proper meter reading and utility billing, a $100.00 per month surcharge shall be applied and the water usage shall be estimated based on past usage. In addition to the surcharge, the property will be responsible for payment of any usage in excess of the estimated usage. The property owner may appeal the surcharge in writing. Such written appeal must include an explanation and/or justification for the failure to comply. Such appeal shall be directed to the city engineer. The appeal will be reviewed by the city engineer and forwarded to the city council with a recommendation for action. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 3.01-3.03, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 334A, § 1, 3-3-02; Ord. No. 362, § 5, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 19-25. - Service lines. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain the service line from the property line to the structure being served, including the curb box. In case of failure on the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring in the service line from the property line, or curb box to the structure being served within 24 hours after oral or written notice has been given such individual, the water shall be shut off until the line is repaired. The owner shall be responsible for ensuring that the curb box is straight and keyable at all times so that sections of the city system do not have to shut down for private system repairs. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 3.05, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 362, § 6, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 19-26. - Water line and connection specifications. 
(a)  Watermains, valves, hydrants, service connections and interior plumbing shall be installed as specified by the current edition of the Minnesota Plumbing Code. 
(b)  A separate and independent building water line shall be provided for every building. Exceptions may be allowed only by special permission granted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 2.02, 5.01, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 362, § 7, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 19-27. - Inspections and city supervision of work. 
(a)  Inspections of all interior plumbing and exterior services, including connections to the municipal sewage disposal system, are required. The permit holder is responsible to arrange for such inspections which are performed between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on normal workdays. 
(b)  Any direct connection to or tapping of the actual main line shall be supervised by the city. Depending on the availability of the inspector, trenches may have to remain open for some period of time and in some instances overnight. In such cases the permit holder shall be responsible to enclose the opening to ensure pedestrian and vehicular safety. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 2.03, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 168, § 5, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 278, § 3, 3-9-98) 
Sec. 19-28. - Water use restriction. 
(a)  Use of the city water supply system for lawn and garden sprinkling, irrigation, car washing or other nonpotable uses shall be limited to an odd-even schedule corresponding to property address, effective each year from May 1 to September 30. Whenever the city council or, on a temporary basis, the public works director and/or the city manager or city manager's designee, shall determine that a shortage of the water supply threatens the city, they may further limit the days and hours during which water may be used from the city water supply system. Special permit consideration will be given for those property owners with new seed or sod if in the opinion of the public works director sufficient water for such permits is available. 
(b)  Homeowners associations and apartment complexes that provide a common irrigation system may water only every other day. 
(c)  Property owners installing an automatic or underground irrigation system are required to install a rain sensor device. Existing irrigation systems are required to retrofit to install a rain sensor device at such time as improvement or extension of the system valued at or above $1,000.00, or requiring a plumbing permit are done. 
(d)  Violations will result in a $50.00 surcharge, which will be added to the next water bill for the premises. Subsequent violations in a calendar year will cause the surcharge to increase to $100.00 for second violation, $150.00 for third violation, and $250.00 for subsequent violations. Appeals shall be made to the city manager or designee within ten days of levy of surcharge, in writing. A decision will be rendered by city manager, in writing, within ten days of receipt. 
(e)  In the event any surcharge is not paid within three months after the time it is rendered, the city council may certify the amount due together with penalties to the county auditor to be collected with other real estate taxes levied against the premises served. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 4.01, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 210, § 1, 6-27-94; Ord. No. 298, § 2, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 362, § 8, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 19-29. - User rates and charges. 
(a)  Quarterly water usage rates shall be set on an annual basis by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  A water usage account shall be maintained in the name of each property owner connected to the city's water system. The city clerk shall prepare and mail to the owner of each premises connected to the city's water system a statement for water usage furnished thereto during the preceding quarter. Upon the request of a property owner the city will bill monthly if the customer provides an automated deposit into the city's account and agree to receive bills electronically. 
(c)  The city clerk shall compute the amount due to the city for water charges and render a quarterly statement thereof. All amounts due as shown on the invoice shall be payable at the municipal building on or before the 21st day of the following month in which the invoice is issued. A penalty of ten percent shall be added to all accounts that are not paid in full by said due date. This penalty shall be computed on the unpaid balance not paid by the appropriate due date at the time each quarterly statement is prepared and presented. The city reserves the right to shut off water service if the account is delinquent for an unreasonable length of time as determined by the city. 
(d)  In the event any water service charge is not paid within three months after the time it is rendered, the city council may recover said amount in an action brought in any court of competent jurisdiction, or in the alternative, may certify the amount due together with penalties to the county auditor to be collected with other real estate taxes levied against the premises served. 
(e)  When termination of water service is requested by a consumer, the city clerk shall direct the water superintendent to turn off the service to the premises involved. The meter shall be read at that time and a final bill rendered to the consumer. Water service shall not be restored to the premises except upon the payment of all prior service charges. 
(f)  In the event a meter is found to have stopped, or to be operating in a faulty manner, the amount of water used by the consumer shall be estimated, which estimate shall be based on prior consumption. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 6, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 515, § 1, 12-13-10) 
Secs. 19-30-19-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish and maintain sewers, M.S. § 412.221, subd. 6; authority of city to provide for or regulate the disposal of sewage, M.S. § 412.221, subd. 22; power of city to compel sewer connections, M.S. § 412.221, subd. 31; sewers and sewage disposal systems, M.S. § 444.075. 

Sec. 19-41. - Connection required. 
(a)  The owner of each existing building or structure from which sewage or industrial waste is drained and which is located on premises adjacent to a sewer of the city sanitary sewer system, or in a block through or to which the sanitary sewer system extends, or is within 150 feet of said sanitary sewer system, shall cause the premises to be connected with the sanitary sewer system of the city within 12 months after such connection becomes available to any such premises, unless, in the opinion of the city council after consultation with the city engineer, it is neither feasible, nor practical to make such connection. 
(b)  All buildings and structures constructed within the city after March 11, 1985, on premises adjacent to a sewer of the city sanitary sewer system, or in a block through or to which the sanitary sewer system extends, or is within 150 feet of said sanitary sewer system, shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer system for the disposal of sewage or industrial waste. 
(c)  Any person required by this section to connect premises with the sanitary sewer system shall cause such connection to be made within 30 days after receipt of written notice from the city ordering the connection. Service of the notice shall be sufficient if served personally upon such person or served by certified mail addressed to such person at the premises. 
(d)  Whenever any owner shall fail to comply with such written notice, the city council may, by resolution, direct that a connection be made with the sanitary sewer and that the cost of the installation be assessed against the property benefited. 
(e)  After such city installation and connection is completed by order of the council, the city clerk shall serve a written notice of the assessment upon the owner directing him to pay said assessment to the city within ten days after the service of said notice. If such assessment is not paid within ten days the city clerk shall certify the amount thereof to the county auditor for collection in the same manner as other special assessments for such a period and under such terms as the city council shall determine. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 1.02-1.04, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 168, § 6, 4-27-92) 
State Law reference- Authority to require sewer connections, M.S. § 412.221, subd. 31. 
Sec. 19-42. - Persons authorized to make connections, etc.; bond. 
(a)  Work which in any way affects the city's sewer lines or connections thereto shall be performed in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code as adopted by the city. 
(b)  In the event that the permitted work includes any direct contact with the city's sewer system or the alteration of a city street, the plumber shall file with the city a copy of the master plumber's bond and certificate of insurance as required by the Minnesota Plumbing Code. Bond and insurance requirements may be waived by the building official for: 
(1)  Persons seeking plumbing permits for work on premises owned and occupied as a residence by permittee. 
(2)  Master plumber seeking plumbing permits on premises owned and occupied by permittee's employer. 
(Ord. No. 168, § 7, 4-27-92; Od. No. 362, § 9, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 19-43. - Permit for connections, etc. 
(a)  Required . Work which is regulated by the Minnesota Plumbing Code, or that affects the city water lines or city sanitary sewer system shall not be performed without first obtaining a written permit from the city in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code as adopted by the city. 
(b)  Fees . The fees to be paid the city for plumbing permits shall be determined in accordance with chapter 4 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 5, §§ 2.01, 2.02, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 168, § 8, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 278, § 4, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 362, § 10, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 19-44. - Prohibited discharges into sanitary sewer system. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any substance not requiring treatment or any substance not acceptable for discharge, as determined by the city or the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, into the sanitary sewer system. Only sanitary sewage from approved plumbing fixtures may be discharged into the sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sanitary sewer. Any person having a roof drain, sump pump, unauthorized swimming pool discharge, cistern overflow pipe or surface drain connected and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer shall disconnect and remove any piping or system conveying such water to the sanitary sewer system. 
(c)  All construction involving the installation of clear water sump pits shall include a sump pump with minimum size 11/2 diameter discharge pipe. The pipe attachment must be a rigid permanent type plumbing such as PVC or ABS plastic pipe with glued fittings, copper or galvanized pipe. All discharge piping shall be installed in accordance with the plumbing code. Discharge piping shall start at the sump pit and extend through the exterior of the building and terminate with not less than six inches of exposed pipe. Sump pump discharge location and flow shall be consistent with the approved development drainage plan for the lot. The discharge may not be pumped directly onto any public right-of-way unless approved by the city engineer or his designee. Any disconnects or openings in the sanitary sewer shall be closed and repaired in compliance with applicable codes. 
(d)  Every person owning improved real estate that discharges into the city's sanitary sewer system shall allow inspection by authorized city employees or its agents of all properties or structures connected to the sanitary sewer system to confirm there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system. Any persons refusing to allow their property to be inspected shall immediately become subject to the surcharge as described in subsection (g) hereinafter. 
(e)  Any owner of any property found to be in violation of this section shall make the necessary changes to comply with this section and such change shall be verified by authorized city employees or its agents. Any property or structure not inspected or not in compliance by May 1, 1994, shall, following notification from the city, comply within 14 calendar days or be subject to the surcharge as provided in subsection (g) hereinafter. 
(f)  Upon verified compliance with this section, the city reserves the right to reinspect such property or structure at least annually to confirm continued compliance. Any property found not to be in compliance upon reinspection or any person refusing to allow their property to be reinspected shall, following notification from the city, comply within 14 calendar days or be subject to the surcharge hereinafter provided for. 
(g)  A surcharge of $100.00 per month is hereby imposed and shall be added to every sewer billing, to property owners who are found not in compliance with this section. The surcharge shall be added every month until the property is verified to be in compliance through the city's inspection program. 
(h)  The city council, upon recommendation of the city engineer, shall hear and decide requests for temporary waivers from the provisions of this section where strict enforcement would cause a threat to public safety because of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration. Any request for a temporary waiver shall be submitted to the city engineer in writing. Upon approval of a temporary waiver from the provisions of this section, the property owner shall agree to pay an additional fee for sanitary sewer services based on the number of gallons discharged into the sanitary sewer system as estimated by the city engineer. 
(i)  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor and each day that the violation continues is a separately prosecutable offense. The imposition of the surcharge shall not limit the city's authority to prosecute the criminal violations, seek an injunction in district court ordering the person to disconnect the nonconforming connection to the sanitary sewer, or for the city to correct the violation and certify the costs of connection as an assessment against the property on which the connection was made. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 1.05, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 168, § 9, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 205, § 1, 5-9-94; Ord. No. 362, §§ 11, 12, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 19-45. - Lateral connection charges. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued to connect with the sanitary sewer system of the city either directly or indirectly from any lot or tract of land unless the city clerk shall have certified: 
(1)  That the lot or tract of land, or portion of the lot or tract, to be served by such connection has been assessed for the cost of construction of the sanitary sewer lateral with which the connection is made; or 
(2)  If no assessment has been levied for said construction cost, that proceedings for levying such assessment have been or will be commenced in due course; or 
(3)  If no assessment has been levied, and no assessment proceedings will be completed in due course, that a sum equal to the portion of cost of constructing said sanitary sewer which would be assessable against said lot or tract has been paid to the city as outlined in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  The applicant shall pay a connection fee that is just and equitable in an amount established by the city council. The amount of the charge shall be automatically adjusted each year on January 1 to reflect construction cost changes for the local Minneapolis region as evidenced by the Engineering News-Record Construction Cost Index. 
(c)  Upon written request of the owner of the benefited premises showing good cause, the city council may provide that the connection charge be specially assessed against the benefited property, payable in semiannual installments for a term of eight years at an interest rate that is two percent above the prime rate. Unless deferred payment is so authorized, all connection charges shall be payable in full prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 5, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 236, § 2, 3-27-95; Ord. No. 261, § 3, 1-27-97; Ord. No. 362, § 13, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 589, § 3, 12-9-13) 
Sec. 19-46. - Trunk hook-up charges. 
(a)  In addition to the lateral connection charges set forth herein, a trunk hook-up charge, unless charged as a part of public improvement project, shall be imposed against each lot or tract of land, or portion thereof served by the sewer system for the sewer treatment facilities, lift stations, forcemains, trunk sewers, and the replacement of existing sewer facilities. The amount of this charge shall be automatically adjusted each year on January 1 to reflect construction cost changes to the local Minneapolis region as evidenced by the Engineering News-Record Construction Cost Index. 
(b)  The number of unit trunk hook-up charges to be levied against each benefited lot or tract of land, or portion thereof, shall be established by using the following criteria: 
(1)  Single-family houses, townhouses, condominiums, mobile homes and duplex units shall each comprise one unit for each dwelling unit; 
(2)  Other buildings and structures shall be assigned one water trunk hook-up charge (unit) for each sewer availability charge (SAC) as estimated by the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services. 
(c)  The number of sewer trunk hook-up charges imposed against the premises may be revised conditioned upon the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services revising the number of sewer availability charges accordingly. 
(d)  Upon written request of the owner of the benefited premises showing good cause, the sewer trunk hook-up charge may be specially assessed against the benefited property payable in semiannual installments over a four-year period at an interest rate that is two percent above the prime rate. Unless deferred payment is so authorized, all trunk hook-up charges shall be payable in full prior to the issuance of a building permit for new construction on the property. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 6, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 261, § 4, 1-27-97; Ord. No. 278, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 362, § 14, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 589, § 4, 12-9-13) 
Sec. 19-47. - Service availability charges. 
    In addition to, and not in lieu of, all other charges imposed from time to time by the city for building permits, sewer connection permits, sewer usage rates, and sewer trunk connection charges, the then prevailing Metropolitan Council Environmental Services service availability charge (SAC) shall be paid to the city at the time a building permit for new construction is issued, or at the time a sewer connection permit is issued for the connection of an existing building to the city sanitary sewer system. The amount of the service availability charge shall be established by the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 7.02, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 362, § 15, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 19-48. - Persons authorized to make connections, etc.; bond. 
(a)  Work which in any way affects the city's sewer lines or connections thereto shall be performed in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code as adopted by the city. 
(b)  In the event that the permitted work includes any direct contact with the city's sewer system or the alteration of a city street, the plumber shall file with the city a copy of the master plumber's bond and certificate of insurance as required by the Minnesota Plumbing Code. Bond and insurance requirements may be waived by the building official for: 
(1)  Persons seeking plumbing permits for work on premises owned and occupied as a residence by permittee. 
(2)  Master plumber seeking plumbing permits on premises owned and occupied by permittee's employer. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 2.01, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 362, § 16, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 19-49. - Sewer specifications. 
(a)  Sanitary sewer mains, manholes and service installation shall be as specified by the current edition of the Minnesota Plumbing Code and/or City of Chanhassen Standard Specifications and Detail Plates. 
(b)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. Exceptions may be allowed only by special permission granted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 5, §§ 3.01, 2.02, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 278, § 6, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 362, § 17, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 19-50. - Inspections and city supervision of work. 
(a)  Inspections of all interior plumbing and exterior services, including connections to the municipal sewage disposal system, are required. The permit holder is responsible to arrange for such inspections which are performed between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on normal workdays. 
(b)  All direct connections to and tappings of the actual city main line shall be supervised by the city. Depending on the availability of the inspector, trenches may have to remain open for some period of time and in some instances overnight. In such cases the permit holder shall be responsible to enclose the opening to ensure pedestrian and vehicular safety. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 2.03, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 278, § 7, 3-9-98) 
Sec. 19-51. - User rates and charges. 
(a)  A quarterly sewer usage unit rate shall be established by resolution of the city council as a part of the annual budgetary process. 
(b)  A sewer usage account shall be maintained in the name of each property owner connected to the city's sanitary sewer system. The city clerk shall prepare and mail to the owner of each consumer premises connected with the sanitary sewer system a statement for sewer usage services furnished thereto during the preceding quarter. The quarterly billings will be based on winter quarter water usage unless that consumption proves inaccurate, then actual quarterly usage measurements shall be employed. Charges for individuals connected to sewer but not water shall be billed on an assumed usage rate. Upon the request of a property owner the city will bill monthly if the customer provides an automated deposit into the city's account and agrees to receive bills electronically. 
(c)  The city clerk shall compute the amount due to the city for sewage charges and render a quarterly statement thereof. All amounts due as shown on the invoice shall be payable at the municipal building on or before the 21st day of the following month in which the invoice is issued. A penalty of ten percent shall be added to all accounts that are not paid in full by the due date. This penalty shall be computed on the unpaid balance not paid by the appropriate due date at the time each quarterly statement is prepared and presented. 
(d)  In the event any sewer usage charge is not paid within three months after the time it is rendered, the council may recover said amount in an action brought in any court of competent jurisdiction, or in the alternative, may certify the amount due together with penalties to the county auditor to be collected with other real estate taxes levied against the premises served. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 4, 3-11-85; Ord. No. 515, § 2, 12-13-10) 
Sec. 19-52. - Service lines. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain the service line from the property line to the structure being served. In case of failure on the part of any owner to repair any leak occurring in the service line within 24 hours after oral or written notice has been given, the city may repair the leak and bill the property owner for the work and time incurred on the repair. 
(Ord. No. 362, § 18, 12-8-03 
Secs. 19-53-19-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 523, § 1, adopted May 23, 2011, amended art. IV, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 19-66-19-76, was entitled "Individual Sanitary Sewage Treatment Systems", and derived from: Ord. No. 10-B, adopted Jan. 26, 1987 and Ord. No. 168, adopted Apr. 27, 1992; Ord. No. 289, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 1999; Ord. No. 362, §§ 19-28, adopted Dec. 8, 2003; and Ord. No. 395, § 7, adopted May, 9, 2005. 

Sec. 19-66. - Ordinance adopted by reference. 
    Carver County Ordinance 67-2010, 'Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems Purpose, Intent, and Authority", is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein subject to the amendments set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 5-23-11) 
Sec. 19-67. - Amendments. 
    The following amendments to Carver County Ordinance 67-2010 are adopted: 
(1)  With the exception of references to the "department of health", all references to "department" are changed to "city." 
(2)  With the exception of references to the "county auditor", all reference to the "county" or to "Carver County" are changed to "city." 
(3)  Section 52.031 G. is amended to read as follows: Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2150, Subpart 2, Table VII, is amended to include: Setbacks from the soil treatment and dispersal area for above grade systems, including but not limited to, mound and at grade systems, will be measured from the toe of the slope to any property line(s) and/or road right-of-way(s). Setback of ten feet from the SSTS to a swimming pool. Setback of 20 feet from the SSTS to slopes greater than 20 percent. Setback of 50 feet from the SSTS to a bluff. 
(4)  Section 52.031 H. is amended to read as follows: Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2220, Subpart 2, Item B, is amended to include: Setbacks from the soil treatment and dispersal area for above grade systems, including but not limited to, mound and at grade systems, will be measured from the toe of the slope to any property line(s) and/or road right-of-way(s). Setback of ten feet from the SSTS to a swimming pool. Setback of 20 feet from the SSTS to slopes greater than 20 percent. Setback of 50 feet from the SSTS to a bluff. 
(5)  Section 52.031 J. is amended to read as follows: Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2230, Subpart 2, Item C, is amended to include: Setbacks from the soil treatment and dispersal area for above grade systems, including but not limited to, mound and at grade systems, will be measured from the toe of the slope to any property line(s) and/or road right-of-way(s). Setback of ten feet from the SSTS to a swimming pool. Setback of 20 feet from the SSTS to slopes greater than 20 percent. Setback of 50 feet from the SSTS to a bluff. 
(6)  Section 52.032 is amended to read as follows: SSTS must be designed and installed to comply with the following minimum setback distances measured in feet: 
Feature Tank(s)/
Sealed Privy Soil Treatment and Dispersal Area/Unsealed Privy Building Sewer or Supply Pipes Private, single-family water supply well with less than 50 feet of casing and not encountering 10 feet of impervious material. 1 50 100 50 Any other private, single-family water supply well or buried water suction pipe. 2 50 50 50 Buried pipe distributing water under pressure. 3 10 10 10 Structure(s) 4 10 20 - Property lines and road rights-of-way. 5 10 10 
Above grade systems will be measured from the toe of the slope. 6 - Ordinary high water mark of natural environmental lakes. 7 150 150 - Ordinary high water mark of recreational development lakes and protected watercourses. 7 75 75 - Ordinary high water mark of general development lakes. 7 50 50 - Swimming pool. 10 10 - Slopes of 20% or greater. 20 20 - Bluff. 
(Average grade 25% slope and has a 25' rise in elevation.) 50 50  
1  (Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.1710, Item B and Minnesota Rules, Chapter 4725). 
2  (Minnesota Rules, Chapters 4725 and 4715). 
3  (Minnesota Rules, Chapter 4715). 
4  (Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.215 Table VII). 
5  (Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.215 Table VII). 
6  (When lot size prohibits meeting the required ten-foot setback from the toe of the slope, the ten-foot setback may be measured from the absorption area, with department approval and a survey verifying the proposed setback. Said survey must be provided by the property owner at the property owner's expense.) 
7  (Shoreland Management Act and Minnesota Rules, Chapters 6105 and 6120). 
(7)  Section 52.052 shall be deleted. 
(8)  Section 52.061 shall read as follows: An SSTS construction permit must be obtained by a licensed contractor from the city prior to the installation, construction, replacement, modification, alteration, repair, or capacity expansion of an SSTS. The purpose of this permit is to ensure that the proposed construction activity is sited, designed, and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter by appropriately certified and/or licensed SSTS professional(s). 
(9)  Section 52.072 shall be amended to read as follows: An SSTS construction permit shall not be transferred to a new property owner or different licensed SSTS installer. The licensed SSTS installer must amend the SSTS construction permit in accordance with this article. 
(10)  Section 52.143 D. is deleted. 
(11)  Section 52.144 B.1. is deleted. 
(12)  Section 52.167 B. is amended to read as follows: When a compliance inspection is required and cannot be completed, due to frost conditions, during the period of November 1 to April 30, permits or land use application(s) pursuant to § 52.167 (A) can be issued provided an escrow account is provided in the amount of 110 percent of the estimated cost for the compliance inspection. A compliance inspection must be performed before the following June 1 and/or the SSTS is brought into compliance by the following September 30. 
(13)  Section 52.169 A.3. is amended to read as follows: If the seller fails to provide a certificate of compliance, sufficient security must be established in the form of an escrow account to assure the installation of a complying SSTS. The security, in the amount of 110 percent of the estimated cost for the SSTS improvement, shall be placed in an escrow with a licensed real estate closer, licensed attorney-at-law, or federal or state chartered financial institution. The SSTS must be installed within the time frame established in § 52.050 and § 52.051. After a complying SSTS has been installed and a certificate of compliance issued, the escrow may be released. 
(14)  Section 52.169 B.6. is deleted. 
(15)  Section 52.169 C. is amended to read as follows: All property conveyances subject to this article occurring during the period between November 1st and April 30th, and SSTS compliance cannot be determined due to frozen soil conditions, shall have an escrow account established in the amount of 110 percent of the estimated cost for the SSTS improvement. The buyer is responsible to have the compliance inspection completed by the following June 1st by a licensed SSTS inspector. If, upon inspection, the SSTS is found to be in compliance, the funds in escrow may be released. If, upon inspection, the SSTS is found to be noncompliant, the SSTS shall be brought into compliance within ten months from the date of property transfer. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 5-23-11) 
Sec. 19-68. - Tank maintenance report remittance. 
    If a licensed maintainer does not submit a tank maintenance report to the city, then it shall be the owner's or owner's agent responsibility to submit the tank maintenance report to the city. 
(Ord. No. 583, § 1, 5-13-13) 
Secs. 19-69-19-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORM SEWERS 

Sec. 19-96. - Definition. 
    In this article "storm sewer connection" means the installation of a hookup or connection from the municipal storm sewer line in a street or easement to the structure to be served thereby or to any inlet or catch basin on the property drained by the storm sewer. 
(Ord. No. 53, § 2.03, 6-18-73) 
Sec. 19-97. - Connection permit. 
    No person shall connect any premises to storm sewer system without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city. Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city, and shall state the information required by the form. By making an application, each applicant agrees to be bound by all applicable ordinances. Permits shall be valid for a period of six months from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 53, § 3, 6-18-73) 
Sec. 19-98. - Contractors-License. 
(a)  No person shall make a storm sewer connection in the city without a license issued by the city. Application for a license shall be made on a form furnished by the city. The applicant shall furnish the information required by the form. Each application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee in the amount established in chapter 4 of this Code. 
(b)  Any person not licensed as a plumber by the state shall be required to take an examination to determine his skill and knowledge in the matter of the making of storm sewer connections. The examination shall be given by the city. 
(c)  Licenses issued hereunder shall be renewable on or before August 1 of each year, and may be revoked or refused by the city council for cause. Any installation, construction, alteration or repair by a licensee in violation of the provisions of any applicable ordinance, or refusal on the part of a licensee to correct defective work performed by such licensee shall be cause for revocation of or refusal to renew a license. 
(d)  Before any license is revoked or its renewal refused, the licensee shall be given a hearing to show cause why such license should not be revoked or refused. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be in writing. 
(Ord. No. 53, §§ 1, 4, 6-18-73; Ord. No. 362, § 29, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 19-99. - Same-Bond. 
    Each licensee under this article shall file with the city a corporate surety bond in an amount not less than $5,000.00 to insure proper performance of work in connection with or storm sewer connections, to save and hold the city harmless in the performance of his work, to insure completion of sanitary sewer, water, and storm sewer connections in the event of failure or defect caused by the licensee, and to insure compliance with all pertinent ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 53, § 5, 6-18-73) 
Sec. 19-100. - Same-Insurance. 
    Each licensee under this article shall secure and maintain, during the term of his license, public liability insurance of at least $200,000.00 for bodily injury to, or death of, any one person and $500,000.00 for bodily injury, or death of, two or more persons in any one accident; and at least $100,000.00 for property damage. The city shall be an additional named insured under the policy. 
(Ord. No. 53, § 6, 6-18-73) 
Sec. 19-101. - Unlawful discharge. 
    As provided in this section and the city's NPDES permit, it shall be unlawful to discharge to any storm sewer any pollutant waters. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 1, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 19-102. - Regulations for use of storm sewer. 
(a)  No person shall throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain or keep or permit to be thrown, placed, left, maintained or kept, any refuse, rubbish, garbage or any other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, or accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, drainage structure, business place, or upon any public or private plot of land so that the same might be or become a pollutant, except in containers, recycling bags, or other lawfully established waste disposal facility. 
(b)  No person shall intentionally dispose of grass, leaves, dirt, or other landscape debris into a lake, wetland, stormwater pond, wetland buffer strip, street, road, alley, catch basin, culvert, curb, gutter, inlet, ditch, natural watercourse, ravine, flood control channel, canal, storm drain or any fabricated natural conveyance. 
(c)  No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or otherwise expose any chemical or septic waste in an area where discharge to streets or the storm sewer system may occur. 
(d)  No person shall use any storm sewer connection to intentionally convey nonstormwater to the stormwater system. 
(e)  Objects, such as motor vehicle parts, containing grease, oil or other hazardous substances, and unsealed receptacles containing hazardous materials, shall not be stored outdoors. 
(f)  Fuel and chemical residue or other types of potentially harmful material, such as animal waste, garbage or batteries, which is located outdoors shall be removed as soon as possible and disposed of properly. Household hazardous waste shall not be placed in a trash container. 
(g)  No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city storm sewer system. 
(h)  The following activities shall be determined exempt from the provisions listed in this article: 
(1)  City staff or city contractors during the course of conducting maintenance activities; and 
(2)  Metropolitan Mosquito Control District during the course of conducting mosquito control activities. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 1, 2-12-07) 
Secs. 19-103-19-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - "SECTION 201" SEWER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 19-126. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 362, § 30, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, repealed § 19-126, which pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. 5-A, § 1.02, adopted Jan. 13, 1986. See § 1-2 for definitions. 
Sec. 19-127. - Compliance. 
    Community and individual sewer disposal systems, constructed under Section 201 of P.L. 97.117, Grant C271437, comply with Federal Regulations 40 CFR 35 for the maintenance, use and charges for such systems. Such sewer systems must also comply with all applicable provisions of articles III and IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5-A, § 1, 1-13-86) 
Sec. 19-128. - Unlawful surface discharge. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other pollutant waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article and the city's NPDES/SDS permit. 
(Ord. No. 5-A, § 2.01(a), 1-13-86) 
Sec. 19-129. - Unlawful connection to public sewers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to connect a building sewer to any public sewer without first obtaining a permit from the city. The city shall permit new connections and flow increases only if there is additional available capacity in all components of the particular public sewage treatment system being considered. No new connections or flow increases will be permitted two years following start up of community sewage treatment systems that employ a drainfield or other soil-absorption system. 
(Ord. No. 5-A, § 2.01(b), 1-13-86) 
Sec. 19-130. - Regulations for use of public sewer. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water to any community sewer system. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any "201" sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees. 
(2)  Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million by weight, of fat, oil, or grease. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interferences with the proper operation of the community disposal system. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment and personnel of the community disposal system. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the community disposal system. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. 
(8)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(9)  Water or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, including wastes which may affect and prohibit the permeability of soils such as dairy products or blood. 
(10)  Wastes which, due to characteristics, or strength, result in the violation of the city's NPDES or SDS permit. 
(b)  If any water or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged directly or indirectly to the public sewers, which water or wastes do not meet the standards set out in or promulgated under this subsection, or which in the judgment of the city may have a deleterious effect upon the treatment facilities, processes, equipment, and soil, vegetation and groundwater or which otherwise create a hazard to life, or constitute a public nuisance, the city take all or any of the following steps: 
(1)  Refuse to accept the discharges. 
(2)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
(3)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for the discharge to the public sewers. 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling or treating the wastes. 
(c)  The design and installation of plant or equipment for pretreatment or equalization of flows shall be subject to the review and approval of the city, and subject to the requirements of 40 CFR 403, entitled "Pretreatment Standards", and the state pollution control agency. 
(d)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any inflammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All such interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city engineer, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(e)  The admission into public sewers of any waters or wastes having any of the following characteristics shall be subject to the review and approval of the city council. 
(1)  A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or 
(2)  Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or 
(3)  Containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics described above; or 
(4)  Having an average daily flow greater that two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city. 
(f)  The owner shall provide at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
(1)  Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight; or 
(2)  Reduce objectionable characteristics of constituents to within the maximum limits provided for above; or 
(3)  Control the quantities and rates of discharges of such waters or wastes. 
(g)  Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the city council and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. 
(h)  Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(i)  All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of water and wastes as referenced shall be determined in accordance with methods employed by the state department of health. 
(Ord. No. 5-A, § 2.02, 1-13-86; Ord. No. 362, § 31, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 19-131. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the city community sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 5-A, § 2.03, 1-13-86) 
Sec. 19-132. - Service responsibilities for community systems. 
    The city shall be responsible to service, maintain and repair 201 program community disposal systems including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Annual inspection of sludge and scum in septic tank pumping chamber and warning device. 
(2)  Pumping of septic tank when sludge and scum levels indicate it is necessary or every three years, whichever is sooner. 
(3)  Routine annual maintenance of pump and pumping chamber, sewer line and treatment area. 
(4)  Replacement and/or repair or any malfunctioning parts. 
(5)  Cleaning of sewer lines. 
(Ord. No. 5-A, § 2.04, 1-13-86) 
Sec. 19-133. - Service responsibilities for individual on-site systems. 
(a)  In instances where the 201 program sewer system is completely contained on the individual's property, the on-site system shall become the property and responsibility of the property owner. The owner shall then be responsible for the annual system inspection, any system repairs and the pumping of the septic tank. 
(b)  Should the owner not have the tank pumped when the sludge level is nearing 12 inches from the bottom of the outlet baffle, or the scum is nearing three inches above the bottom of the outlet baffle, or once every three years, the city shall contract for the work and bill the property owner. Additionally, should system repairs be required, but not completed in a timely fashion, the city shall contract for the repairs and bill the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 5-A, § 2.05, 1-13-86) 
Sec. 19-134. - Inspection. 
    The authority, its agent and a representative of the United States Environmental Protection Agency bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all property for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing. 
(Ord. No. 5-A, § 3.01, 1-13-86) 
Sec. 19-135. - System charges. 
    The owner of every property shall pay to the authority a service charge to cover the cost of administration of this article. The service charge shall be established by resolution of the authority and may be revised from time to time to reflect the cost of providing administrative services. 
(Ord. No. 5-A, § 3.02, 1-13-86) 
Secs. 19-136-19-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 444, § 2, adopted Feb. 12, 2007, repealed the former Art. VII., §§ 19-140-19-148, and enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 132, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 1990; Ord. No. 147, § 1, adopted May 20, 1991; and Ord. No. 411, § 2, adopted Jan. 23, 2006. 

Sec. 19-140. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to implement standards to achieve the goals and policies set forth in the city's surface water management plan in order to preserve, protect and improve the city's surface water resources. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 3, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 19-141. - Development standards. 
    These development standards shall be reflected in plans prepared by developers and/or project proposers in the design and layout of site plans, subdivisions and water management features. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 3, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 19-142. - Plans required. 
    All plans shall be reviewed and stamped "Approved by the City Engineer" and all applicable permits must be obtained prior to commencing construction. For all newly constructed stormwater facilities (ponds, retention areas, infiltration basins, storm sewer, etc.) or existing facilities that are modified, as-built plans shall be prepared by the developer. As-built plans shall be signed and certified by a licensed professional engineer in the State of Minnesota and record drawings shall be provided to the city. Standard details for many typical storm structures (e.g., storm sewer, outlet structures, catch basins, sump manholes, etc.) are available on the city's website. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 3, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 19-143. - General elements. 
(a)  Hydrologic analysis. 
(1)  Storm distributions and storm volumes for hydrologic analysis shall be based upon Hershfield, D.M., 1961, Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the United States for Durations of 30 Minutes to 24 Hours and Return Periods from 1 to 100 Years, Technical Publication No. 40 (TP-40). 
(2)  Design of major facilities (e.g., ponds, detention areas, retention areas) shall be based on the U.S.D.A. NRCS methods, 100-year return period, 24-hour duration, type II distribution with average soil moisture conditions (AMC-2). The analysis of flood levels, storage volumes and discharge rates for detention basins shall utilize the design storm/freeboard evaluation storm concept. 
(3)  Minor drainage systems (storm sewer) shall be analyzed and designed to protect for the 10-year frequency rainfall, and shall be evaluated for the 100-year frequency rainfall. Full pipe flow analysis shall be used unless special conditions can be demonstrated to consider pressure flow. 
(4)  The rational method is the accepted design method for the design of minor systems (storm sewer). The preferred method of design would be a method utilizing a hydrograph approach with factors for land use and soil moisture conditions. NRCS methodology is not acceptable for minor system design unless approved by the city engineer. 
(5)  Landlocked stormwater basins shall be designed to hold back-to-back 100-year storms. For landlocked areas, available freeboard and infiltration capacity of in-place soils should be analyzed (if analyzed for unfrozen soil conditions). 
(b)  Peak discharge rates. 
(1)  Peak stormwater discharge rates and storage volumes from any drainage area, watershed, subwatershed, detention basin, wetland or conveyor shall be consistent with the values shown in this plan for the 100-year storm event. 
(2)  No increase in peak discharge rate may result from the proposed project for the 1- or 2-year storm, the 10-year storm and the 100-year storm event. Variances may be allowed if computations can be provided which demonstrate no adverse downstream effects will result from the proposed system. Cumulative storm depths for the required events are: 
a.  2-Year = 2.8 inches. 
b.  10-Year = 4.2 inches. 
c.  100-Year = 6.0 inches. 
(c)  General facility planning. 
(1)  Developments shall maximize preservation and use of natural detention areas and regional detention areas shall be used to the greatest practical extent. Multiple purpose detention areas are encouraged to maximize maintenance efficiency within proposed developments while providing the proper flood control and water quality features. 
(2)  The construction of detention basins will involve the direct participation of individual developers. Where regional basins serve multiple properties and may lie outside of the ownership of the specific development, the city and WDs will take an active role on implementing policy. Because the basis for the hydrology is based on the developer's grading plan, the developer is required to obtain and submit the certification of a licensed engineer that the detention areas are constructed to the specifications of the approved design. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 3, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 19-144. - Major facility design elements. 
(a)  Facility design criteria. 
(1)  For design or modification of stormwater facilities, the following criteria shall be followed: 
a.  All hydrologic data and computations shall be based on NRCS (formerly SCS) methodology. Computer modeling may be completed using HydroCAD, TR20/TR55, SWMM or comparable city approved modeling software. 
b.  Hydraulic computations shall be completed using the rational method for storm sewer design, or in commonly used software packages including FHWA HY-8, Geopack, Eagle Point or SWMM compatible software. 
c.  Water quality modeling shall be completed using Pondnet, P8 Urban Catchment Model, SLAMM or comparable software. 
d.  Outlet structure designs shall provide rate controls that limit post-project rates to not exceed existing rates for 1- or 2-year, 10-year, 100-year events and 100-year/10-day snowmelt. 
e.  An emergency overflow spillway shall be identified and designed to convey storm flows from events greater than the 100-year event. Extreme events (on the order of a 10.0-inch event) shall be analyzed to ensure the emergency overflow spillway will function as designed. If an emergency overflow route is adjacent to the property, the lowest building opening must be minimum one foot above the emergency overflow. 
f.  Maximum 3:1 (H:V) side slopes (see diagram that follows). 
g.  10:1 (H:V) safety bench from normal water level (see diagram that follows). 
h.  For basins intended to have permanent water levels, a minimum of four feet of standing water (dead storage depth) and a maximum of ten feet shall be provided. 
i.  Proper allowance shall be made for future access and maintenance. Easements shall be greater than or equal to 20 feet wide. 
j.  Separation between the inlet(s) and outlet shall be maximized to prevent short-circuiting. 


Water Level Diagram 
(2)  The facility design shall provide adequate live storage to provide protection from the design storm, consistent with lowest building elevation standards. Lowest building floor elevation is defined as the lowest slab elevation for a home or building, including basements and crawl spaces. The lowest building floor elevation for structures adjacent to wetlands and water bodies shall be an elevation three feet above the 100-year high water level. 
(3)  Newly constructed or modified detention basins shall provide storage volume below the outlet (dead storage) to allow for water quality treatment in accordance with the following, whichever is most restrictive: 
a.  Water quality features meeting the MPCA NPDES construction permit for permanent stormwater management systems; 
b.  Water quality treatment consistent with NURP criteria (90 percent removal of TSS and 60 percent removal of TP for a standard NURP particle size distribution); and/or 
c.  For proposed projects in a watershed that directly discharges to a "Preserve" water feature (Table 20 of SWMP), NURP plus enhanced treatment is required as listed below: 
1.  Stormwater ponds are required to include a sediment forebay at the inlet. The volume of the sediment forebay should be five to 15 percent of the permanent pool surface area. The sediment forebay shall be a minimum of three feet plus the depth for sediment storage. 
2.  Projects in watersheds that discharge directly to Assumption Creek must incorporate BMPs as outlined in Appendix A C.1, C.2, C.3 and C.5 of the MPCA NPDES construction general permit, and as listed below: 
i.  During construction. 
aa.  All exposed soil areas with a slope of 3:1 or steeper, that have a continuous positive slope to a special water must have temporary erosion protection or permanent cover within three days after the area is no longer actively being worked. All other slopes that have a continuous positive slope to a special water must have temporary erosion protection or permanent cover within seven days after the area is no longer actively being worked. 
bb.  Temporary sediment basin requirements described in Part III.B.1-5 of the NPDES construction general permit must be used for common drainage locations that serve an area with five or more acres disturbed at one time. 
ii.  Post construction. The water quality volume that must be treated by the project's permanent stormwater management system described in Part III.C of the NPDES construction general permit shall be one inch of runoff from the new impervious surfaces created by the project. 
iii.  Buffer zone. An undisturbed buffer zone of not less than 100 linear feet from the special water (not including tributaries) shall be maintained at all times. Exceptions from this requirement for areas, such as water crossings or limited water access, are allowed if the permittee fully documents in the SWPPP the circumstances and reasons that the buffer encroachment is necessary. All potential water quality, scenic and other environmental impacts of these exceptions must be minimized and documented in the SWPPP for the project. 
iv.  Temperature controls. The permanent stormwater management system must be designed such that the discharge from the project will minimize any increase in the temperature of trout stream receiving waters resulting from the 1-, and 2-year 24-hour precipitation events. This includes all tributaries of designated trout streams within the section that the trout stream is located. Projects that discharge to trout streams must minimize the impact using one or more of the following measures, in order of preference: 
aa.  Minimize new impervious surfaces. 
bb.  Minimize the discharge from connected impervious surfaces by discharging to vegetated areas, or grass swales, and through the use of other nonstructural controls. 
cc.  Infiltration or evapotranspiration of runoff in excess of pre-project conditions (up to the 2-year, 24-hour precipitation event). 
dd.  If ponding is used, the design must include an appropriate combination of measures such as shading, filtered bottom withdrawal, vegetated swale discharges or constructed wetland treatment cells that will limit temperature increases. The pond should be designed to draw down in 24 hours or less. 
ee.  Other methods that will minimize any increase in the temperature of the trout stream. 
ff.  For proposed projects in a watershed that directly discharges to an "Improve 1" (Table 20 of SWMP) water feature NURP plus enhanced treatment is required as listed below: 
A.  Stormwater ponds are required to include a sediment forebay at the inlet. The volume of the sediment forebay should be five to 15 percent of the permanent pool surface area. The sediment forebay shall be a minimum of three feet plus the depth for sediment storage. 
B.  Projects in watersheds that discharge directly to Riley or Bluff Creeks must analyze the downstream system to ensure there is no increase in runoff rates. One way to determine the downstream effects is to extend the analysis downstream to a point where the proposed development represents less than ten percent of the total watershed draining to that point. 
(b)  Skimmers and outlets. 
(1)  Skimming devices should be designed to remove oils and floatable materials up to a one-year frequency event. The skimmer should be set 12 inches below the normal surface water elevation and should control the discharge velocity to 0.5 fps. 
(2)  Outlets shall be evaluated for the need to dissipate energy so as to reduce velocities to permissible levels as allowed by the soil and vegetation. At a minimum, flared end sections should be provided with riprap consistent with Minnesota Department of Transportation standards. For areas with high flows or where excessive erosion occurs or is anticipated, energy dissipation per Federal Highway Administration standards shall be followed. 
(3)  Riprap shall be provided below the channel grade and above the outfall or channel bottom to insure that riprap will not be undermined by scour or rendered ineffective by displacement. Riprap consisting of natural angular stone suitably graded by weight shall be designed for anticipated velocities. Riprap shall be placed over a suitable filter material or filter fabric to insure that soil particles do not move through the riprap and reduce its stability. 
(4)  For outlets through berms or roadway embankments and all culverts under public traveled streets, anti-seepage collars shall be used (see diagram in this section). The collars shall be installed so as to increase the creep distance or seepage line along conduit by 15 percent. The locations for the use of collars include: 
a.  All water and pond structures with a pool depth of two feet and two-day duration. 
b.  Two hundred fifty acre watershed or more. 
c.  Design head of ten feet or more. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 3, 2-12-07; Ord. No. 472, § 1, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 19-145. - Erosion and sediment control. 
(a)  Erosion and sediment control plans. 
(1)  An erosion and sediment control plan shall be required for any land-disturbing activity that meets any of the following conditions: 
a.  Disturbs 5,000 square feet or more of land area; or 
b.  Requires the excavation, placement or stockpiling of 50 cubic yards or more of material; or 
c.  Any disturbance that is upgradient of and tributary to a water of the state as defined in M.S. § 115.01, subd. 22; or 
d.  Any disturbance of land that is considered "highly erodible" as identified by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service's Web Soil Survey application or equivalent; or 
e.  Any land disturbance within the Bluff Creek Overlay District; or 
f.  Any time an earthwork permit is issued; or 
g.  An erosion and sediment control plan may be required after the fact if it is determined that sediment has migrated off of a construction site. 
(2)  This shall be a stand-alone document that shall include the following: 
a.  Site plans for existing and proposed conditions drawn to an appropriate scale. The plans shall include the following: 
1.  Site location in relation to surrounding roads, steep slopes and/or bluff areas, other significant geographic features, buildings and other significant structures. 
2.  Site property lines. 
3.  Area of disturbance. 
4.  Drainage boundaries and direction of drainage pre- and post-development. 
5.  Location of surface water features as defined in M.S. § 115.01, subd. 22, including but not limited to, storm sewer inlet structures, wetlands, ponds, streams, lakes, on or immediately adjacent to the site, and all appropriate setbacks from these features. 
6.  Identification of all receiving waterbodies and/or stormwater conveyance systems to which the site discharges. Notation of an impaired or special management waters status of waterbodies. 
7.  Location of all trees and vegetation on the site with identification of what is to be saved. Installation of protective fencing, or other adequate measure, so as to exclude all fill and equipment from the drip line or critical root zone of the vegetation to be protected. 
8.  Existing easements and utilities. 
9.  Ingress and egress for equipment and materials. 
10.  Location of stockpiled materials. 
11.  Locations of proposed runoff control, erosion prevention, sediment control and temporary and permanent soil stabilization measures, including, but not limited to: Inlet protection, perimeter control, temporary and permanent soil stabilization, concrete wash areas, slope breaks, energy dissipation, rock construction entrance, silt curtains. 
b.  Dewatering plan, if necessary, shall be provided to the city for review. The city must be noticed 24 hours prior to the commencement of any dewatering activities. 
c.  As site and/or climatic conditions change additional best management practices may be needed. These changes must be implemented on the site and incorporated into the erosion and sediment control plan. 
d.  Where inadequate natural vegetation exists or where it becomes necessary to remove existing natural vegetation, both temporary vegetative and permanent vegetative cover shall be addressed in the plans and specifications. 
e.  Six inches of topsoil shall be incorporated into the final grading or four inches of 60 percent sand and 40 percent compost mix must be ripped into existing soil materials to a depth of ten inches on the site. 
(3)  Stream bank stabilization and stream bed control structures shall be designed based on the unique site conditions present including soil conditions, flow rate, slope and flow velocity and shall be consistent with Part 654 of the National Engineering Handbook: Stream Restoration Design [H_210_NEH_654 - May 2008 or most recent revision]. 
(4)  If the disturbance exceeds the minimum threshold for the NPDES permit, erosion and sediment control plans shall be compliant with NPDES General Stormwater Permit for Construction Activity (MN R100001). The applicant shall prepare or cause to be prepared a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) and provide this plan to the city. 
(5)  Every effort shall be made to minimize disturbance of existing groundcover. 
(6)  All erosion control noted on the approved plan shall be installed prior to the initiation of any site grading. Noncompliance with the grading and erosion control plan shall constitute grounds for an order from the city engineer to halt all earthwork and related construction on the site. 
(b)  Maintenance. The land owner, or permittee shall be responsible at all times for the maintenance and proper operation of all erosion and sediment control management practices. Specific maintenance requirements are as follows: 
(1)  All exposed soil areas must be stabilized as soon as possible to eliminate soil erosion but in no case later than 14 days after construction activity in that portion of the site had temporarily or permanently ceased. 
(2)  The normal wetted perimeter of any temporary or permanent drainage ditch or swale that drains water from the site, or diverts water around a site must be stabilized. Stabilization must be completed within 24 hours of connecting to a surface water. Portions of the ditch that are under construction must be stabilized within 24 hours after the construction activity in that portion has ceased. 
(3)  Sediment control practices must minimize sediment from entering surface waters, including curb and gutter systems and storm sewer inlets. 
(4)  Sediment control practices must be established on all down-gradient perimeters before any up-gradient land-disturbing activities begin. These practices shall remain in place until the city has determined that the site soils have been permanently stabilized. 
(5)  All storm drain inlets must be protected by best management practices as shown in the most current edition of "City of Chanhassen Standard Specifications and Detail Plates", during construction until all sources with potential for discharging to the inlet have been stabilized. 
(6)  Pipe outlets must be provided with temporary or permanent energy dissipation within 24 hours of connection to a surface water. 
(7)  In order to maintain sheet flow and minimize rills and gullies, there shall be no unbroken slope length of greater than 30 feet for slopes with a grade of 3:1 or steeper. 
(8)  Temporary stockpiles must have effective sediment controls in place to prevent discharge to surface waters including stormwater conveyances such as curb and gutter. 
(9)  Site access roads (entrances to construction sites) shall be graded or otherwise protected with silt fences, diversion channels or dikes and pipes to prevent sediment from exiting the site via the access road. Primary site access roads shall be surfaced with crushed rock or wood chips. The rock entrance shall extend for a minimum distance of 75 feet (150 for wood chips) beginning at existing paved surface; length may be reduced or lengthened at the discretion of the city engineer based upon site considerations. All construction traffic shall utilize the entire length of the rock entrance. 
(10)  Soil tracked from the site by motor vehicles shall be cleaned from paved roadway surfaces at least daily or as needed throughout the duration of construction. Roadway cleaning shall be the responsibility of the party or parties having a permit with the city. If the tracked soil is not cleaned in a timely manner, the city may elect to clean the surface and invoice the responsible party. 
(11)  During construction of an infiltration or biofiltration system, rigorous prevention and sediment controls must be used to prevent the discharge of sediment into the infiltration/biofiltration area. Infiltration/biofiltration areas must not be excavated to final grade until the contributing drainage area(s) has been constructed and finally stabilized. Infiltration/biofiltration areas shall be protected from heavy equipment operation. 
(12)  Dewatering or basin draining (e.g., pumped discharges, trench/ditch cuts for drainage) related to the construction activity that may have turbid or sediment laden discharge water must be discharged to a temporary or permanent sedimentation basin on the site whenever possible. If water cannot be discharged to a sedimentation basin prior to entering the surface water, it must be treated with the appropriate BMPs, such that the discharge does not adversely affect the receiving water or downstream landowners. 
(13)  Inlet protection devices and all perimeter control shall be maintained once sediment accumulates to a depth one-third of the designed capacity. 
(14)  Detention basins may be used as temporary sediment retention during the construction phase. Upon final stabilization and before final approval, accumulated sediment must be removed to restore the required permanent pool volume in the detention area and an as-built survey showing this must be provided to the city. 
(c)  Inspections and notifications. 
(1)  Work sites must be inspected once every seven days and within 24 hours of a 1.0 inch rainfall event to assure that all sediment and erosion control elements are working effectively. 
(2)  Inspection and maintenance records must be maintained and retained with the erosion control plan. Upon request, the inspection records must be made available to the city within 24 hours. 
(3)  The city may contract inspections out to the Carver County Soil and Water Conservation District or other entities. The city may pass the costs on to the applicant. 
(4)  The applicant or its authorized agent shall notify the city in writing at the following points: 
a.  On completing installation of perimeter erosion and sedimentation controls. 
b.  On completing land-disturbing activities and putting into place measures for final soil stabilization and revegetation. 
c.  Whenever any site dewatering is proposed to take place. 
d.  When the site has been permanently stabilized and revegetated. 
e.  When all temporary erosion and sedimentation controls have been removed from the site. 
(d)  Financial assurance. To guarantee compliance with the plan, and related remedial work, a cash escrow or letter of credit, satisfactory to the city, shall be furnished to the city before a building permit is issued. The escrow amount shall be not less than $250.00, but may be greater than $250.00 if, after review of the site, the city deems it necessary to require a greater amount to guarantee compliance. The maximum escrow allowable per parcel is $7,500.00 per acre. The city may use the escrow or draw upon the letter of credit to reimburse the city for any labor or material costs it incurs in securing compliance with the plan or in implementing the plan. If the city draws on the escrowed funds, no additional building permits shall be issued until the pre-draw escrow balance has been restored. The city shall endeavor to give notice to the owner or developer before proceeding, but such notice shall not be required in an emergency as determined by the city. The assurance shall be maintained until final stabilization and removal of erosion and sediment controls. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 3, 2-12-07; Ord. No. 524, § 3, 6-27-11) 
Sec. 19-146. - Wetland elements. 
(a)  Water level fluctuations (peak elevation and duration) for wetlands shall be limited to two feet and duration not to exceed 48 hours so as to prevent the destruction of wildlife habitat and wetland vegetation. 
(b)  Sedimentation basins or sediment removal devices shall be provided prior to discharge into wetlands. 
(c)  Variable bottom contours should be considered to provide deeper holes and flat shallow benches. This feature will provide habitat for diversity of plants and wetland inhabitants for wetland mitigation sites and stormwater basins. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 3, 2-12-07) 
Secs. 19-147-19-199. - Reserved. 
Sec. 19-200. - Surface water management utility established. 
    Surface water management shall be operated as a public utility pursuant to M.S. § 444.075. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 4, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 19-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Surface water management budget is the annual budget approved by the city council for surface water management including planning, monitoring, capital expenditures, personnel and equipment. 
    Surface water management fee means the quarterly charge for each parcel of nonexempt property in the city for the management of surface water. 
    Utility factor means the ratio of runoff volume, in inches, for a particular land use, to the runoff volume, in inches for a one-third-acre residential lot, assuming a two-inch rainfall and soil conservation service (SCS) "type B" soil conditions. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 4, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 19-202. - Surface water management fees. 
    The surface water management fees for tax parcels shall be calculated in accordance with section 4-50. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 4, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 19-203. - Credits. 
    The city council may adopt policies for adjustment of the surface water management fees. Information to justify a fee adjustment must be supplied by the property owner. Adjustment of fees shall not be retroactive. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 4, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 19-204. - Exemptions. 
    The following land uses are exempt from the surface water management fee: 
(1)  Public right-of-way. 
(2)  Lakes. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 4, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 19-205. - Payment of fee. 
    A surface water management account shall be maintained in the name of each property owner. The city clerk shall prepare and mail to the property owner the city's surface water management fee statement. Fees shall be invoiced quarterly. The amount due as shown on the invoice shall be payable on or before the 21st day of the following month in which the invoice is issued. A penalty of ten percent per quarter shall be added to all accounts that are not paid in full by the due date. The penalty shall be computed on the unpaid balance not paid by the due date at the time each quarterly statement is prepared. Any prepayment or overpayment of charges shall be retained by the city and applied against subsequent fees. Upon request of the property owner the city will bill monthly if the property owner provides an automated deposit into the city's account and agree to receive bills electronically. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 4, 2-12-07; Ord. No. 515, § 3, 12-13-10) 
Sec. 19-206. - Appeal of fee. 
    If a property owner or person responsible for paying the surface water management fee believes that a particular fee is incorrect, such person may file a written appeal with the city clerk. Appeals will be heard by the city council. No adjustment will be made to the utility factor for property classifications 1, 2 and 3. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 4, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 19-207. - Certification of delinquent fees. 
    If a surface water management fee is not paid within three months after a billing is issued, the city council may certify the amount due, together with penalties, to the county auditor to be collected with other real estate taxes on the parcel. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 4, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 19-208. - Surface water management fund. 
    A separate fund shall be maintained for surface water management fees and expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 4, 2-12-07) 
Chapter 20 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 7; planning and development, ch. 15; use of official maps, § 15-20; subdivisions, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Municipal planning and zoning, M.S. § 462.12 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 377, § 1, adopted May 24, 2004, repealed § 20-1, which pertained to definitions. See Code Comparative Table for full derivation. See § 1-2 for definitions. 
Sec. 20-2. - Purpose. 
    This chapter is enacted to carry out the intent of the city's comprehensive plan and to: 
(1)  Protect residential, commercial, industrial and institutional areas from the intrusion of incompatible uses; 
(2)  Prevent overcrowding of land; 
(3)  Conserve and enhance the city's tax base; 
(4)  Protect against fire, smoke, explosion, noxious fumes, offense noise, vibration, dust, odors, heat, glare and other hazards to people; 
(5)  Preserve the natural beauty and amenities of the city and achieve excellence and originality of design; 
(6)  Facilitate the provision of public services; 
(7)  Secure equity among individuals in the use of their property. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. I, § 2, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-3. - Interpretation. 
(a)  Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are either more or less restrictive than conditions imposed by other ordinances, the ordinance which is most restrictive shall prevail. When this chapter provides both general regulation as well as specific regulation of a subject, the specific regulation shall apply. 
(b)  When the term "density" is used in this chapter without specifying "net density" or "gross density, " it shall be construed to mean "net density." 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. I, § 3(1-3-1), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 108, § 1, 9-11-89) 
Sec. 20-4. - Compliance. 
    No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied, no building permit shall be granted and no plat approved that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. I, § 3(1-3-2), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-5. - Identification of arterial and collector streets. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following are identified as arterial and collector streets: 
    Arterial streets: 
County Road 14 (Pioneer Trail) 
County Road 15 (Audubon Road south of Lyman Boulevard) 
County Road 17 (Powers Boulevard) 
County Road 18 (Lyman Boulevard west of County Road/Trunk Highway 101) 
County Road 19 (Galpin Boulevard south of Trunk Highway 5) 
County Road 61 (Flying Cloud Drive) 
Country Road 101/Trunk Highway 101 (north to south corporate city limits) 
Dell Road (Highway 5 south to corporate city limits) 
Trunk Highway 5 
Trunk Highway 7 (Principal) 
Trunk Highway 41 
U.S. Highway 212 (Principal) 
    Collector streets: 
82nd Street 
Audubon Road (north of Lyman Boulevard) 
Bluff Creek Boulevard 
Bluff Creek Drive 
Century Boulevard (from West 78th Street to 82nd Street) 
Coulter Boulevard 
County Road 117 (Galpin Boulevard north of Trunk Highway 5) 
Dakota Avenue (Highway 5 to Lake Drive East) 
Dell Road (Trunk Highway 5 north to corporate city limits) 
Great Plains Boulevard (West 78th Street to Grandview Road) 
Kerber Boulevard 
Lake Drive 
Lake Drive East 
Lake Drive West 
Lake Lucy Road (Trunk Highway 41 to Powers Boulevard) 
Longacres Drive 
Lyman Boulevard (east of County Road/Trunk Highway 101) 
Market Boulevard (Trunk Highway 5 to West 78th Street) 
Minnewashta Parkway 
Park Road 
Pleasant View Road 
Stoughton Avenue 
West 78th Street (Trunk Highway 41 to County Road/Trunk Highway 101) 
Yosemite Avenue 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 25, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 240, § 9, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 377, § 2, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 451, § 1, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 507, § 1, 6-28-10; Ord. No. 577, § 1, 12-10-12; Ord. No. 619, § 5, 2-27-17) 
Secs. 20-6-20-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-26. - Enforcement generally. 
    The city manager or authorized representative shall conduct and supervise the enforcement of this chapter with the assistance of the city attorney, building official, community development director, Carver County Sheriff's Office and other designated staff. Enforcement actions to be taken by the city staff shall be authorized by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. XI, § 1(11-1-2(1)), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, § 3, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-27. - Revocation, modification, etc., of permits, authorizations, etc. 
    Prior to the institution of legal proceedings, the city manager may, by written order, suspend, revoke or modify any permit or authorization issued pursuant to this chapter on information and belief that the permit has been issued in error on the basis of incorrect or inadequate information, or that the work is not being performed in compliance with this chapter or with the provisions of any permit issued pursuant hereto. The city manager, in addition, may issue an order to the owner or occupant of any premises to cease and desist the use of such premises immediately, when such premises are being used in a manner creating substantial hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, or in violation of any permit issued pursuant hereto. The city manager shall have the power to prevent unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use of lands or structures within the city and to restrain, correct or abate such violations, or to prevent the occupancy of buildings, structures or lands, or prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use on or about said premises and may use the city attorney, police and other personnel in accomplishing these duties. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. XI, § 1(11-1-2(2)), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-28. - Board of appeals and adjustments. 
(a)  Board designation. The planning commission shall act as the board of appeals and adjustments. 
(b)  Powers. Pursuant to M.S. § 462.357, subd. 6, the board shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by a city administrative officer in the enforcement of this chapter; 
(2)  To hear requests for variances from the literal provisions of this chapter in instances where their strict enforcement would cause practical difficulty because of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration, and to grant such variances only when it is demonstrated that such actions will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this chapter; and 
(3)  To grant permits or approvals for appeals authorized under M.S. § 462.359. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 131, § 1, 7-9-90; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-26-99; Ord. No. 377, § 4, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 612, § 2, 12-14-15) 
State Law reference- Board of appeals and adjustments, M.S. § 462.354, subd. 2. 
Sec. 20-29. - Board of appeals and adjustments variance and appeal procedures. 
(a)  Form; fee. Appeals and applications for variances shall be filed with the community development director on prescribed forms. A fee, as established by the city council, shall be paid upon the filing of an application. The board of appeals and adjustments may waive the application fee in unusual circumstances. 
(b)  Hearing. Upon the filing of an appeal or application for variance, the community development director shall set a time and place for a hearing before the board of appeals and adjustments on such appeal or application, which hearing shall be held within 45 days after the filing of said appeal or application. At the hearing the board shall hear such persons as wish to be heard, either in person or by attorney or agent. Notice of such hearing shall be mailed not less than ten days before the date of hearing to the person who filed the appeal or application for variance, and in the case of an application for variance, to each owner of property situated wholly or partially within 500 feet of the property to which the variance application relates. The names and addresses of such owners shall be determined by the community development director from records provided by the applicant. 
(c)  Decisions of the board. The board shall be empowered to decide appeals and grant variances, other than variances in conjunction with platting, site plan review, conditional use permits and interim use permits, when the decision of the board is by an affirmative vote of three-fourths of the members present. A vote of less than three-fourths of the members present or any vote on a variance in conjunction with platting, site plan review, conditional use permits and interim use permits shall serve only as a recommendation to the city council, who shall then make the final determination on the appeal or variance request within 30 days after receipt of the board's action. If the board recommends approval, it may also recommend appropriate conditions. The board shall act upon all appeals and variance requests within 15 days after the date of the close of the required hearing. 
(d)  Appeal from decisions of the board. A city council member, the applicant, or any aggrieved person may appeal such decision to the city council by filing an appeal with the community development director within four days after the date of the board's decision. 
(e)  Council action. By majority vote, the city council may reverse, affirm or modify, wholly or partly, the decision appealed from the board, and to that end the city council shall have all the powers of the board, or the city council may approve or deny the variance request. The council shall decide all appeals within 30 days after the date of the required hearing thereon. In granting any variance, the city council may attach conditions to ensure compliance with this chapter and to protect adjacent property. 
(f)  Action without decision. If no decision is transmitted by the board to the city council within 60 days from the date an appeal or variance request is filed with the community development director, the council may take action on the request, in accordance with the procedures governing the board, without further awaiting the board's decision or recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 1(3-1-4(1)-(5), (7)), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 131, § 2, 7-9-90; Ord. No. 143, § 1, 3-11-91; Ord. No. 292, § 2, 4-26-99; Ord. No. 377, § 5, 5-24-04) 
State Law reference- Appeals and adjustments, M.S. § 462.357, subd. 6. 
Sec. 20-30. - Recording permits. 
    Variances, conditional use permits, interim use permits, site plan approvals, wetland alteration permits, and mining permits shall be recorded against the title to the property for which the permit is granted. Such permits shall be invalid unless they are recorded within 120 days after they are approved by the city. The permit applicant is responsible for recording the document and providing the city proof of the recording within the one hundred twenty-day period. The city council may approve an extension of time within which to record the permits. No related city permit may be issued and no construction or use may commence until after the permit is recorded and the city has received proof of the recording. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 1, 6-4-90) 
Sec. 20-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former § 20-31 was repealed in its entirety by Ord. No. 292, § 3, adopted Apr. 26, 1999. Former section 20-31 pertained to variance requests in conjunction with platting, site plan review, conditional use and interim use permits and derived from Ord No. 131, § 3, adopted July 9, 1990. 
Secs. 20-32-20-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning ordinance amendments, M.S. § 462.357, subds. 3, 4. 

Sec. 20-41. - Generally. 
    The council may, from time to time, by a majority vote of all members of the city council adopt amendments to this chapter, including the zoning map. Amendments which change all or part of the existing classification of a zoning district from residential to either commercial or industrial require a two-thirds majority vote of all members of the city council. Amendments shall not be adopted that are inconsistent with the city's comprehensive plan unless the council expresses its intent to amend the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 3(3-3-1), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 139, § 1, 3-11-91; Ord. No. 328, § 1, 10-8-01) 
Cross reference- Amendments to official maps, § 15-22. 
Sec. 20-42. - Procedure generally. 
(a)  Proceedings to amend this chapter, including the zoning map shall only be initiated by the council, the planning commission or a petition of the property owner. 
(b)  An application for an amendment shall be filed with the city. Petitions by property owners requesting change in a district boundary shall be accompanied by a map or plat showing the lands proposed to be changed and all land within 500 feet of the boundaries of the property proposed for such rezoning together with the names and addresses of the owners of lands in such area. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 3(3-3-2), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-43. - Public hearing. 
(a)  No amendment to this chapter, including the zoning map shall be adopted until a public hearing has been held thereon by the planning commission. Notice of the time, place and purpose of an amendment hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the day of hearing. When an amendment involves changes in one or more district boundaries affecting an area of five acres or less, notice of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten days before the date of hearing to each owner of property within the area proposed to be changed and owners of property situated wholly or partially within 500 feet of the property to which the amendment relates. The failure of a property owner to receive notice as specified herein shall not invalidate the public hearing or the amended proceeding. Where appropriate, notice shall also be given to affected homeowner's associations. 
(b)  If a development is proposed adjacent to a lake or will affect the usage of the lake, the community development director may require an expanded mailing list for sites fronting on lakeshore where the development would be visible over a larger area. The applicant is responsible for meeting with affected homeowners. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 3(3-3-3), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, § 6, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-44. - Planning commission action. 
    Following conclusion of the public hearing held by the planning commission, the commission shall report its findings and recommendations on the proposed amendment to this chapter, including the zoning map to the council. If no report of recommendation is transmitted by the planning commission within 60 days following referral of the amendment to the commission, the council may take action on the amendment without awaiting such recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 3(3-3-4), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-45. - Council action. 
    Following planning commission consideration of an amendment to this chapter including the zoning map, or upon the expiration of its review period, the council may adopt the amendment or any part thereof in such form as it deems advisable, reject the amendment, or refer it to the planning commission for further consideration. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 3(3-5-5), 12-15-86) 
Secs. 20-46-20-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 20-56. - Generally. 
(a)  A variance from this chapter may be requested only by the owner of the property or the owner's approved representative to which the variance would apply. A variance may not be granted which would allow the use of property in a manner not permitted within the applicable zoning district. A variance may, however, be granted for the temporary use of a single-family dwelling as a two-family dwelling. In granting any variance, conditions may be prescribed to ensure substantial compliance with this chapter and to protect adjacent property. 
(b)  Prior to filing an application for a variance, the applicant shall attend a conference with city staff. The primary purpose of the conference shall be to provide the applicant with an opportunity to gather information and obtain guidance on the general merits of the proposal and its conformity to the provisions of the comprehensive plan and the City Code before incurring substantial expense. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 1(3-1-1(1)), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 131, § 4, 7-9-90; Ord. No. 377, § 7, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 20-57. - Violations of conditions imposed upon variance; termination. 
    The violation of any written condition shall constitute a violation of this chapter. It is a condition of every variance that the property for which the permit is issued not be subdivided or the lot lines of the property altered. A variance, except a variance approved in conjunction with platting, shall become void within one year following issuance unless substantial action has been taken by the petitioner in reliance thereon. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 1(3-1-3(1)), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 196, § 1, 11-22-93; Ord. No. 474, § 2, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 20-58. - General conditions for granting. 
    A variance may be granted if all of the following criteria are met: 
(1)  Variances shall only be permitted when they are in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this chapter and when the variances are consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  When there are practical difficulties in complying with the zoning ordinance. "Practical difficulties," as used in connection with the granting of a variance, means that the property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by this chapter. Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. 
(3)  That the purpose of the variation is not based upon economic considerations alone. 
(4)  The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner. 
(5)  The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. 
(6)  Variances shall be granted for earth-sheltered construction as defined in M.S. § 216C.06, subd. 14, when in harmony with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 1(3-1-3(2)), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 131, § 3, 7-9-90; Ord. No. 377, § 8, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 525, § 1, 6-27-11) 
Sec. 20-59. - Conditions for use of single-family dwelling as two-family dwelling. 
    A variance for the temporary use of a single-family dwelling as a two-family dwelling may only be allowed under the following circumstances: 
(1)  There is a demonstrated need based upon disability, age or financial hardship. 
(2)  The dwelling has the exterior appearance of a single-family dwelling, including the maintenance of one driveway and one main entry. 
(3)  Separate utility services are not established (e.g., gas, water, sewer, etc.). 
(4)  The variance will not be injurious to or adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city or the neighborhood where the property is situated and will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 1(3-1-3(3)), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-60. - Denial. 
    Variances may be denied by the board of appeals and adjustments and the city council, and such denial shall constitute a finding and determination that the conditions required for approval do not exist. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 1(3-1-4(6)), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, § 9, 5-24-04) 
Secs. 20-61-20-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - NONCONFORMING USES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 165, adopted Feb. 10, 1992, amended Div. 4 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Div. 4, §§ 20-71-20-78, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 5, adopted Dec. 15, 1986; and Ord. No. 163, § 1, adopted Feb. 24, 1992. 

Sec. 20-71. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is: 
(1)  To recognize the existence of uses, lots and structures which were lawful when established, but which no longer meet all ordinance requirements; 
(2)  To prevent the enlargement, expansion, intensification or extension of any nonconforming use, building or structure; and 
(3)  To encourage the elimination of nonconforming uses, lots and structures or reduce their impact on adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 2, 2-10-92) 
Sec. 20-72. - Nonconforming uses and structures. 
(a)  Any nonconformity, including the lawful use or occupation of land or premises existing at the time of the adoption of an additional control under this chapter, may be continued, including through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance or improvement, but not including expansion, unless: 
(1)  The nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a period of more than one year; or 
(2)  Any nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater than 50 percent of its market value, and no building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property is damaged. In this case, the city may impose reasonable conditions upon a building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property. 
(b)  Any subsequent use or occupancy of the land or premises shall be a conforming use or occupancy. The city may, by ordinance, permit an expansion or impose upon nonconformities reasonable regulations to prevent and abate nuisances and to protect the public health, welfare or safety. This section does not prohibit the city from enforcing an ordinance that applies to adults-only bookstores, adults-only theaters, or similar adults-only businesses, as defined by ordinance. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), the city shall regulate the repair, replacement, maintenance, improvement or expansion of nonconforming uses and structures in floodplain areas to the extent necessary to maintain eligibility in the national flood insurance program and not increase flood damage potential or increase the degree of obstruction to flood flows in the floodway. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any detached single-family dwelling that is on a nonconforming lot or that is a nonconforming use or structure may be altered, or expanded provided, however, that the nonconformity may not be increased. If a setback of a dwelling is nonconforming, no additions may be added to the nonconforming side of the building unless the addition meets setback requirements. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the prohibitions contained in the forgoing subsections of this section, if approved by the city council a nonconforming land use may be changed to another nonconforming land use of less intensity if it is in the public interest. In all instances the applicant has the burden of proof regarding the relative intensities of uses. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 2, 2-10-92; Ord. No. 377, §§ 10, 11, 5-24-04; Ord. >No. 423, § 2, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 20-73. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  No variance shall be required to construct a detached single-family dwelling on a nonconforming lot of record, excluding platted outlots, provided that it fronts on a public street or approved private street and provided that the structure meets the minimum requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Except as otherwise specifically provided for detached single-family dwellings, there shall be no expansion, intensification, replacement or structural changes of a structure on a nonconforming lot. 
(c)  If a nonconforming lot or parcel is, or at any time since June 25, 2012, has been held in common ownership with all or part of an adjoining or abutting parcel or lot, then such nonconforming lot or parcel and such adjoining or abutting parcel or lot shall be deemed one lot. If in a group of two or more adjoining or abutting lots or parcels owned or controlled by the same person, any single lot or parcel does not meet 75 percent of the full minimum depth, width, and area requirements of this chapter, such single lot or parcel shall not be considered as a separate lot or parcel able to be conveyed or developed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 2, 2-10-92; Ord. No. 377, § 12, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 423, § 3, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 543, § 1, 6-25-12) 
Secs. 20-74-20-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BUILDING PERMITS, CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY, ETC.[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 377, § 14, adopted May 24, 2004, amended div. 5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 5, §§ 20-91-20-94, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 4(3-1-4), adopted Dec. 15, 1986; Ord. No. 130, § 1, adopted July 9, 1990; Ord. No. 178, § 1, adopted Oct. 26, 1992; Ord. No. 232, § 1, adopted Feb. 13, 1995; and Ord. No. 318, § 2, adopted Apr. 23, 2001. 

Sec. 20-91. - Zoning permit. 
(a)  A zoning permit shall be required for the construction of structures which do not require building permits to determine compliance with zoning requirements such as setback, site coverage, structure height, etc.: 
(1)  Agricultural buildings. 
(2)  Decks less than 30 inches above the ground and not attached to the principal structure. 
(3)  Driveway expansions. 
(4)  One-story detached accessory structures, used as tool or storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, 200 square feet or less in building area. 
(5)  Patios. 
(6)  Permanent fences less than six feet in height. 
(7)  Retaining walls four feet and less in height. 
(8)  Sport courts. 
(b)  Any zoning permit application that fails to meet zoning ordinance requirements shall be denied by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 13, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 409, § 1, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 452, § 1, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 612, § 3, 12-14-15) 
Cross reference- Technical codes, § 7-16 et seq. 
Secs. 20-92-20-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SITE PLAN REVIEW[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 119, adopted Feb. 12, 1990, amended former div. 6 in its entirety to read as set out in §§ 20-106-20-121. Prior to amendment, div. 6 contained §§ 20-106-20-108, which pertained to site plan review and derived from Ord. No. 80, Art. III, §§ 6(3-6-1-3-6-4), adopted Dec. 15, 1986. 

Sec. 20-106. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of this division to serve the public interest by promoting a high standard of development within the city. Through a comprehensive review of both functional and aesthetic aspects of new or intensified development, the city seeks to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Implement the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Maintain and improve the city's tax base. 
(3)  Mitigate to the extent feasible adverse impacts of one land use upon another. 
(4)  Promote the orderly and safe flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(5)  Preserve and enhance the natural and built environment. 
(6)  Within the HC districts, meet the additional purpose, intent and standards of the HC districts. 
(7)  Within the BCO district, meet the additional purpose, intent and standards of the BCO district. 
(Ord. No. 119, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 212, § 3, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 286, § 5, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 20-107. - Approval required. 
    Without first obtaining site and building plan approval it shall be unlawful to do any of the following: 
(1)  Construct a building. 
(2)  Move a building to any lot within the city. 
(3)  Expand or change the use of a building or parcel of land or modify a building, accessory structure or site or land feature in any manner which results in a different intensity of use, including the requirement for additional parking. 
(Ord. No. 119, 2-12-90) 
Sec. 20-108. - Exceptions. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 20-107, the following shall not require site or building plan approval: 
(1)  Construction or alteration of a single- or two-family residential building or accessory building on a lot zoned for residential use; 
(2)  Enlargement of a building by less than ten percent of its gross floor area, provided that there is no variance involved and also provided that the community development director has conducted an administrative review pursuant to section 20-113; 
(3)  Changes in the leasable space of a multitenant building where the change does not intensify the use or require additional parking beyond the capacity of the site; 
(4)  Construction of buildings for agricultural uses on land zoned and utilized for agricultural purposes; 
(5)  Moving a residence or accessory building to any lot zoned A-2, PUD-R, RR or RSF; provided that the lot and structure siting comply with all applicable zoning ordinance standards. 
(Ord. No. 119, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 377, § 14, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-109. - Applications. 
    Application for a site plan review shall be made to the city planner on forms provided by the city and shall be filed 30 days in advance of the planning commission meeting, at which it is to be considered. Prior to filing an application for site plan review, the applicant shall attend a conference with city staff. The primary purpose of the conference shall be to provide the applicant with an opportunity to gather information and obtain guidance on the general merits of the proposal and its conformity to the provisions of the comprehensive plan and the City Code before incurring substantial expense. Incomplete or deficient applications shall not be scheduled for a meeting unless the community development director has determined that official action is warranted. The application shall also include: 
(1)  Evidence of ownership or an interest in the property; 
(2)  The application fee; 
(3)  Complete site plans, signed by a registered architect, civil engineer, landscape architect or other design professional, to include the following. 
(4)  General: 
a.  Name of project. 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of applicant, engineer, and owner of record. 
c.  Legal description (certificate of survey will be required). 
d.  Date proposed, north arrow, engineering scale, number of sheets, name of drawer. 
e.  Vicinity map showing relationship of the proposed development to surrounding streets, rights-of-way, easements and natural features. 
f.  Description of intended use of the site, buildings and structures, including type of occupancy and estimated occupancy load. 
g.  Existing zoning and land use. 
h.  Tabulation box indicating: 
1.  Size of parcel in acres and square feet. 
2.  Gross floor area of each building. 
3.  Percent of site covered by building. 
4.  Percent of lot coverage on site broken out by impervious surface and pervious pavement. 
5.  Percent of site covered by parking area. 
6.  Projected number of employees. 
7.  Number of seats if intended use is a restaurant or place of assembly. 
8.  Number of parking spaces required. 
9.  Number of parking spaces provided including handicapped. 
10.  Height of all buildings and structures and number of stories. 
11.  Breakdown of the building area allocated for specific uses, e.g., manufacturing, office, retail, showroom, warehouse, etc. 
(5)  Site and building plan: 
a.  Property line dimensions, location of all existing and proposed structures with distance from boundaries, distance between structures, building dimensions and floor elevations. 
b.  Grading and drainage plans showing existing natural features (topography, wetlands, vegetation, etc.), as well as proposed grade elevations and sedimentation and stormwater retention ponds. Plans shall include runoff and storage calculations for ten-year and 100-year events. If stormwater is proposed to be routed to existing stormwater ponds, documentation shall be provided to demonstrate that the downstream pond is sufficient to accommodate the additional stormwater. 
c.  All existing and proposed points of egress/ingress showing widths at property lines, turning radii abutting rights-of-way with indicated centerline, width, paving width, existing and proposed median cuts, and intersections of streets and driveways. 
d.  Vehicular circulation system showing location and dimension for all driveways, parking spaces, parking lot aisles, service roads, loading areas, fire lanes, emergency access (if necessary), public and private streets, alleys, sidewalks, bike paths, direction of traffic flow and traffic-control devices. 
e.  Landscaping plan in accordance with the provisions of article XXV. 
f.  Location, access and screening detail of trash enclosures. 
g.  Location and screening detail of rooftop equipment. Screening shall be provided from the perspective of a point six feet high at all adjacent property lines or from a distance of 250 feet, whichever is greater. 
h.  Location and detail of signage including method of lighting, height, width, sign display area, etc. 
i.  Lighting location, style, mounting and photometrics. 
j.  Building elevations from all directions indicating materials and colors. Interior floor plans may be required. 
k.  Utility plan identifying size and direction of existing water and sewer lines, fire hydrants, distance of hydrant to proposed building. 
l.  List of proposed hazardous materials, use and storage. 
m.  Proposed fire protection system. 
n.  Such other information as may be required by the city. 
o.  Photocomposite images, artistic renderings, or site elevations which depict the visual impact of the proposed development's design, landscaping, street layout, signage, pedestrian ways, lighting, buildings, or other details that affect land use within the city shall be submitted. Such images and renderings shall be from key vantage points and provide an undistorted perspective of the proposed development from abutting properties, less intensive land uses, and/or from entryway locations. Photorealistic imaging or renderings are the appropriate level of resolution. 
(6)  Within the HC districts, the application shall also include: 
a.  Building elevations from all directions, indicating materials, colors and landscaping at installation. 
b.  Building and site views from Highway 5, the appropriate access boulevard (north or south of Highway 5), and any other appropriate arterial or collector roadways. 
c.  Site views showing the relationships of the proposed building or development to adjacent development, including buffered areas. 
d.  Drawings of all significant or atypical site features, such as unusual landscaping, manmade water features other than retention ponds, outdoor sculpture, or other large-scale artwork and other uncommon constructs. 
e.  Sample building materials. 
f.  Sample paving materials, upon the city's request. 
(7)  Within the BCO district, the application shall also include: 
a.  Identified boundaries of the primary zone and secondary zone on a drawing depicting existing conditions and on a site plan depicting the proposed development pattern. 
b.  Calculations and/or drawings that identify the allowable density (number of units or building coverage) under this Code, including lands lying in the primary and secondary zone. Calculation of allowable density shall specifically exclude lands classified as bluffs, floodplains and designated wetlands. Calculation of allowable lot coverage may include bluffs and floodplains but shall specifically exclude designated wetlands. 
(Ord. No. 119, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 203, § 2, 5-9-94; Ord. No. 212, § 4, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 286, § 6, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 315, § 1, 3-26-01; Ord. No. 377, § 15, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 474, § 3, 10-13-08; Ord. No. 628, §§ 15, 16, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 633, § 2, 6-25-18) 
Sec. 20-110. - Standards. 
    In evaluating a site and building plan, the planning commission and city council shall consider its compliance with the following: 
(1)  Consistency with the elements and objectives of the city's development guides, including the comprehensive plan, official road mapping, and other plans that may be adopted; 
(2)  Consistency with this division; 
(3)  Preservation of the site in its natural state to the extent practicable by minimizing tree and soil removal and designing grade changes to be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed or developing areas; 
(4)  Creation of a harmonious relationship of buildings and open spaces with natural site features and with existing and future buildings having a visual relationship to the development; 
(5)  Creation of a functional and harmonious design for structures and site features, with special attention to the following: 
a.  An internal sense of order for the buildings and uses on the site and provision of a desirable environment for occupants, visitors and general community; 
b.  The amount and location of open space and landscaping; 
c.  Materials, textures, colors and details of construction as an expression of the design concept and the compatibility of the same with the adjacent and neighboring structures and uses; and 
d.  Vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including walkways, interior drives and parking in terms of location and number of access points to the public streets, width of interior drives and access points, general interior circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and arrangement and amount of parking. 
(6)  Protection of adjacent and neighboring properties through reasonable provision for surface water drainage, sound and sight buffers, preservation of views, light and air and those aspects of design not adequately covered by other regulations which may have substantial effects on neighboring land uses. 
(7)  Within the HC districts, consistency with the purpose, intent and standards of the HC districts. 
(8)  Within the BCO district, consistency with the purpose, intent and standards of the BCO district. 
(Ord. No. 119, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 212, § 5, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 286, § 7, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 20-111. - Public hearing. 
    Upon receipt of a completed application, a date shall be set for review of the site plan before the planning commission. The review will be held no less than ten days after mailed notice is sent to the owner of properties located wholly or partially within 500 feet of the site, as reflected in the records of the county auditor. The community development director may require an expanded mailing list for sites fronting on lakeshore where the development would be visible over a larger area. Following the hearing or any continuance thereof, the planning commission shall make a recommendation. The site plan shall be forwarded to the city council with the planning commission's recommendation for review on the next available agenda. Final approval of the site plan requires a simple majority vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 119, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 377, § 16, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-112. - Multiple applications. 
    Any site and building plan application which is accompanied by a request for a conditional use permit or for a rezoning amendment to this division shall be considered by the planning commission concurrently with the conditional use permit or rezoning application. 
(Ord. No. 119, 2-12-90) 
Sec. 20-113. - Administrative approvals. 
    Minor site plan and building alterations which do not involve a variance, which are consistent with the intent of the approval relative to all aspects of the site and building plans and which are not accompanied by other matters requiring consideration by the planning commission or city council, may be approved by the community development director. The director is not authorized to approve the principal construction of new buildings or alterations to existing buildings that would add more than ten percent to the existing gross floor area. If any application is processed administratively, the community development director shall render a decision within 30 days and shall serve a copy of the decision upon the applicant by mail. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the community development director may appeal the decision to the planning commission in the manner specified in section 20-109 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 119, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 377, § 17, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-114. - Conditions. 
    The planning commission, city council or community development director may impose conditions in granting approval to site and building plans to promote the intent of this division and to protect adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 119, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 377, § 18, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-115. - Specific project. 
    Site and building plans shall be valid only for the project for which approval is granted. Construction of all site elements shall be in compliance with the plans and specifications approved by the planning commission, city council or director of planning. 
(Ord. No. 119, 2-12-90) 
Sec. 20-116. - Architectural standards. 
(a)  It is not the intent of the city to restrict design freedom unduly when reviewing project architecture in connection with a site and building plan. However, it is in the best interest of the city to promote high standards of architectural design and compatibility with surrounding structures and neighborhoods. Architectural plans shall be prepared by an architect or other qualified person acceptable to the community development director and shall show the following: 
(1)  Elevations of all sides of the building; 
(2)  Type and color of exterior building materials; 
(3)  A typical floor plan; 
(4)  Dimensions of all structures; and 
(5)  The location of trash containers and of heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment. 
(b)  The use of unadorned, prestressed concrete panels and concrete block shall not be permitted. Acceptable materials will incorporate textured surfaces, exposed aggregate and/or other patterning. The use of metal on building exteriors shall be limited to trim detailing and/or to buildings using metal and glass curtain walls. Architectural metal roof (standing seam and similar) systems and canopies may also be allowed. 
(c)  All rooftop or ground-mounted mechanical equipment and exterior trash storage areas shall be enclosed with materials compatible with the principal structure. Low profile, self-contained mechanical units which blend in with the building architecture may be exempt from the screening requirement. 
(d)  Underground utilities shall be provided for all new and substantially renovated structures. On sites where, through design on topography, rooftop mechanical systems are highly visible from off-site locations, structural screening will be required. 
(e)  Within the HC districts, the standards for the HC districts shall apply in addition to the standards specified in this division. 
(Ord. No. 119, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 212, § 6, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 377, § 19, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-117. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 153, adopted Nov. 4, 1991, repealed former § 20-117, which pertained to the maintenance of sites and landscaping and derived from Ord. No. 119, adopted Feb. 12, 1990. 
Sec. 20-118. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 377, § 20, adopted May 24, 2004, repealed § 20-118, which pertained to retaining walls and derived from Ord. No. 119, adopted Feb. 2, 1990; and Ord. No. 212, § 7, adopted July 11, 1994. 
Sec. 20-119. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 153, adopted Nov. 4, 1991, repealed former § 20-119, which pertained to a landscaping financial guarantee and derived from Ord. No. 119, adopted Feb. 12, 1990. 
Sec. 20-120. - Maintenance of site. 
    It shall be the obligation of the owner to maintain the site in a manner consistent with the approved site and building plan. Unapproved alterations are in violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 119, 2-12-90) 
Sec. 20-121. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-122. - Site plan permit. 
(a)  The terms and conditions of approval of the site plan shall be embodied in a permit signed by the property owner and the city. The permit shall be recorded against the title to the property. 
(b)  A letter of credit or cash escrow shall be required to ensure satisfactory installation of site improvements in an amount equal to 110 percent of the value of the required improvements. The developer is obligated to install and complete all such improvements at his or her own expense and under the supervision and inspection of the city. The guarantee shall be provided prior to recording the site plan permit and shall be valid until the improvements are inspected and approved by the city. 
(c)  Procedures for the reduction or release of security shall include: 
(1)  Requests for reductions of letters of credit must be submitted to the city in writing by the developer or their engineer. 
(2)  The city shall verify completion of the improvements. 
(3)  Any reduction shall be subject to city approval. 
(Ord. No. 161, § 1, 1-13-92; Ord. No. 612, § 4, 12-14-15) 
Secs. 20-123-20-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS GENERALLY AND ZONING DISTRICT MAP 

Sec. 20-201. - Establishment of districts. 
    The city is divided into the following zoning districts: 
Agricultural districts: 
    "A-2" Agricultural estate district 
Residential districts: 
    "RR" Rural residential district 
    "RSF" Single-family residential district 
    "R-4" Mixed low density residential district 
    "R-8" Mixed medium density residential district 
    "R-12" High density residential district 
    "R-16" High density residential district 
    "RLM" Low and medium density residential district 
Business districts: 
    "BN" Neighborhood business district 
    "BH" Highway and business services district 
    "CBD" Central business district 
    "CC" Community commercial district 
    "BG" General business district 
    "BF" Fringe business district 
Institutional and industrial districts: 
    "OI" Office and institutional district 
    "IOP" Industrial office park district 
Special districts: 
    "PUD" Planned unit development 
    "FW" Floodway district 
    "FF" Flood fringe district 
    "GFP" General floodplain district 
    "S" Shoreland district 
    "HC-1" Highway 5 central business corridor district 
    "HC-2" Highway 5 corridor district 
    "BCO" Bluff Creek Overlay District 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. IV, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 123, § 1, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 212, § 2, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 286, § 4, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 377, § 21, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 619, § 6, 2-27-17) 
Sec. 20-202. - Zoning map. 
    The boundaries of the districts established by this chapter are delineated on the zoning map; the map and all notations, references and data shown thereon are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter and will be on permanent file for public inspection at the city hall. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. IV, § 2, 12-15-86) 
Cross reference- Official maps, § 15-20 et seq. 
Sec. 20-203. - District boundaries. 
    Except where referenced on the zoning map, a street or alley line or other designated line by dimensions shown on the map, the district boundary lines of all districts except the flood fringe and floodway district, shoreland management district and Bluff Creek Overlay District shall follow lot lines or the centerlines of streets or alleys. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of any district, the board of appeals and adjustments shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. IV, § 3, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, § 22, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-204. - Schedule of uses permitted by district. 
    Uses of land, buildings and structures not permitted below as either principal, accessory or conditional are prohibited. All district regulations shall also be subject to the provisions of all other applicable provisions of the chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 1, 12-15-86) 
Secs. 20-205-20-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONDITIONAL USES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-221. - Nature; burden of proof. 
    Conditional uses include those uses which are not usually allowed within the zoning district, but which may under some circumstances be suitable. The applicant shall have the burden of proof that the use is suitable and that the standards set forth in division 2 of this article have been met. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 2(3-2-1), 12-15-86) 
Secs. 20-222-20-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 

Sec. 20-231. - Application, public hearing, notice and procedure. 
(a)  The application, public hearing, public notice and procedure requirements for conditional use permits shall be the same as those for amendments as provided in article II, division 2, except that the permit shall be issued on the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire council. Although specific submissions required to complete an application for a conditional use permit may vary with the specific use and the district in which it is located, all applications for such permits must include at minimum a site plan that clearly illustrates the following: Proposed land use building mapping and functions, circulation and parking areas, planting areas and treatment, sign locations and type, basic lighting concerns, the relationship of the proposed project to neighboring uses, environmental impacts and demand for municipal services. 
(b)  Prior to filing an application for a conditional use, the applicant shall attend a conference with city staff. The primary purpose of the conference shall be to provide the applicant with an opportunity to gather information and obtain guidance on the general merits of the proposal and its conformity to the provisions of the comprehensive plan and the City Code before incurring substantial expense. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 2(3-2-2), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 474, § 4, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 20-232. - General issuance standards. 
    The planning commission shall recommend a conditional use permit and the council shall issue such conditional use permits only if it finds that such use at the proposed location: 
(1)  Will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare of the neighborhood or the city. 
(2)  Will be consistent with the objectives of the city's comprehensive plan and this chapter. 
(3)  Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so to be compatible in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character of that area. 
(4)  Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or planned neighboring uses. 
(5)  Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, including streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer systems and schools; or will be served adequately by such facilities and services provided by the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use. 
(6)  Will not create excessive requirements for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community. 
(7)  Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or the general welfare due to excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare, odors, rodents or trash. 
(8)  Will have vehicular approaches to the property which do not create traffic congestion or interfere with traffic or surrounding public thoroughfares. 
(9)  Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of solar access, natural, scenic or historic features of major significance. 
(10)  Will be aesthetically compatible with the area. 
(11)  Will not depreciate surrounding property values. 
(12)  Will meet standards prescribed for certain uses as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 2(3-2-3), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, § 23, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-233. - Conditions imposable on permits. 
(a)  In reviewing applications for conditional use permits, the planning commission and the council may attach reasonable conditions to mitigate anticipated adverse impacts associated with these uses, to protect the value of other property within the district, and to achieve the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Controlling the number, area, bulk, height and location of such uses. 
(2)  Regulating ingress and egress to the property and the proposed structures thereon with particular reference to vehicle and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control and access in case of fire or other catastrophe. 
(3)  Regulating off-street parking and loading areas where required. 
(4)  Utilities with reference to location availability and compatibility. 
(5)  Berming, fencing, screening, landscaping or other facilities to protect nearby property. 
(6)  Compatibility of appearance. 
(b)  In determining conditions, special considerations shall be given to protecting immediately adjacent properties from objectionable views, noise, traffic and other negative characteristics associated with such uses. 
(c)  It is a condition of every conditional use permit that the property for which the permit is issued not be subdivided or the lot lines of the property altered. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 2(3-2-4), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, § 24, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 477, § 1, 1-26-09) 
Sec. 20-234. - Denial for noncompliance. 
    If the council denies a conditional use permit, it shall state findings as to the ways in which the proposed use does not comply with the standards required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 2(3-2-5), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-235. - Permits not personal. 
    A conditional use permit shall be issued for a particular use and not for a particular person. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 2(3-2-6), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-236. - Expiration. 
    If substantial construction has not taken place within one year of the date on which the conditional use permit was granted, the permit is void except that, on application, the council, after receiving recommendation from the planning commission, may extend the permit for such additional period as it deems appropriate. If the conditional use is discontinued for six months, the conditional use permit shall become void. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 2(3-2-8), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, § 25, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-237. - Revocation and inspection. 
(a)  Failure to comply with any condition set forth in a conditional use permit shall be a misdemeanor and shall also constitute sufficient cause for the revocation of the conditional use permit by the city council following a public hearing. The property owner shall be notified in advance of the city council's review of the permit. 
(b)  Inspections will be conducted at least annually to determine compliance with the terms of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. III, § 2(3-2-7), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 106, § 1, 8-14-89) 
Secs. 20-238-20-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 377, § 26, adopted May 24, 2004, amended Div. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 3, §§ 20-251-20-267, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 9(5-9-1(3), adopted Dec. 15, 1986; Ord. No. 80-A, § 1, adopted June 15, 1987; Ord. No. 87, § 1, adopted June 13, 1988; Ord. No. 103, § 1, adopted May 22, 1989; Ord. No. 121, adopted Feb. 26, 1990; Ord. No. 146, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 6, 1991; Ord. No. 151, § 2, adopted Aug. 26, 1991; Ord. No. 160, § 3, adopted Feb. 10, 1992; Ord. No. 230, § 1, adopted Jan. 19, 1995; Ord. No. 240, § 10, adopted July 24, 1995; Ord. No. 248, § 2, adopted Mar. 11, 1996; Ord. No. 259, §§ 1, 3 adopted Dec. 15, 1986; Ord. No. 285, § 1, adopted July 13, 1998; Ord. No. 294, § 1, adopted Aug. 23, 1999; and Ord. No. 306, § 2, adopted July 24, 2000. 

Sec. 20-251. - Scope. 
    In addition to all other standards required by section 20-232, the standards in this division shall apply to conditional uses if they are to be located in agricultural or residential districts. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-252. - Bed and breakfast establishments. 
    The following applies to bed and breakfast establishments: 
(1)  Two off-street parking spaces, plus one additional space per rental room must be provided. 
(2)  There shall be no more than one employee in addition to the residents. 
(3)  Establishment must be owner occupied. 
(4)  Not more than five rooms may be rented. All rooms must be located in the principal dwelling except that one room may be located in a detached accessory structure. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-253. - Cemetery. 
    The minimum lot size for a cemetery shall not be less than one acre. 
(1)  Headstone and markers shall be of natural stone. 
(2)  Maximum height of a headstone shall not exceed three feet in height above ground level, two feet six inches in width and six inches in thickness. An apron of at least four inches in width shall be placed around said marker or monument at a depth so as to assure no settling or movement of the marker or monument, which shall be made of concrete, which apron shall also be level with the surface of the ground, and which shall be affixed to the marker so as to prevent grass, weeds or other vegetation from growing between the marker and apron. 
(3)  Installation of markers and monuments shall be provided adequate planking to protect turf and shall remove materials, equipment and refuse immediately upon completion of work. 
(4)  Groundwater testing shall be done to determine high water table and springs located on the site. 
(5)  Sufficient maintenance and perpetual care funds shall be in place. 
(6)  Cemetery hours shall be from sunrise to sunset. 
(7)  The site shall contain a minimum of ten parking spaces. 
(8)  Access to the cemetery shall be by means of a collector or arterial roadway. 
(9)  Mausoleums: Maximum size/height 20 feet must maintain district setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-254. - Churches. 
(a)  The following applies to churches located inside the Metropolitan Urban Services Area (MUSA): 
(1)  The site shall be located on a collector or arterial roadway as identified in the comprehensive plan or located so that access can be provided without conducting traffic through residential concentration. 
(2)  The structure must be set back 50 feet from all property lines. 
(3)  Parking areas shall be set back 25 feet from streets and nonresidential property. 
(4)  Lot coverage shall not exceed 70 percent of the site and the remainder is to be suitably landscaped in conformance with article XXV. 
(b)  In addition to the criteria in subsection (a), the following applies to churches located outside the Metropolitan Urban Services Area: 
The following must be provided for review: 
(1)  Location of two drainfield sites. 
(2)  Two soil borings on each drainfield site for a total of four soil borings. 
(3)  No percolation tests for drainfield sites where the land slope is between zero and 12 percent. 
(4)  One percolation test per drainfield site where the land slope is between 13 and 25 percent. 
(5)  Areas where the land slope exceeds 25 percent shall not be considered as a potential soil treatment site. 
(6)  The sewage treatment system must be in conformance with chapter 19, article IV. 
(7)  School and day care uses accessory to the church use are not permitted unless approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 628, § 17, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 20-255. - Commercial kennels, stables and riding academies. 
    The following applies to commercial kennels, stables and riding academies: 
(1)  The structure must be in compliance with chapter 5, article III. 
(2)  The site must be located on a collector street. 
(3)  The structure must be a minimum of 200 feet from wetland area. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-256. - Day care centers. 
    The following applies to day care centers: 
(1)  The site shall have loading and drop-off points designed to avoid interfering with traffic and pedestrian movements. 
(2)  Outdoor play areas shall be located and designed in a manner which mitigates visual and noise impacts on adjoining residential areas. 
(3)  Each center shall obtain all applicable state, county and city licenses. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-257. - Electrical distribution and underground electric distribution substations. 
    Electrical distribution and underground electric distribution substations are subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The distribution and underground electric distribution substations must be served by a collector or major arterial street as designated in the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The distribution and underground electric distribution substations will not have sanitary facilities and will not be used for habitation. 
(3)  The distribution and underground electric distribution substations will be located on at least five acres of property. 
(4)  A security fence as specified in the National Electric Safety Code shall surround the distribution and underground electric distribution substations. 
(5)  A landscaping plan shall be submitted for city approval. 
(6)  Distribution and underground electric distribution substations shall be a minimum of 500 feet from single-family residences. 
(7)  A summary of current research regarding the health effects of EMF levels, conducted by health and scientific professionals, including those who do and do not receive utility sponsorship. 
(8)  Provide EMF levels under maximum and average anticipated loading at the base of the utility poles, underneath the wires between the poles, at ground level above underground wires, at the edge of the property line, at the edge of the closest habitable building, and at the point above ground where there would be the greatest EMF level. 
(9)  Reasonable and prudent measures to minimize EMF levels along all alternative electric line routes. 
(10)  Depictions of the views of the proposed facility, if above ground, from at least two directions selected by city staff. 
(11)  The site is guided office/industrial on the City of Chanhassen Land Use Plan. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 390, § 2, 3-14-05) 
Sec. 20-258. - Golf course. 
(a)  Hours of operation shall be from sunrise to sunset. 
(b)  Soil must be tested to determine fertilizing requirements. If necessary, the applicant/owner/lessee shall use slow release fertilizers applied at low rates or only as needed, use natural organic fertilizers whenever possible. The use of fertilizers shall be prohibited within the floodplain. Only phosphorous-free fertilizers shall be used. 
(c)  The applicant/owner/lessee shall apply pesticides only when needed. Use products that are most effective, target specific, and present the least hazards to people, wildlife and the environment. 
(d)  The applicant/owner/lessee shall apply for and obtain permits from the appropriate regulatory agencies, i.e., Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, Minnesota Department of Health, Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, Army Corps of Engineers and Minnesota Department of Transportation and comply with their conditions of approval. 
(e)  Annual reports of fertilizer use shall be provided to the city. 
(f)  A clubhouse may be permitted on the site. The clubhouse must be shown on the site plan and must comply with all building and zoning requirements. 
(g)  A retail pro shop is permitted within the clubhouse. Retail operations shall not occupy more than 20 percent of one floor. A 3.2 malt liquor license is allowed provided the applicant applies and receives approval of a liquor license in accordance with City Code. Retail sales are limited to food, beverages and golf-related items. A wine license is allowed provided the applicant applies and receives approval of a wine license in accordance with City Code and the site contains a restaurant meeting the state licensing requirements. 
(h)  All maintenance and other equipment must be kept in a screened storage area. 
(i)  The golf course must be accessed from a collector or arterial roadway. 
(j)  The site design shall minimize golf ball hazards. 
(k)  Hours of maintenance operation shall be limited to sunrise to sunset. 
(l)  No outside speaker systems shall be allowed without approval from the city council. 
(m)  A water consumption and use study must be submitted to the city for review. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 451, § 2, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 603, § 1, 2-23-15) 
Sec. 20-259. - Golf driving ranges. 
    The following applies to golf driving ranges with or without a miniature golf course: 
(1)  The location of the driving range is limited to being adjacent to TH 5 and TH 212 and access must be from a collector or arterial which leads to TH 5 or TH 212. 
(2)  Hours of operation shall be from sunrise to sunset. 
(3)  Provision of adequate parking areas and submission of landscaping plan shall be in conformance with article VIII of this chapter. 
(4)  No site shall be located within 500 feet of a single-family residence. 
(5)  Buildings on the site may not exceed 800 square feet and shall be painted in earth tones. 
(6)  A retail pro shop is permitted. Only prepackaged food may be sold with no commercial cooking appliance allowed. A 3.2 malt liquor license is allowed provided the applicant applies and receives approval of a liquor license in accordance with City Code. Retail sales are limited to golf related items and the pro shop. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-260. - Group homes. 
    The following applies to group homes for seven to 16 persons. 
(1)  The structure must be in compliance with the state licensing requirement. 
(2)  The structure must be in compliance with local building and fire codes. 
(3)  The site will be reviewed annually through a public hearing process. 
(4)  Septic systems must be in compliance with chapter 19, article IV. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-261. - Hospitals and health care facilities services. 
    The following applies to hospitals and health care facilities services: 
(1)  The site shall have direct access to collector or arterial streets, as defined in the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Emergency vehicle access shall not be adjacent to or located across a street from any residential use. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-262. - Mineral extraction. 
(1)  Hours shall be 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Saturday and no hours of operation on Sundays or holidays. 
(2)  A restoration plan shall be provided as part of the site plan review process. 
(3)  Stormwater management plans shall be provided as part of the site plan review process. Plans shall be submitted with site plan prior to council meeting. 
(4)  The site must be accessible via an arterial or collector roadway. 
(5)  Road restoration security deposit must be submitted to the city. 
(6)  Applicant shall submit a dust control plan. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-263. - Model home. 
    This criterion applies only to dwelling units which are converted into office space on a temporary basis, removed following occupancy, or leasing of 90 percent of the units or three years after opening of development. 
(1)  Five parking spaces shall be provided. 
(2)  Lighting shall be provided to ensure safety. 
(3)  The structure must be located within 150 feet of a paved road surface (i.e. bituminous or concrete roadway). 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-264. - Petting farms. 
    The following conditions will apply to petting farms: 
(1)  The site must be on and have access to a collector or minor arterial as identified in the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The minimum lot size shall be five acres. 
(3)  The site must also be used as a residence. Only three full time equivalent nonresident employees shall be employed on the site per five acres. 
(4)  All structures and storage areas must be set back 50 feet from public or private rights-of-way, and 300 feet from an adjacent single-family residence or a minimum of 50 feet from a side lot line, whichever is greater. The city council may require storage areas to be completely screened by 100 percent opaque fencing or berming. 
(5)  Parking areas shall be screened from public or private rights-of-way and adjacent single-family residences. 
(6)  Hours of operation shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. The city council may further restrict hours of operation if the use is located adjacent to property guided residential as identified in the comprehensive plan. 
(7)  No outdoor speaker systems shall be permitted without approval from the city council. 
(8)  Signage shall comply with article XXVI of this chapter. 
(9)  Retail sales shall be limited to 300 square feet in area. Retail sales shall be limited to petting farm related items. 
(10)  Animals kept outside must have continual access to shelter to protect them from the elements and must be in a confined area with fencing. 
(11)  A termination date shall be established for the interim use permit. The use shall be permitted until a particular date, until the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit it. Prior to the permit expiring, the applicant may request an extension to the interim use permit by submitting a new application. The renewal application will be subject to all city ordinances including any new ordinances enacted after the original approval. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-265. - Private stables. 
    The following applies to private stables: 
(1)  Stables shall comply with chapter 5, article III. 
(2)  Stables must be located a minimum of 200 feet from wetland areas. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-266. - Recreational beach lots. 
    Intent. Based upon experience, it is recognized by the city that the use of lakeshore by multiple parties may be an intensive use of lakeshore that may present conflicts with neighboring uses of lakeshore or the use of other lakeshore on the same lake or the lake itself. Further, beach lots may generate complaints if they are not maintained to the same standards as single-family lakeshore lots. Therefore, the city requires the following conditions for recreational beach lots, in addition to such other conditions that may be prescribed in the permit: 
(1)  Recreational beach lots shall have at least 200 feet of lake frontage. 
(2)  Except as specifically provided herein, no structure, ice fishing house, camper, trailer, tent, recreational vehicle, shelters (except gazebos) shall be erected, maintained, or stored upon any recreational beach lot. For the purpose of this section, a gazebo shall be defined as, "a freestanding roofed structure which is open on all sides." 
(3)  No boat, trailer, motor vehicle, including but not limited to cars, trucks, motorcycles, motorized mini-bikes, all-terrain vehicles or snowmobiles shall be driven upon or parked upon any recreational beach lot. 
(4)  No recreational beach lot shall be used for overnight camping. 
(5)  Boat launches are prohibited. 
(6)  No recreational beach lot shall be used for purposes of overnight storage or overnight mooring of more than three motorized or nonmotorized watercraft per dock. If a recreational beach lot is allowed more than one dock; however, the allowed number of boats may be clustered. Up to three sailboat moorings shall also be allowed. Nonmotorized watercraft such as canoes, windsurfers, sailboards and small sailboats may be stored overnight on any recreational beach lot if they are stored on racks specifically designed for that purpose. No more than six watercraft may be stored on a rack. The number of racks shall not exceed the amount of storage necessary to permit one rack slip per lot served by the beach lot; however, in no case shall there be more than four racks per beach lot. Docking of other watercraft or seaplanes is permissible at any time other than overnight. 
(7)  The maximum number of docks on a recreational beach lot is three. No dock shall be permitted on any recreational beach lot unless the beach meets the following conditions: 
a.  Shoreline of at least 200 feet per dock; and 
b.  Area of at least 30,000 square feet for the first dock and additional 20,000 square feet for each additional dock. 
(8)  No recreational beach lot dock shall exceed six feet in width, and no such dock shall exceed the greater of 50 feet or the minimum straight-line distance necessary to reach a water depth of four feet. The width (but not the length) of the cross-bar of any "T" or "L" shaped dock shall be included in the computation of length described in the preceding sentence. The cross-bar of any such dock shall not measure in excess of 25 feet in length. 
(9)  No dock shall encroach upon any dock set-back zone, provided, however, that the owner of any two abutting lakeshore sites may erect one common dock within the dock setback zone appurtenant to the abutting lakeshore sites, if the common dock is the only dock on the two lakeshore sites and if the dock otherwise conforms with the provisions of this chapter. 
(10)  No sail boat mooring shall be permitted on any recreational beach lot unless it has at least 200 feet of lake frontage. No more than one sailboat mooring shall be allowed for every 200 feet of lake frontage. 
(11)  For purposes of this subsection, the following terms shall mean those beach lots which are located either within (urban) or outside (rural) the Year 2000 Metropolitan Urban Service Area boundary as depicted in the comprehensive plan. 
a.  Urban recreational beach lot: At least 80 percent of the dwelling units, which have appurtenant rights of access to any recreational beach lot, shall be located within 1,000 feet of the recreational beach lot. 
b.  Rural recreational beach lot: A maximum of 50 dwelling units (including riparian lots) shall be permitted appurtenant rights of access to the recreational beach lot. Upon extension of the Metropolitan Urban Service boundary into the rural area, the urban recreational beach lot standards will apply. 
(12)  All recreational beach lots may be used for swimming beach purposes, but only if swimming areas are clearly delineated with marker buoys which conform to the United States Coast Guard standards. 
(13)  All recreational beach lots shall have a buffer sufficient to insulate other property owners from beach lot activities. This buffer may consist of topography, streets, vegetation, distance (width or depth), or other features or combinations of features which provide a buffer. To insure appropriate buffering, the city may impose conditions to insulate beach lot activities including, but not limited to: 
a.  Increased side or front yard setbacks for beach areas, docks, racks or other allowed recreational equipment or activities; 
b.  Hours of use; 
c.  Planting and maintenance of trees and shrubs; 
d.  Erection of fences; 
e.  Standards of maintenance including mowing and trimming; painting and upkeep of racks, docks and other equipment; disposal of trash and debris; 
f.  Increased width, depth or area requirements based upon the intensity of the use proposed or the number of dwellings having rights of access. 
(14)  To the extent feasible, the city may impose such conditions even after approval of the beach lot if the city finds it necessary. 
(15)  Overnight docking, mooring, and storage of watercraft, where allowed, is restricted to watercraft owned by the owner/occupant or renter/occupant of homes which have appurtenant right of access to the recreational beach lot. 
(16)  The placement of docks, buoys, diving ramps, boat racks, and other structures shall be indicated on a site plan approved by the city council. 
(17)  Portable chemical toilets may be allowed as a condition of approval of a recreational beach lot. The maintenance and use of chemical toilets on some beach lots may be unsuitable because they cannot be adequately screened from residential neighbors or lake users. Any use of chemical toilets on recreation beach lots shall be subject to the following: 
a.  The minimum setback from the ordinary high water mark shall be 75 feet. Side and front yard setbacks shall be maximized to achieve maximum screening from adjacent lots and the lake. 
b.  It may only be used Memorial Day to Labor Day and shall be removed from the lot during the rest of the year. 
c.  It shall be securely anchored to the ground to prevent tipping. 
d.  It shall be screened from the lake and residential property with landscaping. 
e.  It shall be serviced at least weekly. 
f.  Only models designed to minimize the potential for spilling may be used. 
g.  Receipt of an annual license from the city's planning department. The license shall be issued unless the conditions of approval of this ordinance have been violated. All license applications shall be accompanied by the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and phone number of applicants. 
2.  Site plan showing proposed location of chemical toilets. 
3.  Name, address, and phone number of chemical toilet supplier. 
4.  Plan for commercially maintaining the chemical toilet, including a copy of any agreement for maintenance, and the name, address, and phone number of person responsible for maintenance. 
5.  A written description of how the applicant intends to screen the portable chemical toilet from all views into the property, including views from the lake. 
(18)  No watercraft or boat lift shall be kept, moored, docked, or stored in the dock setback zone. 
(19)  Gazebos may be permitted on recreational beach lots subject to city council approval and the following standards: 
a.  Minimum setback from the ordinary high water mark shall be 75 feet. 
b.  No gazebo shall be closer to any lot line than the minimum required yard setback for the zoning district in which the structure is located. 
c.  Maximum size of the structure shall not exceed 250 square feet. 
d.  Maximum height shall not exceed 20 feet. 
e.  Gazebos shall make use of appropriate materials, colors, and architectural and landscape forms to create a unified, high-quality design concept for the lot which is compatible with adjacent and neighboring structures. 
f.  Gazebos shall be properly maintained. Structures which are rotted, unsafe, deteriorated or defaced shall be repainted, repaired, removed, or replaced by the homeowners or beach lot association. 
g.  The following improvements are prohibited in gazebos; screening used to completely enclose a wall, water and sewer service, fireplaces, and electricity. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-267. - Sales trailers for residential developments. 
    Sales trailers are subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Trailers are permitted only until a permanent dwelling unit is available to be used as the sales office/model. At such time, the trailer shall be removed from the site. 
(2)  Hours of the sales trailer shall be 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(3)  No outside speaker systems shall be allowed without approval from the city council. 
(4)  Lighting shall be downcast, with no flashing, blinking or skylights permitted. 
(5)  Trailers shall be skirted and landscaped. One trailer shall be permitted per development. 
(6)  Trailers shall comply with Minnesota State Building Code requirements. 
(7)  Off-street hard surface parking for three to five cars shall be provided. 
(8)  The engineering department shall approve any access from a city street. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-268. - Wholesale and retail nurseries. 
(1)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to recognize that preexisting retail nurseries and garden centers are located within the city and may be in conflict with the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance. These establishments predate current ordinance standards. To allow for planned and orderly development, the city finds it necessary to regulate the expansion or intensification of these uses and to provide standards for any future retail nursery or garden centers. It is the intent of this section to promote the health, safety, general welfare, aesthetics, and image of the community by regulating the creation and the expansion of existing retail nurseries and garden centers. The creation or expansion of these uses will be allowed only by interim use permit by the city council. 
(2)  The following conditions will apply to wholesale and retail nurseries: 
a.  The site must be on a collector or minor arterial as identified in the comprehensive plan. 
b.  The minimum lot size is five acres. 
c.  All storage and yard areas as well as buildings must be set back 50 feet from public or private road rights-of-way, and 300 feet from an adjacent single-family residence or a minimum of 50 feet from a side lot line, whichever is greater. 
d.  All outdoor storage areas must be buffered from adjacent properties. Buffering may be accomplished using berms, fencing, landscaping, natural topography, or increased setbacks. The city council may require storage areas to be completely screened by 100 percent opaque fencing or berming. 
e.  Hours of operation shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. The city council may further restrict hours of operation if the use is located adjacent to property guided residential as identified in the comprehensive plan. 
f.  Light sources shall be shielded. 
g.  No outside speaker systems shall be allowed without approval from the city council. 
h.  A termination date shall be established for the interim use permit. The use shall be permitted until a particular date, until the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit it. Prior to the permit expiring, the applicant may request an extension to the interim use permit by submitting a new application. The renewal application will be subject to all city ordinances including any new ordinances enacted after the original approval. 
i.  One wall sign not to exceed 90 square feet and one monument sign not exceeding 24 square feet in size or eight feet in height shall be permitted on the premises. The council may further restrict the size and location of signs if the use is located adjacent to property guided residential as identified in the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 26, 5-24-04) 
Secs. 20-269-20-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STANDARDS FOR BUSINESS, OFFICE, INSTITUTIONAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 377, § 27, adopted May 24, 2004, amended Div. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 4, §§ 20-281-20-296, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 17(5-17-1, adopted Dec. 15, 1986; Ord. No. 80-A, § 1, adopted June 15, 1987; Ord. No. 97, § 2, adopted Oct. 24, 1988; Ord. No. 116, § 3, adopted Jan. 22, 1990; Ord. No. 137, § I, adopted Feb. 11, 1991; Ord. No. 24, § 3, adopted Mar. 11, 1996; Ord. No. 259, § 4, adopted Nov. 12, 1996; Ord. No. 243, § 2, adopted Feb. 19, 1995; Ord. No. 164, § 2, adopted Feb. 24, 1992; and Ord. No. 296, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 2000. 

Sec. 20-281. - Scope. 
    In addition to the standards required by section 20-232, the standards in this division shall apply to the conditional uses if they, are located in a business, office, institutional or industrial district. 
Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-282. - Adaptive reuse of buildings for private business use. 
    Adaptive reuse of surplus or vacant public or private buildings for private business uses are subject to the following criteria: 
(1)  Only nonretail business uses shall be permitted and all such uses shall be conducted only within an existing building; no outdoor storage or other outdoor business activities shall be permitted on the property except accessory parking and loading, and the use of the premises for recreational activities for which such facilities are designed. 
(2)  Exterior alteration, except for approved signage, which indicates from the exterior that the building is being utilized for other than educational purposes shall be prohibited. 
(3)  No noxious or offensive trades, services or activities shall be conducted within the building nor shall anything be done on any site which may be or become an annoyance or nuisance to the adjoining neighborhood by reason of unsightliness or excessive emission of odors, fumes, smoke, vibration, dirt, dust, glare, wastes or noise. 
(4)  Business identification signage shall be limited to one business directory-type sign which identifies only the names of businesses located within the building. 
(5)  Off-street parking spaces and loading facilities shall be provided for each use in a manner consistent with the minimum parking and loading requirements in this chapter for each specific use. In no case shall any existing parking or loading area be enlarged unless specifically approved by the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-283. - Automotive dealers. 
    The following applies to truck, automobile or boat sales: 
(1)  No vehicles which are unlicensed or inoperative shall be stored on the premises. 
(2)  All repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles shall occur within a closed building except minor maintenance, including, but not limited to, tire inflation, adding oil and wiper replacement. 
(3)  No outside storage or display is allowed, except vehicles for sale or rent. 
(4)  No outside speaker systems shall be allowed without approval from the city council. 
(5)  Parking setback shall be applicable for car or truck storage or waiting areas. 
(6)  No test driving of vehicles on local residential streets is allowed. 
(7)  A landscaped buffer 100 feet from any residential zoning district. 
(8)  All vehicle dealers shall be licensed by the state. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-284. - Automobile rental facilities. 
(1)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to limit automobile rental facilities to those that serve the community and neighborhood, and are limited in scope and are ancillary to a primary use. 
(2)  The following applies to automobile rental facilities as a conditional use in the BH, Highway Business District with the following standards: 
a.  No unlicensed and inoperative vehicles shall be stored on the premises. 
b.  All maintenance of vehicles shall occur within an enclosed building. 
c.  No outside storage or display is allowed, except vehicles for rent. 
d.  No outdoor speaker system or outdoor telephones shall be allowed without approval from the city council. 
e.  Parking setbacks shall be applicable for parking/storage areas. 
f.  Required customer and employee parking spaces shall not be used for rental vehicle storage. 
g.  Vehicle sales are not permitted. 
h.  The number of rental vehicles shall not exceed 15. 
i.  Only automobiles owned by the rental agency shall be stored on the property. 
j.  Parking spaces allocated for rental vehicle storage shall be designated. One and two-tenths parking space shall be provided per rental vehicle. 
k.  No signs shall be attached to vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-285. - Bed and breakfast establishments. 
    The following applies to bed and breakfast establishments: 
(1)  Two off-street parking spaces plus one additional space per rental room must be provided. 
(2)  There shall be no more than one employee in addition to the residents. 
(3)  Establishment must be owner-occupied. 
(4)  There shall be five or less rooms for rent. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-286. - Churches. 
(1)  The applicant shall be issued a two-year IUP permit. Upon renewal of the permit the applicant shall demonstrate adequate parking, life safety, and adequate occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-287. - Commercial kennels and stables. 
    The following applies to commercial kennels and stables: 
(1)  No more than one principal structure and two accessory structures shall be permitted in the rear or side yards. The accessory structures may not cover more than 40 percent of the side or rear yard area. Wetlands shall be excluded from yard calculations. 
(2)  The structure must be in compliance with chapter 5, articles II and III. 
(3)  The site must be located on a collector street. 
(4)  The accessory structure must be a minimum of 200 feet from a wetland area, 50 feet from a public or private road right-of-way, and 200 feet from an adjacent single-family residence or a minimum of 50 feet from a side or rear lot line, whichever is greater. 
(5)  No person shall maintain or operate any commercial kennel or stable without a permit issued by the city as regulated by the City Code. 
(6)  A minimum lot size of one acre is required to be licensed for operation of a commercial kennel or stable. 
(7)  Every commercial kennel or stable shall be enclosed or fenced in such manner as to prevent the running at large or escape of animals confined therein. 
(8)  Both commercial kennels and stables shall be open for inspection by the city authorities at any time. 
(9)  Reserved. 
(10)  Light sources shall be shielded. 
(11)  No outside speaker systems shall be allowed without approval from the city council. 
(12)  Compliance with all state and county regulations shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 512, § 2, 11-22-10) 
Sec. 20-288. - Concrete mixing plant. 
(a)  Storage of material shall be contained within screened storage yards. Screening shall comply with buffer yard D and F4 fencing as specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Hours of operation shall be 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Saturday, and closed holidays and Sundays. 
(c)  The site shall have access by means of a collector or arterial roadway. 
(d)  An environmental impact statement may be required by the planning commission or city council regarding environmental performance standards and design criteria related to: 
(1)  Air pollution; 
(2)  Fire and explosion hazards; 
(3)  Radiation hazards; 
(4)  Electromagnetic radiation and interference hazards; 
(5)  Liquid, gas and solid wastes hazards; 
(6)  Noise standards; 
(7)  Vibration standards; 
(8)  Water quality; and 
(9)  Others as may be requested by the city. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-289. - Contracting yard. 
(a)  Equipment and supply storage must be screened or enclosed. Screening shall comply with buffer yard D and F4 fencing as specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Vehicles/equipment shall be stored within an enclosed or screened area. 
(c)  No unlicensed or inoperable vehicle/equipment shall be stored on-premises. 
(d)  All chemicals shall be stored in proper storage facilities, specified by OSHA regulations. 
(e)  The contractor shall be licensed, bonded and insured. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-290. - Convenience stores with gas pumps. 
    The following applies to convenience stores with gas pumps: 
(1)  No unlicensed or inoperable vehicles shall be stored on-premises. 
(2)  No repair, assembly or disassembly of vehicles. 
(3)  No outside speaker systems shall be allowed without approval from the city council. 
(4)  Gas pump stacking area deemed to be appropriate by the city shall not intrude into any required setback area. 
(5)  No sales, storage or display of used automobiles or other vehicles such as motorcycles, snowmobiles, or all-terrain vehicles shall be permitted. 
(6)  Facilities for the collection of waste oil must be provided. 
(7)  Gas pumps and/or storage tank vent pipes shall not be located within 100 feet of any parcel zoned or guided for residential use. 
(8)  A minimum separation of 250 feet is required between the nearest gas pumps on separate parcels. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-291. - Day care centers. 
    The following applies to day care centers: 
(1)  The site shall have loading and drop-off points designed to avoid interfering with traffic and pedestrian movements. 
(2)  Outdoor play areas shall be located and designed in a manner which mitigates visual and noise impacts of adjoining residential areas. 
(3)  Each center shall obtain applicable state, county and city licenses. 
(4)  Day care facilities in the IOP district shall be subject to a maximum lot coverage of 65 percent. 
(5)  Day care facilities shall submit average annual test results for radon gas. Results shall be submitted annually on the anniversary of the day of the issuance of the original occupancy permit. Day care facilities shall comply with all applicable state and federal requirements pertaining to testing and requiring mitigation techniques. 
(6)  Prior to issuance of a building permit, day care facilities shall conduct tests of existing noise conditions and submit test results to the city for review. In order for a building permit to be issued, existing conditions shall comply with Minnesota Rules 7010. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-292. - Drive-through facilities. 
    Drive-through facilities for any use shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  They shall not be located adjacent to any residential lot lines. 
(2)  They shall be provided with a suitable visual screen from adjacent properties. 
(3)  Stacking shall be provided within applicable parking lot setbacks. 
(4)  Stacking shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Banks: Five vehicles (100 feet); 
b.  Coffee shops: 13 vehicles (260 feet); 
c.  Fast-food restaurant: 12 vehicles (240 feet); 
d.  Pharmacy: Four vehicles (80 feet); 
e.  Car washes: Four vehicles (80 feet); 
f.  Other uses: Four vehicles (80 feet). 
(5)  The city may require a vehicle stacking study to determine whether more or less stacking shall be required for a particular use. 
(6)  Stacking areas shall not interfere with vehicular circulation in the parking lot, nor encroach into any required drive aisles. 
(7)  Speaker or intercom system shall not be audible at the property line. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 18, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 20-293. - Emission control testing stations. 
    Authorized to undertake emissions and/or safety monitoring required by the State of Minnesota provided that: 
(1)  The operation is under contract agreement with the State of Minnesota to provide these services. 
(2)  No repairs are performed on the site. 
(3)  No gas or parts are sold on the site. 
(4)  No outdoor storage of vehicles or related materials. 
(5)  No diesel testing to be allowed at the site. 
(6)  State and federal air and noise standards shall be complied with. If problems are found to exist, the property owner shall be required to pay for any testing deemed to be required by the city to clarify the situation. An update on compliance shall be provided by the applicant after six months of operation. 
(7)  All vehicle stacking shall be provided on-site in designated lanes. Vehicle stacking in fire lanes, parking areas and other drives shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-294. - Equipment rental. 
(a)  Equipment storage must be screened or enclosed. Screening shall comply with buffer yard D and F4 fencing as specified in this chapter. 
(b)  No outdoor loudspeaker system shall be permitted. 
(c)  Equipment may be display during business hours only. 
(d)  Displays may not occupy required parking spaces. 
(e)  Displays may be located in designated display areas approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-295. - Farmer's market. 
(a)  Trash receptacles and screened dumpsters must be provided. Large dumpsters must be picked up the day following the close of the farmers market, a minimum of once per week. 
(b)  The site shall be maintained and cleaned up on a nightly basis to eliminate debris or rodent activity. 
(c)  The site must be accessible via a collector or an arterial roadway. 
(d)  Sales hours shall be between sunrise and sunset. 
(e)  A parking plan proportionate to the number of vendors shall be submitted for city review and approval. 
(f)  Restroom facilities shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-296. - Fast-food restaurants. 
    The following applies to fast-food restaurants: 
(1)  The site shall be located only on sites having direct access to minor arterial streets, collectors or service roads. 
(2)  No outside speaker systems shall be allowed without approval from the city council. 
(3)  Stacking areas for drive-through windows, if present, shall conform to appropriate parking setbacks. 
(4)  Building shall be set back at least 100 feet and screened from any adjacent property designated for residential use in the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 628, § 19, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 20-297. - Food processing. 
(1)  The site must have access via a collector or arterial roadway. 
(2)  All loading docks must be screened with berming, landscaping or other structures. 
(3)  Truck parking is permitted on-site only in designated truck parking areas, parking must be screened. 
(4)  Compliance plan must be submitted to the city including: 
a.  An inventory of potential or identified odor emission point sources associated with the industry or source. 
b.  An engineering quality plan detailing best available control technologies and appurtenances designed to eliminate or achieve the maximum reduction of odor pollution from an emission point source inclusive of, but not necessarily limited to, certain processes, procedures, or operating methods intended to mitigate or control odor pollution. 
c.  A detailed explanation of the specifications and operating parameters of the best available control technologies, monitoring instrumentation and equipment, and processes and procedures intended for the mitigation or control of odor pollution. 
d.  A specification of the documentation that will be made available for the city's review which will verify the data produced by the monitoring equipment, and which will verify that processes and procedures are conducted consistent with the specifications in the facility's odor control study and plan. 
e.  An approved schedule which states, in a time certain manner, the implementation and installation of the best available control technology, processes, procedures, operating methods, and monitoring instrumentation designed to mitigate or control odors at the facility inclusive of an approved completion date. 
f.  An acknowledgment of the authority of the city and its agents to enter into the facility or its property in order to investigate complaints and to verify the facility's adherence to the compliance plan. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-298. - Garden center. 
(1)  Storage of equipment and landscaping materials shall comply with a minimum F3 fence; as specified in this chapter. 
(2)  A loudspeaker system is prohibited. 
(3)  Blower, heating system for the nursery must be shielded or muffled from public view and audibility. 
(4)  All chemicals must be stored/used as specified by OSHA regulations. 
(5)  Accessory displays may not occupy more than 20 percent of the site; this includes but is not limited to plant material and gazebos. 
(6)  Displays may not occupy required parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-298.5. - Gun range, indoor. 
(1)  The gun range shall not be located on any lot adjacent to an existing residential district. 
(2)  The gun range when established shall not be located within 1,000 lineal feet, measured from building to building, of an establishment licensed to dispense intoxicating or nonintoxicating liquor. Indoor gun ranges shall not sell or dispense intoxicating liquors, nor shall they be in a building which contains a business that sells or dispenses nonintoxicating or intoxicating liquors. 
(3)  The use, occupancy and construction of the building shall conform to the Minnesota State Building Code. 
(4)  The building and method of operation shall comply with M.S. ch. 87A. 
(5)  The building and method of operation shall conform to the applicable Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, Environmental Protection Agency, and OSHA standards for indoor ventilation, emission into the atmosphere, indoor sound levels, lead containment and outside noise standards. 
(6)  The design and construction of the gun range shall completely confine all ammunition rounds within the building and in a controlled manner. The design and construction of the gun range shall be certified by a registered engineer in the State of Minnesota. The certified plans shall include the specifications and construction of the bullet trap(s), ceilings, exterior and interior walls and floors. The certified plans shall state what type and caliber of ammunition the range is designed to totally confine. 
(7)  No ammunition shall be used in the range that exceeds the certified design and construction specifications of the gun range. 
(8)  Firearms shall not be stored on the premises when the range is closed for business, unless they are stored in an acceptable gun safe or other secure locking device. 
(9)  On-site supervision shall be supplied at all times by an adult who is an experienced range operator. The range operator shall be responsible for the conduct of their place of business and the conditions of safety and order in the place of business and on the premises. 
(10)  Each range shall have a clear and concise safety plan. The plan must be signed, published, and reviewed at specific intervals and distributed to all range users to study and use. 
(11)  The range operator shall provide and maintain proof of liability insurance which shall require the insurer notify the city manager in writing of cancellation of the policy, a change in the limit of the policy, and/or a change in policy ownership. Said policy shall be available for inspection by the city manager and/or his/her assigns at all times. 
(12)  On-site instruction shall be given only by firearms instructors certified within the prior five years by an organization or government entity that has been approved by the Minnesota Department of Public Safety. Current certificates for firearms instructors shall be on display in a conspicuous location in the premises and available for public inspection. 
(13)  An outside security plan for the general grounds shall be submitted to the city for review and approval. 
(14)  The transport of firearms on the premises, to the premises, and from the premises shall conform to state law. 
(15)  Minors shall not be allowed in the range unless accompanied by an adult at all times. This provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit minors from participating in a firearm safety class which is supervised by an adult instructor. 
(16)  In the industrial office park district, retail sales and rental shall be limited to gun-related material and equipment with a maximum display area of 20 percent of the floor area. 
(17)  In multi-tenant buildings, the gun range shall be soundproofed to prevent the sound from being heard by persons in adjoining units. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 2, 8-22-11) 
Sec. 20-299. - Home improvement trade. 
    All equipment and material shall be stored in a screened or enclosed area. Screening shall comply with buffer yard D and F4 fencing as specified in this chapter. 
(1)  A loudspeaker system is prohibited. 
(2)  A list of chemicals and pollutants used on site must be provided as part of the site plan review. 
(3)  All chemicals shall be stored/used as specified by federal, state, and local regulations. 
(4)  Outdoor assembly and/or building construction are prohibited on-site. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-300. - Hotel. 
(1)  The site must be accessed via a collector or an arterial roadway. 
(2)  The site shall have a covered entrance and a separated drop off area, which may not block the drive isle. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-301. - Lumber yard. 
(1)  Material and supply storage must be screened or enclosed. Screening shall comply with buffer yard D and F4 fencing as specified in this chapter. 
(2)  A loudspeaker system is prohibited. 
(3)  The site must be accessible via a collector or arterial roadway. 
(4)  All waste material shall be disposed of by owner or lessee. 
(5)  Recycling of materials must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-302. - Major auto repair and body shops. 
(1)  No unlicensed or inoperable vehicles shall be stored on-premises except in appropriately designed and screened storage areas. 
(2)  All repair, assembly, disassembly and maintenance of vehicles shall occur within closed building except minor maintenance including, but not limited to, tire inflation, adding oil and wiper replacement. 
(3)  No public address system. 
(4)  No sales, storage or display of used automobiles or other vehicles such as motorcycles, snowmobiles, or all-terrain vehicles. 
(5)  Disposal of vehicle fluids shall comply with PCA regulations. 
(6)  Facilities for the collection of waste oil must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-303. - Mineral extraction. 
(1)  Hours shall be 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Saturday and no hours of operation on Sundays or holidays. 
(2)  A restoration plan shall be provided as part of the site plan review process. 
(3)  Stormwater management plans shall be provided as part of the site plan review process. Plans shall be submitted with site plan prior to council meeting. 
(4)  The site must be accessible via an arterial or collector roadway. 
(5)  The use of explosives shall comply with state and federal regulations. Property owners within 1,000 feet of the site boundary shall be notified at least 48 hours prior to the use of explosives. 
(6)  Road restoration security deposit must be submitted to the city. 
(7)  Applicant shall submit a dust control plan. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-304. - Motel. 
(1)  Parking shall be located in the interior/behind building. 
(2)  Access is limited by means of a collector or arterial roadway. 
(3)  Height of structure shall be limited two stories/30 feet. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-305. - Motor freight terminal. 
(1)  Access shall be limited to a collector or arterial roadway. 
(2)  Trailer storage shall be screened; screening shall comply with buffer yard D and F4 fencing as specified in this chapter. 
(3)  Loading docks must be located away from or screened from public view. 
(4)  Sufficient parking shall be provided on-site to prevent on-street parking of trucks. 
(5)  Trailer parking shall be provided on-site. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-306. - Motor fuel and service stations. 
    The following applies to motor fuel stations: 
(1)  No unlicensed or inoperable vehicles shall be stored on premises except in appropriately designed and screened storage areas. 
(2)  All repair, assembly, disassembly and maintenance of vehicles shall occur within a closed building except minor maintenance including, but not limited to, tire inflation, adding oil and wiper replacement. 
(3)  No public address system shall be audible from any residential parcel. 
(4)  Stacking areas deemed to be appropriate by the city shall meet parking setback requirements. 
(5)  No sales, storage or display of used automobiles or other vehicles such as motorcycles, snowmobiles, or all-terrain vehicles shall be permitted. 
(6)  Disposal of waste oil shall comply with Minnesota Pollution Control Agency regulations. Facilities for the collection of waste oil must be provided. 
(7)  Gas pumps and/or storage tank vent pipes shall not be located within 100 feet of any parcel zoned or guided for residential use. 
(8)  A minimum separation of 250 feet is required between the nearest gas pumps on separate parcels. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-307. - Research lab. 
(1)  All chemicals and pollutants and waste must be stored, used and disposed of according to OSHA and Hazmat regulations and standards. 
(2)  The building must be secure from persons other than laboratory personnel. 
(3)  No outdoor experiments that cause hazards or excessive noise or odors shall be permitted on-site. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-308. - Screened outdoor storage. 
    The following applies to screened outdoor storage: 
(1)  All outdoor storage must be completely screened with 100 percent opaque fence or landscaped screen. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-309. - Small vehicle sales. 
(1)  No inoperable vehicles shall be stored on-premises except in appropriately designed and screened storage areas. 
(2)  Display during business hours only. 
(3)  Displays must be in designated display areas, may not occupy required parking spaces. 
(4)  All repair, assembly, disassembly and maintenance of vehicles shall occur within a building. 
(5)  No outside speaker systems shall be allowed without approval from the city council. 
(6)  Disposal of vehicle fluids shall comply with PCA regulations. Facilities for the collection of waste oil must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-310. - Supermarket. 
(1)  Delivery routes are limited to collector or arterial roadways and prohibited through residential districts. 
(2)  Loading docks must be screened from public view. 
(3)  Waste compaction equipment shall be enclosed within a building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-311. - Temporary classroom structures. 
(a)  All structures must be removed before or on permitted ending date. 
(b)  Design standards shall include skirting along the bottom of the structure. 
(c)  Landscaping must be provided around structure. 
(d)  Pedestrian access shall be provided including access in conjunction with the principle structure. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 27, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-312. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 511, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2010, amended and relocated the provisions of § 20-312, which was entitled, "Temporary outdoor sales". See § 20-964 for similar provisions. 
Sec. 20-313. - Electrical distribution and underground electric distribution substations. 
    Electrical distribution and underground electric distribution substations are subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The distribution and underground electric distribution substations must be served by a collector or major arterial street as designated in the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The distribution and underground electric distribution substations will not have sanitary facilities and will not be used for habitation. 
(3)  The distribution and underground electric distribution substations will be located on at least five acres of property. 
(4)  A security fence as specified in the National Electric Safety Code shall surround the distribution and underground electric distribution substations. 
(5)  A landscaping plan shall be submitted for city approval. 
(6)  Distribution and underground electric distribution substations shall be a minimum of 500 feet from single-family residences. 
(7)  A summary of current research regarding the health effects of EMF levels, conducted by health and scientific professionals, including those who do and do not receive utility sponsorship. 
(8)  Provide EMF levels under maximum and average anticipated loading at the base of the utility poles, underneath the wires between the poles, at ground level above underground wires, at the edge of the property line, at the edge of the closest habitable building, and at the point above ground where there would be the greatest EMF level. 
(9)  Reasonable and prudent measures to minimize EMF levels along all alternative electric line routes. 
(10)  Depictions of the views of the proposed facility, if above ground, from at least two directions selected by city staff. 
(11)  The site is guided office/industrial on the City of Chanhassen Land Use Plan. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 3, 3-14-05) 
Sec. 20-314. - Brewery operated in conjunction with a taproom, producing more than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor per year. 
    The following applies to all breweries operated in conjunction with a taproom: 
(1)  The brewery shall not produce more than 5,000 barrels of malt liquor per year, unless they are located in an area zoned Industrial Office Park (IOP), in which case the brewery shall not produce more than 20,000 barrels of malt liquor per year. 
(2)  An outdoor seating area is permitted provided it has an enclosure and the enclosure is not interrupted; access to the seating area must be through the principle building; its hours of operation shall be no later than 10:00 p.m. Sunday-Thursday and 12:00 a.m. Friday - Saturday; and the outdoor seating area must be located and designed so as not to interfere with pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
(3)  Shipping and receiving areas shall be located behind the facility or otherwise screened from view. 
(4)  Compliance plan must be submitted to the city including: 
a.  An inventory of potential or identified odor emission point sources associated with the industry or source. 
b.  An engineering quality plan detailing best available control technologies and appurtenances designed to eliminate or achieve the maximum reduction of odor pollution from an emission point source inclusive of, but not necessarily limited to certain processes, procedures, or operating methods intended to mitigate or control odor pollution. 
c.  A detailed explanation of the specifications and operating parameters of the best available control technologies, monitoring instrumentation and equipment, and processes and procedures intended for the mitigation or control of odor pollution. 
d.  A specification of the documentation that will be made available for the city's review which will verify the data produced by the monitoring equipment, and which will verify that processes and procedures are conducted consistent with the specifications in the facility's odor control study and plan. 
e.  An approved schedule which states, in a time certain manner, the implementation and installation of the best available control technology, processes, procedures, operating methods, and monitoring instrumentation designed to mitigate or control odors at the facility inclusive of an approved completion date. 
f.  An acknowledgment of the authority of the city and its agents to enter into the facility or its property in order to investigate complaints and to verify the facility's adherence to the compliance plan. 
(Ord. No. 632, § 6, 6-11-18) 
Secs. 20-315-20-319. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - INTERIM USE PERMITS 

Sec. 20-320. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses is: 
(1)  To allow a use for a brief period of time until a permanent location is obtained or while the permanent location is under construction; and 
(2)  To allow a use that is presently acceptable but that with anticipated development will not be acceptable in the future. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 28, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-321. - Application, public hearing, notice and procedure. 
(a)  The application, public hearing, public notice and procedure requirements for interim use permits shall be the same as those for amendment as provided in article II, division 2, except that the permit shall be issued after an affirmative vote of a majority of the entire council. Although specific submissions required to complete an application for an interim use permit may vary with the specific use and the district in which it is located, all applications for such permits must include at minimum a site plan that clearly illustrates the following: Proposed land use, building and functions, circulation and parking areas, planting areas and treatment, sign locations and type, lighting, the relationship of the proposed project to neighboring uses, environmental impacts and demand for municipal services. 
(b)  Prior to filing an application for an interim use, the applicant shall attend a conference with city staff. The primary purpose of the conference shall be to provide the applicant with an opportunity to gather information and obtain guidance on the general merits of the proposal and its conformity to the provisions of the comprehensive plan and the City Code before incurring substantial expense. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 28, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 474, § 6, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 20-322. - General issuance standards. 
    The planning commission shall recommend an interim use permit and the council shall issue interim permits only if it finds, based on the proposed location, that: 
(1)  The use meets the standards of a conditional use permit set forth in section 20-232 of the City Code. 
(2)  The use conforms to the zoning regulations. 
(3)  The use is allowed as an interim use in the zoning district. 
(4)  The date of event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty. 
(5)  The use will not impose additional costs on the public if it is necessary for the public to take the property in the future. 
(6)  The user agrees to any conditions that the city council deems appropriate for permission of the use. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 28, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-323. - Termination. 
    An interim use permit shall terminate on the happening of any of the following events, whichever first occurs: 
(1)  The date stated in the permit; 
(2)  Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was issued; 
(3)  Upon change in the city's zoning regulations which renders the use nonconforming; 
(4)  Upon the subdivision of the property or the alteration of the lot lines of the property. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 28, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 477, § 2, 1-26-09) 
Secs. 20-324, 20-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 636, § 2, adopted Dec. 10, 2018, amended art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. V, §§ 20-326-20-380, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. No. 80, Art. V, adopted Dec. 15, 1986; and Ord. No. 377, §§ 29, and 31-34, adopted May 24, 2004. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-326. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact and purpose. 
(a)  Statutory authorization: The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in M.S. Ch. 103F and Ch. 462, delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of Chanhassen, Minnesota, does ordain as follows. 
(b)  Purpose: 
(1)  This article regulates development in the flood hazard areas of the City of Chanhassen. These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation, which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by minimizing these losses and disruptions. 
(2)  National Flood Insurance Program compliance. This article is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59 - 78, as amended, so as to maintain the community's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(3)  This article is also intended to preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic development. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-327. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which ordinance applies: This article applies to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Chanhassen within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Floodplain Districts. The boundaries of these districts are determined by scaling distances on the flood insurance rate map, or as modified in accordance with section 20-328. 
(1)  The Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Floodplain Districts are overlay districts that are superimposed on all existing zoning districts. The standards imposed in the overlay districts are in addition to any other requirements in this article. In case of a conflict, the more restrictive standards will apply. 
(2)  Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated on the official floodplain maps and actual field conditions, the flood elevations shall be the governing factor in locating the regulatory floodplain limits. 
(3)  Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the planning commission and to submit technical evidence. 
(b)  Incorporation of maps by reference: The following maps together with all attached material are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the official zoning map and this article. The attached material includes the Flood Insurance Study for Carver County, Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas, dated December 21, 2018, the Flood Insurance Study for Hennepin County, Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas, dated November 4, 2016, the Carver County Flood Insurance Rate map panels numbered 27019C0113D, 27019C0114D, 27019C0118D, 27019C0119D, 27019C0207D, 27019C0226D, 27019C0227D, 27019C0229D, 27019C0231D, 27019C0232D, 27019C0233D, 27019C0234D, 27019C0237D, 27019C0241D, and 27019C0242D dated December 21, 2018, and Hennepin County Flood Insurance Rate Map panel number 27053C0410F, dated November 4, 2016 all prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. These materials are on file with the city. 
(c)  Flood studies performed by local Watershed Districts and Water Management Districts shall be adopted by reference as part of the city's local wastewater management plan. 
(d)  Abrogation and greater restrictions: It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or other private agreements. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. 
(e)  Warning and disclaimer of liability: This article does not imply that areas outside the Floodplain Districts or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article does not create liability on the part of the City of Chanhassen or its officers or employees for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(f)  Severability: If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the remainder of this article shall not be affected and shall remain in full force. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-328. - Establishment of Floodplain Districts. 
(a)  Districts: 
(1)  Floodway District. The Floodway District includes those areas within Zone AE delineated within floodway areas as shown on the flood insurance rate maps adopted in subsection 20-327(b). 
(2)  Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District includes areas within Zones AE on the flood insurance rate map adopted in subsection 20-327(b), but located outside of the floodway. 
(3)  General Floodplain District. The General Floodplain District includes those areas within Zones A and AE (that do not have a floodway delineated) as shown on the flood insurance rate maps adopted in subsection 20-327(b). 
(b)  Applicability: Where Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts are delineated on the floodplain maps, the standards in divisions 2 or 3 will apply, depending on the location of a property. Locations where Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts are not delineated on the floodplain maps are considered to fall within the General Floodplain District. Within the General Floodplain District, the Floodway District standards in division 2 apply, unless the floodway boundary is determined, according to the process outlined in section 20-378. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-329. - Requirements for all Floodplain Districts. 
(a)  Minimum development standards. All new construction and substantial improvements must be: 
(1)  Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)  Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)  Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, ductwork, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(b)  Flood capacity. Floodplain developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse or drainage system. 
(c)  The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
(d)  Critical facilities are to be located, so that the lowest floor is not less than three feet above the regional flood elevation, or the 500-year flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Secs. 20-330-20-347. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW) 

Sec. 20-348. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses: The following uses, subject to the standards set forth in subsection 20-348(b), are permitted uses if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district or any applicable overlay district: 
(1)  Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, farm fences, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)  Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport landing strips. 
(3)  Open space uses, including but not limited to, private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, hunting and fishing areas, and single or multiple purpose recreational trails. 
(4)  Residential yards, lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas. 
(5)  Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and pipelines, provided that the department of natural resources' area hydrologist is notified at least ten days prior to issuance of any permit. 
(b)  Standards for floodway permitted uses: 
(1)  The use must have a low flood damage potential. 
(2)  The use must not involve structures or obstruct flood flows. The use must not cause any increase in flood damages, nor any increase in flood elevations in areas where a floodway has been established, as certified by a registered professional engineer. 
(3)  Any facility that will be used by employees or the general public must be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of the regional (one percent chance) flood. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Secs. 20-349-20-350. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-351. - Conditional use permits. 
    The following open space uses require accessory structures or fill or storage of materials or equipment. These uses may be permitted in the Floodway District only after the issuance of a conditional use permit as provided in section 20-387: 
(1)  Structures accessory to primary uses listed in subsections 20-348(a)(1)-(3), provided that: 
a.  Structures are not intended for human habitation. 
b.  Structures will have a low flood damage potential. 
c.  Structures will be constructed and placed so as to offer a minimal obstruction to the flow of floodwaters. 
d.  Structures must be elevated on fill, open sided or structurally dry floodproofed and watertight to the regulatory flood protection elevation. Certifications consistent with subsection 20-385(3) shall be required. 
e.  Structures will not cause any increase in flood damages, nor any increase in flood elevations in areas where a floodway has been established, as certified by a registered professional engineer. 
(2)  Placement of fill, provided: 
a.  Any fill deposited in the floodway shall be no more than the minimum necessary for use. Generally, fill shall be limited to that needed to grade or landscape for that use and shall not in any way obstruct the flow of floodwaters, cause an increase in flood damages, or increase flood elevations in areas where a floodway has been established, as certified by a registered professional engineer. 
b.  Spoil from dredging or sand and gravel operations shall not be deposited in the floodway unless it can be done in accordance with paragraph (2)a, above. 
c.  Fill, dredge spoil, and other similar materials deposited or stored in the floodplain must be protected from erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method. Permanent sand and gravel operations and similar uses must be covered by a long-term site development plan. 
(3)  Storage of materials and equipment, provided: 
a.  The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. 
b.  Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed only be allowed if the City of Chanhassen has approved a plan that assures removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available. 
c.  Storage of other materials or equipment must not cause any increase in flood damages, nor any increase in flood elevations in areas where a floodway has been established, as certified by a registered professional engineer. 
(4)  A levee, dike or floodwall, provided: 
a.  It must not cause an increase to the one percent chance or regional flood. The technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream. 
b.  It must not cause any increase in flood damages, nor any increase in flood elevations in areas where a floodway has been established, as certified by a registered professional engineer. 
(5)  Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters are subject to the provisions of M.S. § 103G.245. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Secs. 20-352-20-365. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF) 

Sec. 20-366. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses are those uses of land or structures allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) that comply with the standards in section 20-367. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-367. - Standards for flood fringe permitted uses. 
(a)  All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so that the lowest floor, as defined, is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures must be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation and the fill must extend at the same elevation at least 15 feet beyond the outside limits of the structure. Elevations must be certified by a registered professional engineer, land surveyor or other qualified person designated by the community. 
(b)  Accessory structures. As an alternative to the fill requirements of subsection 20-367(a), structures accessory to the uses identified in section 20-366 may be designed to accommodate the inundation of floodwaters, meeting the following provisions, as appropriate: 
(1)  The accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment and satisfies the development requirements in section 20-329. 
(2)  Any enclosed accessory structure shall not exceed 576 square feet in size, and only be used for parking and storage. Any such structure shall be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer, or be designed in accordance with the following floodproofing standards: 
a.  To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there shall be a minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. The openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, have a net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, and shall allow automatic entry and exit of floodwaters without human intervention. 
(3)  All service utilities, including ductwork, must be elevated or water-tight to prevent infiltration of floodwaters. 
(4)  All fill must be properly compacted and the slopes must be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method. 
(5)  All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation, or must have a flood warning/emergency evacuation plan acceptable to the City of Chanhassen. 
(6)  Accessory uses such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots may be at an elevation lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. However, any facilities used by employees or the general public must be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of the regional (one percent chance) flood. 
(7)  Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles must meet the standards of division 7 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-368. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses may be permitted in the Flood Fringe District only after the issuance of a conditional use permit as provided in section 20-387: 
(1)  The placement of floodproofed nonresidential basements below the regulatory flood protection elevation, provided: 
a.  The standards for permitted uses in the flood fringe listed in section 20-367 are met. 
b.  All areas of nonresidential structures, including basements to be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation, must be structurally dry floodproofed, which requires making the structure watertight with the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A floodproofing certification consistent with subsection 20-385(3) shall be required. 
c.  Residential basements are not allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Secs. 20-369-20-376. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GF) 

Sec. 20-377. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The uses listed in section 20-348 of this article pertaining to Floodway District permitted uses, are permitted uses. 
(b)  All other uses are subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation criteria specified in section 20-378. Division 2 of this article applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the Floodway District. Division 3 of this article applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the Flood Fringe District. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-378. - Procedures for determining floodway boundaries and regional flood elevations. 
(a)  Detailed study. Developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, or as requested by the zoning administrator, shall be subject to a detailed study to determine the regulatory flood protection elevation and the limits of the Floodway District. The determination of the floodway and flood fringe must be consistent with accepted hydrological and hydraulic engineering standards, and must include the following components, as applicable: 
(1)  Estimate the peak discharge of the regional (one percent chance) flood. 
(2)  Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas. 
(3)  Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional flood without increasing flood stages more than one-half foot. A lesser stage increase than 0.5 foot is required if, as a result of the stage increase, increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach must be assumed in computing floodway boundaries, unless development or geographic features warrant other analysis, as approved by the department of natural resources. 
(b)  Alternative methods. Provided no detailed study is available, an applicant must identify a base flood elevation, at minimum, to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The applicant shall obtain and utilize best available data to determine the regional flood elevation and floodway boundaries from a state, federal, or other source. If no such data exists, the applicant may determine the base flood elevation and floodway limits through other accepted engineering practices. Any such method shall assume a 0.5 foot stage increase to accommodate for future floodway determination. 
(c)  The zoning administrator will review the submitted information and assess the technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District boundary. The assessment must include the cumulative effects of previous floodway encroachments. The zoning administrator may seek technical assistance from an engineer or other expert person or agency, including the department of natural resources. Based on this assessment, the zoning administrator may approve or deny the application. 
(d)  Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries have been determined, the zoning administrator must process the permit application consistent with the applicable provisions of division 2 and division 3 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
DIVISION 5. - SUBDIVISIONS WITHIN THE FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS 

Sec. 20-379. - Subdivisions. 
    In addition to the standards contained in chapter 18, subdivision of lands within the Floodplain Districts must meet the standards enumerated in this section. Manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are considered subdivisions under this division. 
(1)  All lots within the Floodplain Districts must be able to contain a building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(2)  All subdivisions must have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation, unless a flood warning emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the regional (one percent chance) flood has been approved by the City of Chanhassen. The plan must be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual, and must demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation. 
(3)  For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads must be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents. 
(4)  In the General Floodplain District, applicants must provide the information required in division 4 of this article to determine the regional flood elevation, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory flood protection elevation for the subdivision site. 
(5)  Subdivision proposals must be reviewed to assure that: 
a.  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood hazard. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
DIVISION 6. - UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS, AND BRIDGES 

Sec. 20-380. - Public utilities. 
    Public utilities: All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain must be floodproofed in accordance with the state building code or elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-381. - Public transportation facilities. 
    Public transportation facilities: Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the floodplain must comply with divisions 2 and 3 of this article. These transportation facilities must be elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation where failure or interruption of these facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-382. - On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems. 
    On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems: Where public utilities are not provided: 
(1)  On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and are subject to the provisions in Minnesota Rules Chapter 4725.4350, as amended; and 
(2)  New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, they must not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding, and are subject to the provisions in Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080.2270, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
DIVISION 7. - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 

Sec 20-383. - Manufactured homes. 
    Manufactured homes: Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks are subject to applicable standards for each Floodplain District. In addition: 
(1)  New and replacement manufactured homes must be elevated in compliance with division 3 of this article and must be securely anchored to a system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(2)  New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home parks must meet the appropriate standards for subdivisions in division 5 of this article. New or replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured home parks must meet the vehicular access requirements for subdivisions in subsection 20-379(2) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-384. - Recreational vehicles. 
    Recreational vehicles: New recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and expansions to existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are prohibited in any Floodplain District. Recreational vehicles placed in existing recreational vehicle parks, campgrounds or lots of record in the floodplain must either: 
(1)  Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in subsection 20-383(1); or 
(2)  Be travel ready, meeting the following criteria: 
a.  The vehicle must have a current license required for highway use. 
b.  The vehicle must be highway ready, meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks. 
c.  No permanent structural type additions may be attached to the vehicle. 
d.  Accessory structures may be permitted in the Flood Fringe District, provided that they constitute a minimal investment, do not hinder the removal of the vehicle should flooding occur, and meet the standards outlined in subsections 20-329(a) and 20-367(b). 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
DIVISION 8. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec 20-385. - Permits. 
    Unless otherwise stated the permit requirements within the Floodplain Districts shall be identical to those contained in chapter 7 and chapter 20. Additional permit requirements within the Floodplain Districts shall be as follows: 
(1)  Show location of fill or storage of materials in relation to the stream channel. 
(2)  Provide copies of any required municipal, county, state or federal permits or approvals. 
(3)  Certification. The applicant is required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this article. Floodproofing measures must be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect as being in compliance with applicable floodproofing standards in in the state building code. Accessory structures designed in accordance with subsection 20-367(b) of this article are exempt from certification, provided sufficient assurances are documented. Any development in established floodways must not cause any increase in flood elevations or damages, as certified by a registered professional engineer. 
(4)  Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered, or nonconforming use. No building, land or structure may be occupied or used in any manner until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the zoning administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this article. 
(5)  Recordkeeping of certifications and as-built documentation. The zoning administrator must maintain records in perpetuity documenting: 
a.  All certifications referenced in subsection (3) of this section, as applicable. 
b.  Elevations complying with subsection 20-367(a) of this article. The zoning administrator must also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures and alterations to structures are constructed or floodproofed. 
(6)  Notifications for watercourse alterations. Before authorizing any alteration or relocation of a river or stream, the zoning administrator must notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in public waters pursuant to M.S. § 103G.245, this will suffice as adequate notice. A copy of the notification must also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(7)  Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease base flood elevations. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the zoning administrator must notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of the relevant technical or scientific data. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-386. - Variances. 
    Unless otherwise stated a variance request from the provisions of this article will be processed and reviewed in accordance with applicable state statutes and chapter 20, article II of the City Code. Additional variance requirements within the Floodplain Districts shall be as follows: 
(1)  Adherence to state floodplain management standards. A variance must not allow a use that is not allowed in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than those required by state law. 
(2)  Additional variance criteria. The following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied: 
a.  Variances must not be issued by a community within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
b.  Variances may only be issued by a community upon: (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(3)  Flood insurance notice. The zoning administrator must notify the applicant for a variance that: 1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and 2) such construction below the base or regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification must be maintained with a record of all variance actions. 
(4)  General considerations. The community may consider the following factors in granting variances and imposing conditions on variances and conditional uses in floodplains: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
b.  The availability of viable alternative locations for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding. 
c.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site. 
(5)  Submittal of hearing notices to the department of natural resources (DNR). The zoning administrator must submit hearing notices for proposed variances to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten days' notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist. 
(6)  Submittal of final decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions granting variances must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist. 
(7)  Recordkeeping. The zoning administrator must maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and must report such variances in an annual or biennial report to the administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program, when requested by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-387. - Conditional uses. 
    Unless otherwise stated an application for a conditional use permit under the provisions of this article will be processed and reviewed in accordance with chapter 20, article IV of the City Code. Additional requirements for conditional uses within the Floodplain Districts shall be as follows: 
(1)  Conditions attached to conditional use permits. In addition to the standards identified in sections 20-351 and 20-368, the City of Chanhassen may attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this article. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation. 
b.  Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions. 
c.  Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures. 
(2)  Submittal of hearing notices to the department of natural resources (DNR). The zoning administrator must submit hearing notices for proposed conditional uses to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten days' notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist. 
(3)  Submittal of final decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions granting conditional uses must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-388. - Nonconformities. 
    Continuance of nonconformities: A use, structure, or occupancy of land which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this article but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may be continued subject to the following conditions. Historic structures, are subject to the provisions of this section. 
(1)  A nonconforming use, structure, or occupancy must not be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its flood damage potential or degree of obstruction to flood flows except as provided in subsection (2) below. Expansion or enlargement of uses, structures or occupancies within the Floodway District is prohibited. 
(2)  Any addition or structural alteration to a nonconforming structure or nonconforming use that would result in increasing its flood damage potential must be protected to the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or floodproofing techniques (i.e., FP1 thru FP4 floodproofing classifications) allowable in the state building code, except as further restricted in subsection (4) below. 
(3)  If any nonconforming use, or any use of a nonconforming structure, is discontinued for more than one year, any future use of the premises must conform to this article. 
(4)  If any structure experiences a substantial improvement as defined in this article, then the entire structure must meet the standards of division 2 or division 3 of this article for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively. 
(5)  If any nonconformity is substantially damaged, as defined in this article, it may not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this article. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or new structures in division 2 or division 3 will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts, respectively. 
(6)  If any nonconforming use or structure experiences a repetitive loss, it must not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-389. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violation constitutes a misdemeanor: Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) constitute a misdemeanor and will be punishable as defined by law. 
(b)  Other lawful action: Nothing in this article restricts the City of Chanhassen from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the zoning administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that lapses will constitute an additional violation of this article and will be prosecuted accordingly. 
(c)  Enforcement: Violations of the provisions of this article will be investigated and resolved in accordance with the provisions of section 20-26 of the zoning ordinance/code. In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the zoning administrator and city council may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The City of Chanhassen must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-390. - Amendments. 
(a)  Floodplain designation-Restrictions on removal. The floodplain designation on the official zoning map must not be removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the department of natural resources (DNR) if it is determined that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use. 
(b)  Amendments require DNR approval. All amendments to this article must be submitted to and approved by the department of natural resources (DNR) prior to adoption. 
(c)  Map revisions require ordinance amendments. The Floodplain District regulations must be amended to incorporate any revisions by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to the floodplain maps adopted in subsection 20-327(b) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Secs. 20-391-20-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WETLAND PROTECTION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 449, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 14, 2007, repealed the former Art. VI., §§ 20-401-20-418, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for full derivation. 

Sec. 20-401. - Findings intent; rules adopted by reference. 
(a)  Wetlands help maintain water quality, serve to reduce flooding and erosion, act as sources of food and habitat for a variety of fish and wildlife, and are an integral part of the community's natural landscape. Wetlands provide the aesthetic benefits of open space and can be used to provide a natural separation of land uses. It is the intent of this article to establish a policy of sound stewardship through coordination of regulations that conserve, protect, enhance, and result in the no net loss of these environmentally sensitive resources. In addition, it is the intent of the city to promote the restoration of degraded wetlands. 
(b)  The intent of this article is to avoid alteration and destruction of wetlands. When this is not feasible, mitigation must be provided to recreate the function and value of the lost or altered wetlands. 
(c)  This article is adopted in part to implement the Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, as amended (M.S. § 103F.612 et seq.), and the accompanying rules of the Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources (Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420, as amended). 
(d)  This article incorporates by reference the act and the rules. Terms used in this article which are defined in the act or the rules have the meanings given there. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-402. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to assure the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents through preservation and conservation of wetlands and sound management of development by: 
(1)  Conducting an inventory and classification of all wetlands within the city and maintaining a comprehensive set of official city maps depicting the approximate location and extent of wetlands. 
(2)  Establishing wetland regulations that are coordinated with water quantity and water quality goals and policies of the Chanhassen Surface Water Management Plan. 
(3)  Requiring sound management practices that will protect, conserve, maintain, enhance and improve the functions and values of wetlands within the community. 
(4)  Requiring measures designed to maintain and improve water quality in streams and lakes. 
(5)  Protecting and enhancing the scenic value of wetlands. 
(6)  Restricting, controlling and mitigating the harmful effects of development on wetlands. 
(7)  Allowing only development that is planned to be compatible with wetland protection and enhancement. 
(8)  Providing standards for the alteration of wetlands when alteration is allowed. 
(9)  Educating and informing the public about the numerous benefits and features of wetlands and the impacts of urbanization. 
(10)  Obtaining protective easements over or acquiring fee title to wetlands as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-403. - No net loss. 
(a)  To achieve no net loss of wetland, except as provided under sections 20-417 and 20-418 of this article or authorized by a wetland alteration permit issued by the city, a person may not drain, grade, excavate, fill, burn, remove healthy native vegetation, or otherwise alter or destroy a wetland of any size or type. Any alteration to a wetland permitted by a wetland alteration permit must be fully mitigated so that there is no net loss of wetlands. 
(b)  Wetlands shall be subject to the requirements established herein, as well as restrictions and requirements established by other applicable city ordinances and regulations. The wetland protection regulations shall not be construed to allow anything otherwise prohibited in the zoning district where the wetland area is located. 
(c)  All activities within the city shall comply with the Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, as amended (M.S. § 103F.612 et seq.), and the accompanying rules of the Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources (Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420, as amended). Where the requirements of City Code differ from those requirements, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-404. - Official wetland map. 
(a)  The city shall maintain the official city wetland inventory, which is hereby adopted by reference. An electronic copy of this map shall be maintained on the city's geographic information system (GIS) database, with both hard and electronic copies being made available for public review upon request. 
(b)  The city wetland inventory shall identify each basin as one of four management categories: Preserve, Manage 1, Manage 2, and Manage 3. These classifications will be determined using Figure 1.1 "Wetland Management Classification Process Flowchart for Basic Wetland Protection" from Minnesota Routine Assessment Method for Evaluating Wetland Functions (MnRAM Version 3.0), or future versions. 
(c)  The presence or absence of a wetland on the city wetland inventory does not represent a definitive determination as to whether a jurisdictional wetland that would be covered by this article is present. Wetlands identified during a site specific delineation, but not identified by the city wetland inventory, are still subject to the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The city wetland inventory does not depict delineated wetland boundaries and shall not be used as such. 
(e)  The city wetland inventory shall be amended to include any wetlands discovered during the site review process. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-405. - Wetland delineation. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of the project applicant to determine whether a wetland exists on a subject property. It is the responsibility of the applicant to complete a wetland delineation and submit sufficient documentation of the wetland boundary to the city in a wetland delineation report. Wetland delineations shall be completed by, or under the direct supervision of, a certified wetland delineator. Three hard copies of the wetland delineation report must be submitted to the city's WCA agent. Additionally, an electronic copy of the delineated wetland boundaries must be submitted in a format compatible with the city's GIS database. Wetland delineations shall be valid for three years. Wetland delineations completed more than three years prior may be confirmed and/or updated by a qualified wetland professional through a site visit and submittal of a summary of the findings, a copy of the old delineation and a map depicting both the original and revised wetland boundaries, where applicable. 
(b)  Wetland delineations do not need to be completed for properties adjacent to a proposed development that is under separate ownership. However, sufficient information must be presented to demonstrate that any proposed activities shall not directly or indirectly impact adjacent basins. The applicant shall review readily available information including, but not limited to, the city wetland inventory, national wetland inventory maps, topographic maps, soil survey maps, and recent and historic aerial photographs in preparing this assessment. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-406. - Wetland classification. 
(a)  All wetlands delineated under section 20-405 of this article that have not been previously classified shall be classified using the results from the Minnesota Routine Assessment Method for Evaluating Wetland Functions (MnRAM Version 3.0), or future versions. 
(b)  A MnRAM shall be completed by the property owner or applicant for each previously unclassified wetland. An electronic version of the MnRAM evaluation must be submitted to and approved by the city to establish the classification of each wetland prior to any alteration or impact to the wetland. 
(c)  MnRAM 3.0 assessments have been completed by the city as a component of the city wetland inventory. Applicants, however, may appeal the determination, and submit a request to change the classification. To do so, the applicant must submit an electronic copy of the MnRAM for each affected basin to the WCA agent. The forms must be filled out by a qualified wetland scientist. The WCA agent will consult with the technical evaluation panel to determine if a change in the classification is warranted. In all cases, the burden to demonstrate the need for a change in classification lies with the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-407. - Permit required. 
    No person shall drain, excavate in the permanent or semi-permanent flooded areas of open water wetlands, or fill a wetland, wholly or partially, or otherwise impact wetlands without first having a wetland replacement plan or other determination approved by the city. Draining, grading, excavating, filling, removing healthy native vegetation, or otherwise altering or destroying a wetland of any size or type not subject to an exemption under section 20-417 of this article requires a wetland alteration permit. Activity in a wetland requiring a wetland alteration permit includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Construction of new streets and utilities. 
(2)  Creation of ponds or dams and alterations of the natural drainageways of watercourses. This shall only be allowed as part of a mitigation project, or to restore or improve the function and value of the wetland. 
(3)  Installation of boardwalks and docks. Docks shall meet the additional requirements in section 20-920 Structures, Boats and Waterways of this Code. 
(4)  Discharge of untreated stormwater runoff into wetlands. 
(5)  Changes in wetland hydrology that result in an increase in the ordinary high water level of a wetland by more than 12 inches. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07; Ord. No. 522, § 6, 5-23-11) 
Sec. 20-408. - Exemptions from earth work permit requirements. 
    Earth work completed in accordance with an approved wetland alteration permit is exempt from the requirement to obtain a separate earth work permit. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-409. - Permit application requirements and decisions. 
(a)  A wetland alteration permit shall not be issued without having been first reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the city council following the review and hearing procedures set forth for conditional use permits and the additional requirement of Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420.0230. The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed use or activity complies with the purposes, intent and other provisions of this article. The council may establish reasonable conditions which are specifically set forth in the permit to ensure compliance with requirements contained in this article. Such conditions may, among other matters, limit the size, kind or character of the proposed work, require the construction of other structures, require replacement of vegetation and wetland functions and values, establish required monitoring procedures and maintenance activities, stage the work over time, require the alteration of the site design to ensure buffering, and/or require the provision of a performance security. 
(b)  Any projects seeking a wetland alteration permit subject to this article will be required to submit the following: 
(1)  A wetland alteration permit application; 
(2)  A site/grading plan of the entire property; 
(3)  Existing and proposed drainage areas to wetlands; 
(4)  A wetland delineation report in accordance with section 20-405; 
(5)  Wetland classification information in accordance with section 20-406 for each wetland on property; 
(6)  Buffer strip plan meeting the criteria of subsections 20-411(c) and (d); 
(7)  Submittals required by the Wetland Conservation Act; 
(8)  Topographic data; 
(9)  Other information as required by the city. 
(c)  Decisions made under this article that fall under the authority of the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act may be appealed to the Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources under Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420.0250, after administration appeal rights under the official controls have been exhausted. Staff costs to the city associated with appeals shall be borne by the applicant. 
(d)  The city council shall appoint a person to serve on a technical evaluation panel. The person must be a technical professional with expertise in water resources management. Decisions under this article must not be made until after receiving the determination of the technical evaluation panel regarding wetland public values, location, size, and/or type if the city council, the landowner, or a member of the technical evaluation panel asks for such determinations. This requirement does not apply to wetlands for which such data is included in an approved comprehensive wetland management plan per Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420.0240. The city council may seek and consider recommendations, if any, made by the technical evaluation panel in making replacement plan decisions. Unless otherwise designated, the city's representative on the technical evaluation panel shall be the WCA agent. 
(e)  The applicant for a wetland alteration permit is responsible for obtaining all other necessary permits including, but not limited to those required by watershed districts, Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, United States Army Corps of Engineers and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency prior to commencement of the permitted work. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-410. - General standards. 
(a)  The following standards apply to all lands within and abutting a wetland: 
(1)  Septic and soil absorption system must be a setback minimum of 75 feet from the ordinary high water mark of the wetland. 
(2)  The lowest ground floor elevation of a principal structure is three feet above the 100-year flood elevation of the wetland. 
(3)  Access across a wetland shall be by means of a boardwalk or elevated structure and only upon approval of a wetland alteration permit. Wetland crossings must also be in conformance with all other state regulations. 
(4)  Docks and boardwalks shall be elevated a minimum of six inches above the ordinary high water mark. Docks and boardwalks shall only be permitted to cross wetlands in instances where a wetland is riparian to a lake. 
(5)  The erosion and sediment control goals and policies within the city's surface water management plan shall be met. 
(6)  Stormwater runoff shall not be discharged into wetlands without water quality pretreatment as prescribed by this Code. 
(b)  When a wetland alteration permit is issued allowing wetland alteration, the following standards shall be followed: 
(1)  The alteration will not have a net adverse effect on the ecological and hydrological characteristics of remaining wetland. 
(2)  It shall be located as to minimize the impact on vegetation. 
(3)  It shall not adversely change water flow. 
(4)  The size of the altered area shall be limited to the minimum required for the proposed action. 
(5)  The disposal of any excess material is prohibited within remaining wetland areas. 
(6)  The disposal of any excess material shall include proper erosion control and nutrient retention measures. 
(7)  Alterations to any wetland area are prohibited during waterfowl breeding season or fish spawning season, unless it is determined by the city that the wetland is not used for waterfowl breeding or fish spawning. 
(8)  Alterations to wetland areas shall be mitigated in accordance with the requirements of this article if the activity results in a loss of wetland area and/or function and value of the wetland. 
(9)  Dedicated buffers in accordance with section 20-411. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-411. - Placement of structures. 
(a)  For lots created on or after May 14, 2007, a buffer strip shall be maintained abutting all wetlands. All existing vegetation adjacent to a wetland shall be left undisturbed and applied toward the buffer strip unless otherwise approved by the WCA agent or city council. Buffer strip vegetation shall be established and maintained in accordance with the following requirements. If the buffer strip is disturbed, native plant species shall be selected from wetland and upland plants to provide diverse habitat for various species of wildlife. Buffer strips shall be identified by permanent monumentation acceptable to the city. A minimum of one wetland buffer monument is required per lot abutting the wetland edge. The maximum spacing between monuments is 300 feet. 
(b)  The following table provides the minimum standards required for each wetland classification. 
Wetland 
Classification Principal 
Structure 
Setback from 
Buffer Edge (feet) Accessory 
Structure 
Setback from 
Buffer Edge (feet) Permanent Buffer 
Strip Minimum 
Width (feet) Percent of Buffer 
Strip in Native 
Vegetation Outstanding 50 50 50 100% Preserve 40 20 40 100% Manage 1 30 15 25 100% Manage 2 30 15 20 Over 50% Manage 3 30 15 16.5 Over 50%  


Manage 3 Wetland 
(c)  For lots created on or after May 14, 2007, principal structures and accessory structures shall maintain minimum setbacks from the wetland buffer as outlined in subsection 20-411(b). 
(d)  If buffer strips and setbacks were approved in conjunction with a site plan or subdivision before May 14, 2007, the standards set forth in the site plan or subdivision shall prevail, except that in no case shall principal structures be set back less than 40 feet from the wetland edge unless a variance from the wetland setback requirements has been approved. 
(e)  For lots of record before May 14, 2007, property owners may establish wetland buffer strips in compliance with subsection 20-411(b) in exchange for a decreased setback for structures. A wetland buffer agreement describing the precise location and extent of the buffer strip, as well as the restrictions for activities within the buffer strip, shall be signed by the property owner and the city and shall be recorded against the property at the county recorder's office. The property owner shall be responsible for all costs and fees associated with the buffer strip dedication. 
    Following the recording of the wetland buffer agreement with the county recorder's office, accessory structures may be placed within the last 20 feet or 50 percent of the existing principal structure wetland setback, whichever is less. 
(f)  In addition to the requirements above, wetland buffer strips for wetland mitigation areas and those counted as public value credit (PVC), shall also conform to the minimum standards as set forth by the Wetland Conservation Act. 
(g)  The locations of buffer strips and wetland setbacks shall be surveyed and included on the certificate of survey. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless this task is completed and approved by city staff. 
(h)  Retaining walls and fences may be located within wetland setbacks. Neither retaining walls and fences nor the land alteration that takes place as part of construction shall encroach into the required buffer strips. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-412. - Buffer strips required. 
(a)  Before release of final plat, the applicant must submit to the WCA agent a drainage and utility easement for protection of the wetland and approved buffer strip. The easement must describe the boundaries of the wetland and the wetland buffer strips. 
(b)  Building structures, paving, mowing, introducing non-native vegetation, cutting, filling, dumping, disposing of yard waste, fertilizing, or tampering with the monuments within buffer strips is prohibited. 
(c)  Additional wetland impacts shall not be allowed for the creation of buffer strips. 
(d)  The use of meandering buffer strips to maintain a natural appearance is encouraged. 
(e)  Where roadways are constructed next to a wetland, a buffer strip shall be maintained. 
(f)  Where acceptable natural vegetation exists in a wetland and adjacent buffer strip, the retention of such vegetation in an undisturbed state shall be required unless the applicant receives approval to replace such vegetation. A wetland and/or buffer strip has acceptable vegetation if it is dominated by native tree, shrub, or grass species, and has not been used for agricultural production in the last five years. 
(g)  The WCA agent may deny the use of existing vegetation for the use of buffer strips if: 
(1)  It is dominated by any species on the state noxious weed list as defined by M.S. § 18.76-18.88. These species include species such as leafy spurge, spotted knapweed, purple loosestrife, and common and glossy buckthorn; 
(2)  It is present on unstable slopes, has significant bare soil, displays a history of erosion problems, is prone to gully formation, or does not function for sediment and nutrient removal; 
(3)  Any areas were used for agricultural production in the last five years; or 
(4)  The buffer strip is disturbed or altered. 
(h)  If an area is deemed to be unacceptable in its current state, a wetland buffer landscaping plan must be submitted to the WCA agent. This plan shall include at a minimum a: 
(1)  Plan sheet showing the proposed new buffer strip locations and any buffer strips acceptable as existing. Existing buffer strips shall be identified and marked to prevent accidental disturbances. 
(2)  Specification as to what seed mixture will be used, or what trees and/or shrubs will be planted and their locations. 
(3)  Verification that all seed stock and tree species are native to Minnesota and are of local ecotypes. 
(4)  Detailed specification that identifies the project schedule, materials, installation or seeding instructions, and costs. 
(5)  Maintenance schedule that describes the activities that will occur for at least the first two years. This should include a schedule of mowing and spot spraying for weeds if an area is seeded. Plans that call for periodic burning shall have additional details and must have special permission prior to installation. 
(6)  Detail of all best management practices (BMPs) and erosion control plans. 
(7)  Plan identifying the locations of buffer strip markers. 
(i)  The city may, at their discretion, require a cash escrow or letter of credit up to 110 percent of the cost to reestablish the buffer strip should it not be successful, not be maintained, or otherwise require city intervention to maintain the ordinance requirements. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-413. - Wetland alteration. 
(a)  An applicant for a wetland alteration permit must demonstrate that the activity impacting a wetland has complied or, through imposition of conditions of approval, will comply with all of the requirements of the Wetland Conservation Act. 
(b)  A wetland alteration permit shall not be issued unless the proposed development complies with this article. 
(c)  When a wetland alteration permit is issued allowing wetland alteration, the alteration must be consistent with the city's surface water management plan and the Wetland Conservation Act. The alteration shall not alter the hydrological patterns in the remainder of the wetland, if a portion of the wetland remains, unless exempted under section 20-417. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-414. - Wetland management activities. 
    Prior to commencement of a wetland management activity, an administrative wetland permit must be obtained for the activity in accordance with section 20-415. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-415. - Administrative wetland permit. 
(a)  Applications for administrative wetland permits shall be made on a form supplied by the city. A fee shall be paid as set forth in this Code. The WCA agent shall review applications to ensure proposed activities are in compliance with the Wetland Conservation Act and the requirements of this article and are consistent with approved and/or accepted wetland management practices. 
(b)  At the time of application, a person or company making an application for an administrative wetland permit will be required to supply the following information: 
(1)  Location of wetland; 
(2)  Area of wetland to be managed; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the party responsible for management activity; 
(4)  Name, address and telephone number of person or persons performing the management activity; 
(5)  Date of management activity; 
(6)  A list of the type of management activities to be performed at such time; 
(7)  An explanation of the rationale for performing the management activity; 
(8)  Information regarding the management activities being used and their effects on humans, plants and wildlife, especially nontarget species; and 
(9)  A signed consent from all property owners owning property containing or abutting wetland to be treated. 
(c)  The following activities shall be determined exempt from the provisions listed in subsection 20-415(b): 
(1)  Federal, state or local government staff or contractors during the course of conducting maintenance activities; and 
(2)  Metropolitan Mosquito Control District during the course of conducting mosquito control activities. 
(d)  Activities for which administrative wetland permits are approved shall not contribute to nuisances as defined in this Code. 
(e)  The WCA agent may deny the administrative wetland permit if it does not comply with subsection 20-415(d), is not in compliance with the Wetland Conservation Act and/or is not consistent with approved and/or accepted wetland management practices. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-416. - Mitigation. 
(a)  Mitigation intent. Where a wetland alteration permit is approved and mitigation is required pursuant to city code and the Wetland Conservation Act, mitigation must result in an improvement to the wetland function and value. Mitigation plans must address water quality, improvement, and maintenance of preexisting hydrological balance and wildlife habitat. The wetland function and value will include improvement of water quality, maintaining hydrological balance, and provision of wildlife habitat. Mitigation will be performed at ratios required by the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act to achieve replacement of the wetland function and value. 
(b)  Mitigation standards. The functions and values of mitigation wetlands shall be achieved through wetland restoration, creation and/or enhancement. The mitigation standards found in Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420.0550 shall be followed. 
(1)  Mitigation shall be subject to wetland setback and buffer strip requirements as set forth in this article. 
(2)  Mitigation shall at a minimum replace preexisting wetland function and values through the ratios set forth in Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420.0541. 
(3)  Wetland mitigation shall be undertaken on-site. If this is not feasible, then mitigation may occur locally within the subwatershed. If this is not possible, then mitigation may occur outside the subwatershed, elsewhere in the city. If mitigation cannot be accomplished on-site, or if the city deems it necessary to perform mitigation off-site, then the applicant shall be responsible for providing off-site mitigation within the major subwatershed, as designated by the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act, or purchasing wetland credits from the state wetland bank. 
(c)  Construction management and long term wetland maintenance. 
(1)  The wetland alteration permit holder shall follow best management practices to minimize direct impacts due to erosion and construction practices and to safeguard wildlife habitat. 
(2)  The wetland alteration permit holder shall submit an annual report to the city for replacement wetlands in Chanhassen. The purpose of the annual report is to describe actual wetland management, restoration or creation activities completed during the past year as well as activities planned for the upcoming year. The annual report shall include all the information required of annual monitoring reports by Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420.0620 subpart 2. 
The wetland alteration permit holder shall submit annual monitoring reports as required by Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420.0610. Submission shall continue for at least five years or until the replacement wetland is deemed by the technical evaluation panel (TEP) to be fully functional. Where feasible, the city shall require the wetland alteration permit holder to satisfy long term management requirements. 
(d)  Mitigation surety. To ensure that the proposed wetland replacement occurs, the city shall hold either a cash escrow or letter of credit equal to 110 percent of the current value of wetland credits on the open market. An additional escrow account shall be established to ensure that the required monitoring occurs. The monitoring escrow shall be set at 110 percent of the current average monitoring expense as performed by an independent consultant. The monitoring and replacement escrows may be released incrementally as monitoring and replacement are successfully completed. The remaining escrow amount will be returned and the letter of credit terminated upon completion of the monitoring and approval by the technical evaluation panel (TEP). Any interest earned by holding of a cash escrow shall be the property of the city. 
(e)  Within the Minnehaha Creek Watershed District, 1:1 mitigation is required for excavation within wetlands. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-417. - Exemptions and no loss determinations. 
(a)  Activities exempted by Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420.0122 or determined to result in no net loss of wetlands shall be exempted from the provisions of this article. However, certificates of exemption or no loss must be obtained from the city prior to starting work. 
(b)  A person conducting an activity in a wetland under an exemption shall ensure that: 
(1)  Appropriate erosion and sediment control measures are taken to prevent sediment discharges from the site; 
(2)  The activity does not block fish activity in a watercourse; and 
(3)  The activity is conducted in compliance with all other applicable federal, state, and local requirements, including best management practices as listed in Minnesota Rules Chapter 8420.0112, and water resource protection requirements established under M.S. § 103H. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-418. - Variances. 
    Variances from the requirements of this article may be granted in accordance with the variance provisions of article II, division 3 of this chapter so long as the variances do not violate the Wetland Conservation Act and rules adopted under the Act. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-419. - Expiration and renewal of permit. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified by the city council, the permittee shall begin and complete the development authorized by the wetland alteration permit within one year after the date the council approves the permit application. 
(b)  The permittee shall provide written notice to the city 24 hours prior to the commencement and completion of the permitted project. No project shall be deemed to have been completed until approved by the city after receipt of notice of completion. 
(c)  If the permittee fails to commence work within the time specified in this section, the permit shall be void. The permittee may make a written application to the city council for an extension of the time to commence work, but only if the permittee submits the application prior to the date already established to commence work. The application of an extension shall state the reasons the permittee requires an extension. If the council does not extend the permit, the holder of the void permit may apply for a new permit. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-420. - Inspection of work. 
    The city may cause inspection of work for which a wetland alteration permit is issued, at the applicant's expense, to be made periodically during the course of such work and shall cause final inspection to be made following the completion of the work. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 20-421. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Violation of this article, wetland protection, or of the terms of a permit issued thereunder shall be a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who alters a wetland in violation of this article shall apply for a wetland alteration permit and shall pay a filing fee double the regular fee. The city council may require the violator to restore the wetland or take other mitigative measures. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Secs. 20-422-20-475. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SHORELAND MANAGEMENT DISTRICT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 217, adopted Aug. 22, 1994, repealed former Art. VII, §§ 20-476-20-478 and § 4 of the ordinance enacted a new Art. VII as herein set out in §§ 20-476-20-486. Prior to repeal, former Art. VII pertained to the Shoreland Overlay District and derived from Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 23, adopted Dec. 15, 1986. 

Sec. 20-476. - Statutory authorization and policy. 
(a)  Statutory authorization. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in M.S. ch. 103F, Minnesota Regulations, Parts 6120.2500 through 6120.3900, and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in M.S. ch. 462. 
(b)  Policy. The uncontrolled use of shorelands of Chanhassen affects the public health, safety and general welfare not only by contributing to pollution of public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare to provide for the wise subdivision, use and development of shorelands of public waters. The legislature of Minnesota has delegated responsibility to local governments of the state to regulate the subdivision, use and development of the shorelands of public waters and thus preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural environmental values of shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters and related land resources. This responsibility is hereby recognized by Chanhassen. 
(Ord. No. 217, § 4, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 377, § 51, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-477. - General provisions. 
(a)  Jurisdiction . The provisions of this article shall apply to the shorelands of the public waters as classified in section 20-479 of this article. Pursuant to Minnesota Regulations, parts 6120.2500 through 6120.3900, lakes, ponds, or flowage less than ten acres in size are exempt from this ordinance. A body of water created by a private user where there was no previous shoreland is exempt from this article. 
(b)  Compliance . The use of any shoreland of public waters; the size and shape of lots; the use, size, type and location of structures on lots; the installation and maintenance of water supply and waste treatment systems, the grading and filling of any shoreland area; the cutting of shoreland vegetation; and the subdivision of land shall be in full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
(c)  Enforcement . The community development director is responsible for the administration and enforcement of this ordinance. Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law. 
(d)  Interpretation . In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions . It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail. All other articles inconsistent with this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. 
(Ord. No. 217, § 4, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 377, § 52, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-478. - Administration. 
(a)  Permits. A permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure shall stipulate that an identified nonconforming sewage treatment system shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(b)  Variances. The board of adjustments and appeals or city council shall hear and decide requests for variances in accordance with the rules that it has adopted for the conduct of business. When a variance is approved after the department of natural resources has formally recommended denial in the hearing record, the notification of the approved variance required in subsection (c) herein shall also include the summary of the public record/testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions which supported the issuance of the variance. For existing developments, the application for variance shall clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment system is present for the intended use of the property. The variance, if issued, shall require reconstruction of a nonconforming sewage treatment system. 
(c)  Notifications to the department of natural resources. Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances, amendments, or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls shall be sent to the commissioner's designated representative and postmarked at least ten days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to consider proposed subdivisions/plats shall include copies of the subdivision/plat. A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions/plats, and final decisions granting variances or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls shall be sent to the commissioner's designated representative and postmarked within ten days of final action. 
(Ord. No. 217, § 4, 8-22-94) 
Sec. 20-479. - Shoreland classification system and land use districts. 
(a)  Shoreland classification system . The public waters of Chanhassen have been classified below consistent with the criteria found in Minnesota Regulations, Part 6120.3300, and the Protected Waters Inventory Map for Carver/Hennepin County, Minnesota. 
(b)  Shoreland area defined. The shoreland area for the waterbodies listed below shall be as defined in section 1-2 and as shown on the official zoning map. 
(c)  Lakes. 
(1)  Natural environmental lakes: 
Inventory I.D. Number Ordinary High Water Harrison 10-8W 993.6 Rice Lake 27-132P 699.2 Rice Marsh Lake 10-1P 877.0 St. Joe 10-11P 945.2 Silver 27-136P 898.1  
(2)  Recreational development lake: 
Inventory I.D. Number Ordinary High Water Ann 10-12P 955.5 Christmas 27-137P 932.77 Hazeltine 10-14P 916.8 Lotus 10-6P 896.3 Lucy 10-7P 956.1 Minnewashta 10-9P 944.5 Riley 10-2P 865.3 Susan 10-13P 881.8 Virginia 10-15P 929.8  
(d)  Rivers and streams . 
(1)  Agricultural: 
Minnesota River-From west city boundary to east city boundary. 
(2)  Tributary streams: 
Bluff Creek-From Basin 10-209W to Basin 27-132P (Rice Lake). 
Riley Creek from Lake Ann (10-12P) to Lake Susan (10-13P). 
Riley Creek from Lake Susan (10-13P) to Rice Marsh Lake (10-1P). 
Lake Minnewashta (10-9P) to Lake Virginia (10-15P). 
Basin 10-212W to Lotus Lake (10-6P). 
Purgatory Creek-From Lotus Lake (10-6P) to east city boundary. 
Assumption Creek-From west city boundary to Minnesota River. 
All protected watercourses in Chanhassen shown on the Protected Waters Inventory Map for Carver County, a copy of which is hereby adopted by reference, that are not given a classification herein shall be considered "tributary" streams. 
(Ord. No. 217, § 4, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 377, § 53, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 409, § 2, 1-9-06) 
Sec. 20-480. - Zoning and water supply/sanitary provisions. 
(a)  Lot area and width standards. The lot area (in square feet) and lot width standards (in feet) for single, duplex, triplex and quad residential lots created after the date of enactment of this ordinance for the lake and river/stream classification are as follows: 
(1)  Sewered lakes-Natural environment: 
Riparian Lots Nonriparian Lots Area Width Area Width Single  40,000 125 15,000  90 Duplex  70,000 225 35,000 180 Triplex 100,000 325 52,000 270 Quad 130,000 425 65,000 360  
(2)  Sewered lakes-Recreational development: 
Riparian Lots Nonriparian Lots Area Width Area Width Single 20,000 90 15,000 90 Duplex 35,000 135 26,000 135 Triplex 50,000 195 38,000 190 Quad 65,000 255 49,000 245  
Unsewered lakes-Recreational development: 
Riparian Lots Nonriparian Lots Area Width Area Width Single 40,000 125 15,000 90  
(3)  River/stream lot width standards. There is no minimum lot size requirement for rivers and streams, except those specified in the underlying zoning district. The lot width standards for single, duplex, triplex and quad residential developments for the six river/stream classifications are as follows: 
Agricultural Tributary Tributary No Sewer Sewer Single 150 100  90 Duplex 225 150 115 Triplex 300 200 150 Quad 375 250 190  
(4)  Additional special provisions. Residential subdivisions with dwelling unit densities exceeding those in the tables in subsections (1), (2) and (3) can only be allowed if designed and approved as residential planned unit developments. Only land above the ordinary high water level of public waters shall be used to meet lot area standards, and lot width standards shall be met at both the ordinary high water level and at the building line. The sewer lot area dimensions in subsections (1), (2) and (3) can only be used if publicly owned sewer system service is available to the property. 
(Ord. No. 217, § 4, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 240, § 13, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 240, § 13, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 377, § 54, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-481. - Placement, design, and height of structure. 
(a)  Placement of structures on lots . When more than one setback applies to a site, structures and facilities shall be located to meet all setbacks. Structures and onsite sewage treatment systems shall be setback (in feet) from the ordinary high water level as follows: 
Classes of 
Public Waters Structures 
Unsewered Structures 
Sewered Sewage 
Treatment 
System Lakes Natural environment 150 150 150 Recreational development 100  75  75 Rivers/streams Agricultural and tributary 100  50  75  
    One water-oriented accessory structure designed in accordance with subsection 20-482(e)(2)(b) of this ordinance may be setback a minimum distance of ten feet from the ordinary high water level for lakes. 
(b)  Structure setbacks. The following structure setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the waterbody. 
Setback From: Setback (in feet) (1) Top of Bluff 30 (2) Unplatted cemetery 50 (3) Right-of-way line of federal, state, or county highway 50 (4) Right-of-way line of town road, public streets, or other roads or streets not classified 20  
(c)  Bluff impact zones. Structures and accessory facilities, except stairways and landings, shall not be placed within bluff impact zones. 
(d)  Nonresidential uses without water-oriented needs. Uses without water-oriented needs shall be located on lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage, shall either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. 
(e)  Design criteria for structures. 
(1)  High water elevations. Structures shall be placed in accordance with any floodplain regulations applicable to the site. Where these controls do not exist, the elevation to which the lowest floor, including basement, is placed or floodproofed shall be determined as follows: 
a.  For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a level at least three feet above the highest known water level, or three feet above the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher; 
b.  For rivers and streams, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the flood of record, if data are available. If data are not available, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the ordinary high water level, or by conducting a technical evaluation to determine effects of proposed construction upon flood stages and flood flaws and to establish a flood protection elevation. Under all three approaches, technical evaluations shall be done by a qualified engineer or hydrologist consistent with Minnesota Rules, parts 6120.5000 to 6120.6200 governing the management of floodplain areas. If more than one approach is used, the highest flood protection elevation determined shall be used for placing structures and other facilities; and 
c.  Water-oriented accessory structures may have the lowest floor placed lower than the elevation determined in this item if the structure is construed of flood-resistant materials to the elevation, electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above the elevation and, if long duration flooding is anticipated, the structure is built to withstand ice action and wind-driven waves and debris. 
(2)  Water-oriented accessory structures. Each lot may have one water-oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal structure setback in subsection 20-481(a) if this water-oriented accessory structure complies with the following provisions: 
a.  The structure or facility shall not exceed ten feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than 250 square feet. Detached decks shall not exceed eight feet above grade at any point. 
b.  The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high water level shall be at least ten feet; 
c.  The structure or facility shall be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions; 
d.  The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but shall not be enclosed or used as a storage area; 
e.  The structure or facility shall not be designed or used for human habitation and shall not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities; and 
f.  As an alternative for general development and recreational development waterbodies, water-oriented accessory structures used solely for watercraft storage, and including storage of related boating and water-oriented sporting equipment, may occupy an area of up to 400 square feet provided the maximum width of the structure is 20 feet as measured parallel to the configuration of the shoreline. 
(3)  Stairway, lifts and landings. Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts shall meet the following design requirements: 
a.  Stairways and lifts shall not exceed four feet in width on residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public open-space recreational properties, and planned unit developments; 
b.  Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square feet may be used for commercial properties, public open-space, and recreational properties; 
c.  Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or landings; 
d.  Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion; 
e.  Stairways, lifts, and landings shall be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical; and 
f.  Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for physically handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of this section are met in addition to the requirements of Minnesota Regulations, Chapter 1341. 
(4)  Significant historic sites. No structure shall be placed on a significant historic site in a manner that affects the values of the site unless adequate information about the site has been removed and documented in a public repository. 
(5)  Steep slopes. The planning director shall evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions shall be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation. 
(f)  Height of structures. All structures in residential districts, except churches and nonresidential agricultural structures, shall not exceed 35 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 217, § 4, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 322, § 1, 6-25-01; Ord. No. 377, §§ 55-57, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-482. - Shoreland alterations. 
(a)  Generally . Alterations of vegetation and topography shall be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife habitat. Vegetation shall include, but not be limited to, grasses, forbs, shrubs, trees and vines. 
(b)  Vegetation alterations . 
(1)  Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and parking areas regulated by section 20-484 of this ordinance are exempt from the following vegetation alteration standards: 
(2)  Removal or alteration of vegetation is allowed subject to the following standards: 
a.  Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes is not allowed. Intensive vegetation clearing for forest land conversion to another use outside of these areas is allowable if permitted as part of a development approved by the city council if an erosion control and sedimentation plan is developed and approved by the soil and water conservation district in which the property is located. 
b.  In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view of the water from the principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings, picnic areas, access paths, beach and watercraft access areas, and permitted water-oriented accessory structures or facilities, provided that: 
1.  The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as viewed from the water, assuming leaf-on conditions, is not substantially reduced; 
2.  Along rivers and streams, existing shading of water surfaces is preserved; 
3.  The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards; and 
4.  The clearing shall be limited to a strip 30 percent of lot width or 30 feet, whichever is lesser, parallel to the shoreline and extending inward within the shore and bluff impact zones. 
c.  In no case shall clear cutting be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 217, § 4, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 251, § 1, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 377, § 58, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-483. - Topographic alterations/grading and filling. 
    Connections to public waters. Excavations where the intended purpose is connection to a public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, shall be controlled by this ordinance and chapter 7, article III. Permission for excavations may be given only after the commissioner has approved the proposed connection to public waters. 
(Ord. No. 217, § 4, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 377, § 59, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-484. - Placement and design of roads, driveways, and parking areas. 
(a)  Public and private roads and parking areas shall be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from public waters. Documentation shall be provided by a qualified individual that all roads and parking areas are designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation district, or other applicable technical materials. 
(b)  Roads, driveways, and parking areas shall meet structure setbacks and shall not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas, and shall be designed to minimize adverse impacts. 
(c)  Public and watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this subsection are met. 
(Ord. No. 217, § 4, 8-22-94) 
Sec. 20-485. - Stormwater management. 
    Lot coverage of lots shall not exceed 25 percent of the lot area, except as follows: 
(1)  Thirty-five percent for medium/high density residential zones; and 
(2)  Seventy percent in industrial zones within the Lake Susan Shoreland District. 
(Ord. No. 217, § 4, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 628, § 20, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 20-486. - Sewage treatment. 
    Any premises used for human occupancy shall be provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment, as follows: 
(1)  On-site sewage treatment systems shall be set back from the ordinary high water level in accordance with the setbacks contained in subsection 20-481(a) of this ordinance. 
(2)  A nonconforming sewage treatment system shall be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a permit or variance of any type is required for any improvement on, or use of, the property. For the purposes of this provision, a sewage treatment system shall not be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the sewage treatment system's improper setback from the ordinary high water level. 
(3)  The city council has by formal resolution notified the commissioner of its program to identify nonconforming sewage treatment systems. Chanhassen will require upgrading or replacement of any nonconforming system identified by this program within a reasonable period of time that will not exceed three years. Sewage systems installed according to all applicable local shoreland management standards adopted under M.S. § 103F.221, in effect at the time of installation may be considered as conforming unless they are determined to be failing, except that systems using cesspools, leaching pits, seepage pits, or other deep disposal methods, or systems with less soil treatment area separation above groundwater than required by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's Chapter 7080 for design of on-site sewage treatment systems, shall be considered nonconforming. 
(Ord. No. 217, § 4, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 377, § 60, 5-24-04) 
Secs. 20-487-20-489. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-490. - Nonconforming lots. 
(a)  A nonconforming single lot of record located within the shoreland management district may be allowed as a building site without variances from lot size requirements, provided that: 
(1)  All structure and septic system setback distance requirements can be met; 
(2)  A Type 1 sewage treatment system consistent with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080, can be installed or the lot is connected to a public sewer; and 
(3)  The lot coverage does not exceed 25 percent. 
(b)  In a group of two or more contiguous lots of record under a common ownership an individual lot must be considered as a separate parcel of land for the purpose of sale or development, if it meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The lot must be at least 75 percent of the dimensional standard for lot width and lot size for the shoreland classification; 
(2)  The lot must be connected to a public sewer, if available, or must be suitable for the installation of a Type 1 sewage treatment system consistent with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080, and local government controls; 
(3)  Lot coverage must not exceed 25 percent of each lot; and 
(4)  Development of the lot must be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan. 
(c)  A lot subject to subsection (b) not meeting the requirements of subsection (b) must be combined with the one or more contiguous lots so they equal one or more conforming lots as much as possible. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsection (b), contiguous nonconforming lots of record in the shoreland management district under a common ownership may be sold or purchased individually if each lot contained a habitable residential dwelling at the time the lots came under common ownership and the lots are suitable for, or served by, a sewage treatment system consistent with the requirements of M.S. § 115.55 and Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080, or connected to a public sewer. 
(e)  In evaluating all variances, zoning and building permit applications, or conditional use requests, the zoning authority shall require the property owner to address, when appropriate, stormwater runoff management, reducing impervious surfaces, increasing setback, restoration of wetlands, vegetative buffers, sewage treatment and water supply capabilities, and other conservation-designed actions. 
(f)  A portion of a conforming lot may be separated from an existing parcel as long as the remainder of the existing parcel meets the lot size and sewage treatment requirements of the zoning district for a new lot and the newly created parcel is combined with an adjacent parcel. 
(Ord. No. 543, § 2, 6-25-12; Ord. No. 628, §§ 21, 22, 12-11-17) 
Secs. 20-491-20-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 149, adopted June 24, 1991, amended Art. VIII, Div. 1, to read as herein set out. Former Art. VIII, Div. 1, §§ 20-501-20-505, pertaining to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 18(5-18-1-5-18-5), adopted Dec. 15, 1986, and Ord. No. 136, § 1, adopted Jan. 28, 1991. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-501. - Intent. 
    Planned unit developments offer enhanced flexibility to develop a site through the relaxation of most normal zoning district standards. The use of the PUD zoning also allows for a greater variety of uses, internal transfers of density, construction phasing and a potential for lower development costs. In exchange for this enhanced flexibility, the city has the expectation that the development plan will result in a significantly higher quality and more sensitive proposal than would have been the case with the use of other, more standard zoning districts. It will be the applicant's responsibility to demonstrate that the city's expectation is to be realized as evaluated against the following criteria. Planned unit developments are to encourage the following: 
(1)  Preservation of desirable site characteristics and open space and protection of sensitive environmental features, including steep slopes, mature trees, creeks, wetlands, lakes and scenic views. 
(2)  More efficient and effective use of land, open space and public facilities through mixing of land uses and assembly and development of land in larger parcels. 
(3)  High quality of design and design compatible with surrounding land uses, including both existing and planned. Site planning, landscaping and building architecture should reflect higher quality design than is found elsewhere in the community. 
(4)  Sensitive development in transitional areas located between different land uses and along significant corridors within the city. 
(5)  Development which is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(6)  Parks and open space. The creation of public open space may be required by the city. Such park and open space shall be consistent with the comprehensive park plan and overall trail plan. 
(7)  Provision of housing affordable to all income groups if appropriate within the PUD. 
(8)  Energy conservation through the use of more efficient building designs and sightings and the clustering of buildings and land uses. 
(9)  Use of traffic management and design techniques including the provision of transit and pedestrian linkages to reduce the potential for traffic conflicts. Improvements to area roads and intersections may be required as appropriate. Where appropriate, the use of transportation demand management strategies may be required within a project. 
(Ord. No. 149, § 1, 6-24-91; Ord. No. 377, § 61, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-502. - Allowed uses. 
    Specific uses and performance standards for each PUD shall be delineated in a development plan. 
(1)  Each PUD shall only be used for the use or uses for which the site is designated in the comprehensive plan. Specific uses and performance standards for each PUD shall be delineated in a PUD development plan. 
(2)  Where the site of a proposed PUD is designated for more than one land use in the comprehensive plan, the city may require that the PUD include all the land uses so designated or such combination of the designated uses as the city council shall deem appropriate to achieve the purposes of this article and the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  Residential development in a regional/lifestyle center commercial PUD, may only occur in conjunction with a commercial or office development and may not encompass more than 20 percent of the proposed development. The residential component of a development may be constructed concurrent or after construction of the commercial or office component, but may not proceed such commercial or office development. The phasing of the residential component shall be reviewed and approved as part of the development plan. 
(Ord. No. 149, § 1, 6-24-91; Ord. No. 377, § 62, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 488, § 1, 11-23-09) 
Sec. 20-503. - District size and location. 
    Each PUD shall have a minimum area of five acres except the regional/lifestyle center commercial PUD, which must be a minimum of 30 acres, unless the applicant can demonstrate the existence of one of the following: 
(1)  Unusual physical features of the property itself or of the surrounding neighborhood such that development as a PUD will conserve a physical or topographic feature of importance to the neighborhood or community. 
(2)  The property is directly adjacent to or across a right-of-way from property which has been developed previously as a PUD or planned unit residential development and will be perceived as and will function as an extension of that previously approved development. 
(3)  The property is located in a transitional area between different land use categories or on a collector, minor or principal arterial as defined in the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 149, § 1, 6-24-91; Ord. No. 377, § 63, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 488, § 2, 11-23-09) 
Sec. 20-504. - Coordination with other zoning regulations. 
(a)  Subdivision review under chapter 18 shall be carried out simultaneously with the review of a PUD. The plans required under this chapter shall be submitted in addition to or in a form which will satisfy the requirements of chapter 18 for the preliminary and final plat. 
(b)  Site plan review under article II, division 6 of this chapter, shall be carried out for each non-single-family or duplex principal structure that is proposed. 
(c)  PUD plans shall be coordinated with and in compliance with provisions of articles V, VI and VII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 149, § 1, 6-24-91; Ord. No. 377, § 64, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-505. - Required general standards. 
(a)  The city shall consider the proposed PUD from the point of view of all standards and purposes of the comprehensive land use plan to coordinate between the proposed development and the surrounding use. The city shall consider the location of buildings, compatibility, parking areas and other features with response to the topography of the area and existing natural features, the efficiency, adequacy and safety of the proposed layout of streets; the adequacy and location of green areas; the adequacy, location and screening of noncompatible land uses and parking areas. 
(b)  The applicant shall demonstrate that the PUD plan offers the city higher quality architectural and site design, landscaping, protection of wetlands, creeks and mature trees and buffering for adjoining properties that represent improvements over normal ordinance standards. 
(c)  Density. An increase/transfer for density may be allowed at the sole discretion of the city utilizing the following factors: 
(1)  Density within a PUD shall be calculated on net acreage located within the property lines of the site in accordance with the land use plan. 
(2)  The area where the density is transferred must be within the project area and owned by the proponent. 
(3)  Density transfer in single-family detached area will be evaluated using the items listed in sections 20-506 or 20-508. Density transfer eligible for multiple-family areas are not permitted to be applied to single-family areas. 
(4)  In no case shall the overall density of the development exceed the net density ranges identified in the comprehensive plan except as specified in policies supporting the city's affordable housing goals. 
(d)  The city may utilize incentives to encourage the construction of projects which are consistent with the city's housing goals. Incentives may include modification of density and other standards for developments providing low and moderate cost housing. Incentives may be approved by the city contingent upon the developer and the city entering into an agreement ensuring that the housing will be available to low and moderate income persons for a specific period of time. 
(e)  Lot coverage shall be limited as follows: 
Comprehensive
Plan Designation Lot Coverage (%) Low or medium density residential 30 High density residential 50 Office 70 Commercial (neighborhood or community) 70 Commercial (regional) 70 Industrial 70 Mixed use 70*  
Individual lots within PUD may exceed these standards as long as the average meets these standards. 
(f)  Building and parking setbacks from public streets shall be determined by the city based on characteristics of the specific PUD. Parking lots and driving lanes shall be set back at least 20 feet from all exterior lot lines of a PUD. 
Where industrial uses abut developed platted or planned single-family lots outside the PUD, greater exterior building and parking setbacks, between 50 and 100 feet, shall be required in order to provide effective screening. The city council shall make a determination regarding the adequacy of screening proposed by the applicant. Screening may include the use of natural topography or earth berming, existing and proposed plantings and other features such as roadways and wetlands which provide separation of uses. PUD's must be developed in compliance with buffer yard requirements established by the comprehensive plan and chapter 20, article XXV, of the Chanhassen City Code. 
(g)  More than one building may be placed on one platted or recorded lot in a PUD. 
(h)  At the time PUD approval is sought from the city, all property to be included within a PUD shall be under unified ownership or control or subject to such legal restrictions or covenants as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the approved master development plan and final site and building plan. After approval, parcels may be sold to other parties without restriction, however, all parcels will remain subject to the PUD development contract that will be recorded in each chain-of-title. 
(i)  Signs shall be restricted to those which are permitted in the sign plan approved by the city and shall be regulated by permanent covenants or design standards established in the PUD development contract. 
(j)  The requirements contained in articles XXIII and XXV of this chapter may be applied by the city as it deems appropriate. 
(k)  The uniqueness of each PUD required that specifications and standards for streets, utilities, public facilities and subdivisions may be subject to modification from the city ordinances ordinarily governing them. The city council may therefore approve streets, utilities, public facilities and land subdivisions which are not in compliance with usual specifications or ordinance requirements if it finds that strict adherence to such standards or requirements is not required to meet the intent of this [article] or to protect the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the PUD, the surrounding area or the city as a whole. 
(l)  No building or other permit shall be issued for any work on property included within a proposed or approved PUD, nor shall any work occur unless such work is in compliance with the proposed or approved PUD. 
(m)  Buffer yards. 
(1)  The city comprehensive plan establishes a requirement for buffer yards. Buffer yards are to be established in areas indicated on the plan where higher intensity uses interface with low density uses and shall comply with chapter 20, article XXV, of the Chanhassen City Code. 
(2)  The buffer yard is not an additional setback requirement. The full obligation to provide the buffer yard shall be placed on the parcel containing the higher intensity use. 
(3)  The buffer yard is intended to provide physical separation and screening for the higher intensity use. As such, they will be required to be provided with a combination of berming, landscaping and/or tree preservation to maximize the buffering potential. To the extent deemed feasible by the city, new plantings shall be designed to require the minimum of maintenance, however, such maintenance as may be required to maintain consistency with the approved plan, shall be the obligation of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 149, § 1, 6-24-91; Ord. No. 179, § 3, 11-23-92; Ord. No. 240, § 14, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 315, § 2, 3-26-01; Ord. No. 377, §§ 65-68, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 474, §§ 7, 8, 10-13-08; Ord. No. 522, § 7, 5-23-11; Ord. No. 628, § 23, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 20-506. - Standards and guidelines for single-family detached residential planned unit developments. 
(a)  Intent. The use of planned unit developments for residential purposes should result in a reasonable and verifiable exchange between the city and the developer. The developer gains the potential for offering reduced lot sizes and flexibility in development standards which results in a combination of reduced development costs and improved marketing flexibility. At the same time, the city should be offered enhanced environmental sensitivity beyond normal ordinance requirements. Lot sizes should reflect the site's environmental limitations and opportunities and offer a range of housing pricing options. In addition, quality of development, as evidenced by landscaping, construction quality, provision of public/private open and recreational space, should also be enhanced. 
(b)  Minimum lot size. The standard single-family residential PUD allows lot sizes down to a minimum of 11,000 square feet (excluding identified wetland areas from lot calculations). The applicant must demonstrate that there are a mix of lot sizes and proposed housing types consistent with the local terrain conditions, preservation of natural features and open space and that lot sizes are consistent with average building footprints that will be concurrently approved with the PUD. The applicant must demonstrate that each lot is able to accommodate a 60-foot by 60-foot building pad without intruding into any required setback area or protective easement. Each home must also have a minimum rear yard 30 feet deep. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at building setback: 90 feet. 
(d)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(e)  Minimum setbacks: 
(1)  Front yard: 30 feet. The 30-foot front yard setback may be waived by the city council when it is demonstrated that environmental protection will be enhanced. In these instances, a minimum front yard setback of 20 feet shall be maintained. 
(2)  Rear yard: 30 feet. 
(3)  Side yard: Ten feet. 
(4)  Accessory buildings and structures: Located adjacent to or behind principal structure a minimum of ten feet from property line. 
(f)  Protection and preservation of natural features. The applicant must demonstrate that the flexibility provided by the PUD is used to protect and preserve natural features such as tree stands, wetlands, ponds and scenic views. These areas are to be permanently protected as public or private tracts or protected by permanently recorded easements. 
(g)  Landscaping plan. An overall landscaping plan is required. The plan shall contain the following: 
(1)  Boulevard plantings. Located in front yard areas shall require a mix of over-story trees and other plantings consistent with the site. A minimum of one over-story tree must be provided in each front yard. In place of mass grading for building pads and roads, stone or decorative block retaining walls shall be employed as required to preserve mature trees and the site's natural topography. 
(2)  Exterior landscaping and double-fronted lots. Landscaped berms shall be provided to buffer the site and lots from major roadways, railroads, and more intensive uses. Similar measures shall be provided for double-fronted lots. Where necessary to accommodate this landscaping, additional lot depth may be required. 
(3)  Rear yard. The rear yard shall contain at least two over-story trees. Preservation of existing trees having a diameter of at least six inches at four feet in height can be used to satisfy this requirement of the PUD and the plans should be developed to maximize tree preservation. 
(h)  Architectural standards. The applicant should demonstrate that the PUD will provide for a high level of architectural design and building materials. While this requirement is not intended to minimize design flexibility, a set of architectural standards should be prepared for city approval. The primary purpose of this section is to assure the city that high quality design will be employed and that home construction can take place without variances or impact to adjoining lots. The PUD agreement should include the following: 
(1)  Standards for exterior architectural treatments. 
(2)  Prohibition against freestanding garages may be required by the city when it is felt that unattached garages will be difficult to accommodate due to small lot sizes. If an attached garage is to be converted to living space at some time in the future, the applicant will have to demonstrate that there is sufficient room to accommodate a two-car garage without variances to obtain a permit. 
(3)  Guidelines regulating the placement of air conditioners, dog kennels, storage buildings, and other accessory uses that could potentially impact adjoining parcels due to small lot sizes. 
(Ord. No. 179, § 1, 11-23-92; Ord. No. 377, §§ 69, 70, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 542, § 1, 6-25-12; Ord. No. 628, § 24, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 20-507. - Controls during construction and following completion. 
(a)  The use of the land, the construction, modification or alteration of any buildings or structures in a PUD shall be governed by the final development plan. 
(b)  After the certificate of occupancy has been issued, no changes shall be made in the approved final development plan for a PUD except: 
(1)  Any minor extensions, alterations or modifications of existing buildings or structures may be authorized by the city planner if they are consistent with the purposes and intent of the final plan. No change authorized by this section may increase the bulk of any building structure by more than ten percent. 
(2)  Any building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the final development plan unless an amendment to the final development plan is approved. 
(3)  Changes in uses, any rearrangements of lots, blocks and building tracts, changes in the provisions of common open spaces, and all other changes to the approved final development plan may be made only after a public hearing conducted by the planning commission and upon final approval by the city council. Any changes shall be recorded as amendments to the final development plan. 
(c)  Major amendments to an approved master development plan may be approved by the city council after review by the planning commission. The notification and public hearing procedure for such amendment shall be the same as for approval of the original PUD. A major amendment is any amendment which: 
(1)  Substantially alters the location of buildings, parking areas or roads; 
(2)  Increases or decreases the number of residential dwelling units by more than five percent; 
(3)  Increases the gross floor area of nonresidential buildings by more than five percent or increases the gross floor area of any individual building by more than ten percent; 
(4)  Deceases the amount of open space by more than five percent or alters it in such a way as to change its original design or intended use; or 
(5)  Creates noncompliance with any special condition attached to the approval of the master development plan. 
(Ord. No. 149, § 1, 6-24-91) 
Sec. 20-508. - Standards and guidelines for single-family attached or cluster-home PUDs. 
(a)  Generally. Single-family attached, cluster, zero lot line, townhouses and similar type dwelling types may be allowed on sites designed for low, medium or high density residential uses by the City of Chanhassen Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Minimum lot sizes. There shall be no minimum lot size; however, in no case shall net density exceed guidelines established by the city comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Setback standards/structures and parking: 
(1)  PUD exterior: 50 feet. The 50-foot PUD exterior setback may be changed, increased or decreased, by the city council as part of the approval process when it is demonstrated that environmental protection or development design will be enhanced. 
(2)  Interior public right-of-way: 30 feet. The 30-foot front yard setback may be waived by the city council when it is demonstrated that environmental protection will be enhanced. In these instances, a minimum front yard setback of 20 feet shall be maintained. 
(3)  Other setbacks: Established by PUD agreement. 
(d)  Protection and preservation of natural features. The applicant must demonstrate that the flexibility provided by the PUD is used to protect and preserve natural features such as tree stands, wetlands, ponds and scenic views. These areas are to be permanently protected as public or private tracts or protected by permanently recorded easements. 
(e)  Landscaping plan. An overall landscaping plan is required. The plan shall contain the following: 
(1)  Boulevard plantings. Located in front yards shall require a mix of over-story trees and other plantings consistent with the site. Landscaped berms shall be provided to screen the site from major roadways, railroads and more intensive land uses. In place of mass grading for building pads and roads, stone or decorative blocks retaining walls shall be employed as required to preserve mature trees and the site's natural topography. 
(2)  Exterior landscaping and double-fronted lots. Landscaped berms shall be provided to buffer the site and lots from major roadways, railroads, and more intensive uses. Similar measures shall be provided for double-fronted lots. Where necessary to accommodate this landscaping, additional lot depth may be required. 
(3)  Foundation and yard plantings. A minimum budget for foundation plants shall be established and approved by the city. As each parcel is developed in the PUD, the builder shall be required to install plant materials meeting or exceeding the required budget prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or provide financial guarantees acceptable to the city. 
(4)  Tree preservation. Tree preservation is a primary goal of the PUD. A detailed tree survey should be prepared during the design of the PUD and the plans should be developed to maximize tree preservation. 
(f)  Architectural standards. The applicant should demonstrate that the PUD will provide for a high level of architectural design and building materials. While this requirement is not intended to minimize design flexibility, a set of architectural standards should be prepared for city approval. The primary purpose of this section is to assure the city that high quality design will be employed and that home construction can take place without variances or impact to adjoining lots. The PUD agreement should include the following: 
(1)  Standards for exterior architectural treatments. 
(2)  Prohibition against freestanding garages may be required by the city when it is felt that unattached garages will be difficult to accommodate due to small lot sizes. If an attached garage is to be converted to living space at some time in the future, the applicant will have to demonstrate that there is sufficient room to accommodate a two-car garage without variances to obtain a permit. 
(3)  Guidelines regulating the placement of air conditioners, dog kennels, storage buildings and other accessory uses that could potentially impact adjoining parcels due to small lot sizes. 
(Ord. No. 179, § 2, 11-23-92; Ord. No. 240, § 15, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 315, § 3, 3-26-01; Ord. No. 377, §§ 70, 71, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 628, § 25, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 20-509. - Standards and guidelines for regional/lifestyle center commercial planned unit developments. 
(a)  Intent. 
(1)  The use of planned unit developments for regional/lifestyle center commercial purposes should result in a reasonable and verifiable exchange between the city and the developer. This district is intended to provide for the development of regional and community scale integrated retail, office, business services, personal services and services to the traveling public near freeway interchanges. It shall strive to create a self-sustaining pattern of land uses with cultural, employment, entertainment, housing, shopping and social components. 
(2)  The regional/lifestyle center commercial district is a mixed commercial district with retail and entertainment uses of a scale and function that serves a regional market. The physical environment emphasizes an attractive, comfortable walking experience for shoppers and visitors. It shall be designed to serve pedestrian and mass transit users as well as automobile traffic. Centers of this type, generally, have at least two major retail anchors and are characterized by the diversity of mixed retail and service uses. Uses within this district should complement existing retail users in the other commercial districts. 
(3)  Development of these centers shall be planned as a group of organized uses and structures to accommodate a sensitive transition between commercial activities such as loading, parking of automobiles, lighting and trash collection and surrounding residential uses. Such centers shall be designed with one theme, with similar architectural style, similar exterior building materials, and a coordinated landscaping theme, but shall avoid monotony in design and visual appearance. Vehicle and pedestrian access is coordinated and logically linked to provide a comprehensive circulation system. 
(b)  Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet 
(c)  Minimum lot width at building setback: 100 feet. 
(d)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(e)  Minimum setbacks: Building setbacks are also a function of the building height. As a building's height increases above 35 feet, the front, rear and project perimeter setback shall increase on a one to one basis. The increased setback shall only apply to that portion of the building that exceeds 35 feet, e.g., a 40-foot tall building would be set back ten feet (front or rear) at that point where the building height equals 40 feet. A building height may step back, providing the setback/building height ratio is maintained. 
(1)  PUD exterior: 30 feet. The 30-foot PUD exterior setback may be changed, increased or decreased, by the city council as part of the approval process when it is demonstrated that environmental protection or development design will be enhanced. Building setbacks adjacent to exterior development lot lines abutting an area designated for residential use in the comprehensive plan shall be 50 feet, unless unique circumstances are found which would allow the city to reduce the setback requirement. 
(2)  Front yard: 5 feet. 
(3)  Rear yard: 5 feet. 
(4)  Side yard: 0. 
(5) Parking: Setbacks (feet): Front: 10 Side: 10 Rear: 10  
(6)  Parking setback exemptions: 
a.  There is no minimum parking setback when it abuts, without being separated by a street, another off-street parking area. 
b.  Parking along public streets shall provide an appropriate transition, which shall incorporate such elements as landscaping, decorative fencing, public art, berming, etc. 
c.  Parking setbacks adjacent to exterior development lot lines abutting an area designated for residential use in the comprehensive plan shall be 50 feet unless unique circumstances are found which would allow the city to reduce the setback requirement. Unique circumstances include site elevation, separation by natural features such as wetlands or stands of mature trees or substantial visual screening through berming and landscaping. 
(7)  Parking standards shall comply with City Code for type and location. 
(f)  Maximum building height: 
Commercial-retail 2 stories Commercial-services 3 stories Office 5 stories Residential 5 stories  
(g)  Protection and preservation of natural features. The applicant must demonstrate that the flexibility provided by the PUD is used to protect and preserve natural features such as tree stands, wetlands, ponds and scenic views. These areas are to be permanently protected as public or private tracts or protected by permanently recorded easements. 
(h)  Landscaping plan. An overall landscaping plan is required. The plan shall contain the following: 
(1)  Boulevard plantings. Located in front yards shall require a mix of over-story trees and other plantings consistent with the site. Landscaped berms shall be provided to screen the site from major roadways, railroads and less intensive land uses. In place of mass grading for building pads and roads, stone or decorative blocks retaining walls shall be employed as required to preserve mature trees and the site's natural topography. 
(2)  Exterior landscaping and double-fronted lots. Landscaped berms shall be provided to buffer the site and lots from major roadways, railroads, and less intensive uses. Similar measures shall be provided for double-fronted lots. Where necessary to accommodate this landscaping, additional lot depth may be required. 
(3)  Foundation and yard plantings. A minimum budget or plan for foundation plants shall be established and approved by the city. As each parcel is developed in the PUD, the builder shall be required to install plant materials meeting or exceeding the required budget or prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or provide financial guarantees acceptable to the city. 
(4)  Tree preservation. Tree preservation is a primary goal of the PUD. A detailed tree survey should be prepared during the design of the PUD and the plans should be developed to maximize tree preservation. 
(i)  Architectural standards. The applicant should demonstrate that the PUD will provide for a high level of architectural design and building materials. While this requirement is not intended to minimize design flexibility, a set of architectural standards should be prepared for city approval. The primary purpose of this section is to assure the city that high quality design will be employed and that home construction can take place without variances or impact to adjoining lots. The PUD agreement should include the following: 
(1)  Standards for exterior architectural treatments; 
(2)  Streetscape requirements: 
a.  Every building shall incorporate a streetscape, public realm space between the building the roadway. The use of canopies, awnings or arcades is encouraged in these interfaces. 
b.  Outdoor seating areas must be in a controlled or cordoned area with at least one access to an acceptable pedestrian walk. Seating areas may be shared by multiple uses. When a liquor license is involved, an enclosure is required around the outdoor seating area and the enclosure shall not be interrupted; access to such seating area must be through the principle building. Outdoor seating areas must be located and designed so as not to interfere with pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
c.  Streetscape elements shall include: Landscaping, lighting and street furniture such as benches, bus shelters, kiosks, planters, public art, tables and chairs, etc. 
(Ord. No. 488, § 3, 11-23-09) 
Secs. 20-510-20-515. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURES 

Sec. 20-516. - Preapplication conference. 
    Prior to filing an application for PUD, the applicant shall attend a conference with city staff. The primary purpose of the conference shall be to provide the applicant with an opportunity to gather information and obtain guidance on the general merits of the proposal and its conformity to the provisions of this article before incurring substantial expense. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 18(5-18-6(1)), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 542, § 2, 6-25-12) 
Sec. 20-517. - General concept plan. 
(a)  In order to receive guidance in the design of a PUD prior to submission of a formal application, an applicant may submit a concept plan for review and comment by the planning commission and city council. Submission of a concept plan is optional but is highly recommended for large PUDs. In order for the review to be of most help to the applicant, the concept plan should contain such specific information as is suggested by the city. Generally, this information should include the following information appropriate to the type of development, e.g., commercial, industrial or residential: 
(1)  Approximate building areas, pedestrian ways and road locations; 
(2)  Height, bulk and square footage of buildings; 
(3)  Type, number or square footage or intensities of specific land uses; 
(4)  Number of dwelling units; 
(5)  Generalized development plan showing areas to be developed or preserved; and 
(6)  Staging and timing of the development. 
(b)  The tentative written consent of all property owners within the proposed PUD shall be filed with the city before the staff commences review. Approval of the concept statement shall not obligate the city to approve the final plan or any part thereof or to rezone the property to a planned unit development district. 
(c)  The final acceptance of land uses is subject to the following procedures: 
(1)  The developer meets with the city staff to discuss the proposed developments. 
(2)  The applicant shall file the concept stage application and concept plan, together with all supporting data. 
(3)  The planning commission shall conduct a hearing and make recommendations to the city council. Notice of the hearing shall consist of a legal property description, description of request, and be published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the hearing. Written notification of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten days prior thereto to owners of land within 500 feet of the boundary of the property and an on-site notification sign erected. 
(4)  Following the receipt of the report and recommendations from the planning commission, the city council shall consider the proposal. The council may comment on the concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 18(5-18-6(2)), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, § 72, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 409, § 3, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 542, § 3, 6-25-12) 
Sec. 20-518. - Development stage. 
(a)  The applicant shall submit the development stage application, preliminary plat and fee. The applicant shall file the development plans and preliminary plat, together with all supporting data. 
(b)  With the appropriate notifications, the planning commission shall conduct the hearing on the preliminary plat and the rezoning and report its findings and make recommendations to the city council for action. 
(c)  The development stage shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  A preliminary plat and information required by chapter 18. 
(2)  An approved development plan drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet containing at least the following information: 
a.  Proposed name of the development. 
b.  Property boundary lines and dimensions of the property and any significant topographical or physical features of the property. 
c.  The location, size, use and arrangement including height in stories and feet and total square feet of ground area coverage and floor area of proposed buildings, and existing buildings which will remain, if any. 
d.  Location, dimensions of all driveways, entrances, curb cuts, parking stalls, loading spaces and access aisles, and all other circulation elements, including bike and pedestrian; and the total site coverage of all circulation elements. 
e.  The location, designation and total area proposed to be conveyed or dedicated for private and public open space, including parks, playgrounds, school sites and recreational facilities. 
f.  The location, use and size of structures and other land uses located within 200 feet of the property boundary. 
g.  A natural resource analysis identifying existing vegetation areas consisting of forest and wood lots as well as wetlands and wetlands vegetation; the geology, slope, soil and groundwater characteristics of the site; existing lakes, streams, ponds, drainage swales, runoff settling areas, and floodplains must be identified; analysis of the relationship of the proposed use of the existing natural conditions listed above. 
h.  A proposed landscaping plan, including location of existing plants, identification of species, caliper size and acreage. 
i.  The location, type and size of all graphics and signage. 
j.  Any other information that may have been required by the planning commission or council in conjunction with the approval of the general concept plan. 
(3)  An accurate legal description of the entire area within the PUD for which final development plan approval is sought. 
(4)  A tabulation indicating the number of residential dwelling units and expected population. 
(5)  A tabulation indicating the gross square footage, if any, of commercial and industrial floor space by type of activity. 
(6)  Preliminary architectural "typical" plans indicating use, floor plan, elevations and exterior wall finishes of proposed building, including manufactured homes. 
(7)  Preliminary grading and site alteration plan illustrating changes to existing topography and natural site vegetation. The plan should clearly reflect the site treatment and its conformance with the approved concept plan. 
(8)  A soil erosion control plan acceptable to watershed districts, state department of natural resources, soil conservation service, or any other agency with review authority clearly illustrating erosion control measures to be used during construction and as permanent measures. 
(9)  Protective covenants and homeowners' association bylaws. 
(d)  The city may request additional information from the applicant concerning operational factors or retain expert testimony at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 18(5-18-6(3)), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 542, § 4, 6-25-12) 
Sec. 20-519. - Final stage. 
    Following preliminary plat approval, the applicant for PUD shall prepare and submit the final plat and execute the development contract prepared by the city. If appropriate because of the limited scale of the proposal, the preliminary and final plats may proceed simultaneously. The city council shall then consider the submission for final approval and rezoning to PUD. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 18(5-18-6(4)), 12-15-86) 
Secs. 20-520-20-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 377, § 73, adopted May 24, 2004, repealed Art. IX, §§ 20-551-570, which pertained agricultural preservation districts and derived from Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 2(5-2-1, 5-2-2, 5-2-3, 5-2-4, 5-2-5, 5-2-6), adopted Dec. 15, 1986; Ord. No. 120, §§ 3 and 4(1), adopted Feb. 12, 1990. 

Secs. 20-551-20-570. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - "A-2" AGRICULTURAL ESTATE DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-571. - Intent. 
    The intent of the "A-2" District is preservation of rural character while respecting development patterns by allowing single-family residential development. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 3(5-3-1), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-572. - Permitted uses. 
    The following are permitted uses in an "A-2" District: 
(1)  Agriculture. 
(2)  Antennas as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(3)  Arboretums. 
(4)  Day care center for 12 or fewer children. 
(5)  Group home for six or fewer persons. 
(6)  Public and private parks and open space. 
(7)  Single-family dwellings. 
(8)  Temporary real estate office or model home. 
(9)  Utility services. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 3(5-3-2), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 259, § 7, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 74, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-573. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in an "A-2" District: 
(1)  Accessory agricultural building. 
(2)  Garage. 
(3)  Private stables. 
(4)  Swimming pool. 
(5)  Tennis court. 
(6)  Signs. 
(7)  Home occupations. 
(8)  One dock. 
(9)  Roadside stand. 
(10)  Private kennel. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 3(5-3-3), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-574. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in an "A-2" District: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Cemetery. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Electrical distribution and underground electric distribution substations. 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  Churches. 
(12)  Recreational beach lots. 
(13)  Group homes for seven to 16 persons. 
(14)  Golf courses. 
(15)  Towers as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 3(5-3-4), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 80-E, § 1, 11-16-87; Ord. No. 96, § 1, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 103, § 1, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 120, § 4(2), 2-12-90; Ord. No. 240, § 16, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 259, § 8, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 390, § 4, 3-14-05) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Sec. 20-575. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "A-2" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  The minimum lot area is two and one-half acres, subject to section 20-906. A one-unit per ten-acre gross density shall be maintained for proposed lots outside the approved Metropolitan Urban Services Area in effect at the time of a proposed development. This requirement shall not apply to lots of record in existence on January 15, 1987 or lots created thereafter if they were subject to a pending subdivision application on that date and the lots were created as a result of that application. The one-unit per ten-acre density applies to contiguous property under single ownership. Acreage under single ownership, which is not contiguous, cannot be combined for increased density/building eligibility on one of the parcels. Once a building eligibility has been used for a property, a development contract must be recorded with the county establishing the number of building eligibilities remaining or documenting that no building eligibility remains. 
(2)  The minimum lot frontage is 200 feet, except that the minimum lot frontage of lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall be at least 200 feet at the building setback line. 
(3)  The minimum lot depth is 200 feet, except that lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall be at least 200 feet at the building setback line. 
(4)  The maximum lot coverage is 20 percent. 
(5)  The minimum setbacks are as follows: 
a.  For front yards, 50 feet. 
b.  For rear yards, 50 feet. 
c.  For side yards, ten feet. 
(6)  The maximum height is as follows: 
a.  For the principal structure, three stories/35 feet. 
b.  For accessory structures, three stories/35 feet. 
(7)  The minimum driveway separation is as follows: 
a.  If the driveway is on a collector street, 400 feet. 
b.  If the driveway is on an arterial street, 1,250 feet. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 3(5-3-5), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 170, § 1, 7-23-92; Ord. No. 194, § 1, 10-11-93; Ord. No. 332, § 1, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 377, § 75, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-576. - Interim uses. 
    The following are interim uses in the "A-2" District: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Mineral extraction. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Manufactured homes (compliance with section 20-905 is not required). 
(5)  Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(6)  Commercial kennels, stables and riding academies. 
(7)  Wholesale nurseries. 
(8)  Golf driving ranges with or without miniature golf courses. 
(9)  Petting farms. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 3, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 140, § 1, 3-11-91; Ord. No. 240, § 17, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 306, § 3, 7-24-00; Ord. No. 377, § 76, 5-24-04) 
Secs. 20-577-20-590. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - "RR" RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-591. - Intent. 
    The intent of the "RR" District is to provide for single-family residential subdivisions intended for large lot developments. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 4(5-4-1), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-592. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in an "RR" District: 
(1)  Agriculture. 
(2)  Antennas as regulated by article XXX of this chapter 
(3)  Day care center for 12 or fewer children. 
(4)  Group home serving six or fewer persons. 
(5)  Public and private parks and open space. 
(6)  Single-family dwellings. 
(7)  Temporary real estate office and model home. 
(8)  Utility services. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 4(5-4-2), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 259, § 9, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 77, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-593. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in an "RR" District: 
(1)  Garage. 
(2)  Storage building. 
(3)  Swimming pool. 
(4)  Tennis court. 
(5)  Signs. 
(6)  Home occupation. 
(7)  One dock. 
(8)  Roadside stand. 
(9)  Private kennel. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 4(5-4-3), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-594. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in an "RR" District: 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Private stables. 
(3)  Recreational beach lots. 
(4)  Towers as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 4(5-4-4), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 120, § 4(3), 2-12-90; Ord. No. 259, § 10, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 78, 5-24-04) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Sec. 20-595. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "RR" District subject to additional requirements set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  The minimum lot area is two and one-half acres, subject to section 20-906. A one-unit per ten-acre gross density shall be maintained for proposed lots outside the approved Metropolitan Urban Services Area in effect at the time of a proposed development. This requirement shall not apply to lots of record in existence on January 15, 1987 or lots created thereafter if they were subject to a pending subdivision application on that date and the lots were created as a result of that application. The one-unit per ten-acre density applies to contiguous property under single ownership. Acreage under single ownership, which is not contiguous, cannot be combined for increased density/building eligibility on one of the parcels. Once a building eligibility has been used for a property, a development contract must be recorded with the county establishing the number of building eligibilities remaining or documenting that no building eligibility remains. 
(2)  The minimum lot frontage is 200 feet, except that the minimum lot frontage of lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall be at least 200 feet at the building setback line. 
(3)  The minimum lot depth is 200 feet, except that lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall be at least 200 feet at the building setback line. 
(4)  The maximum lot coverage is 20 percent. 
(5)  The minimum setbacks are as follows: 
a.  For front yards, 50 feet. 
b.  For rear yards, 50 feet. 
c.  For side yards, ten feet. 
(6)  The maximum height is as follows: 
a.  For the principal structure, three stories/35 feet. 
b.  For accessory structures, three stories/35 feet. 
(7)  The minimum driveway separation is as follows: 
a.  If the driveway is on a collector street, 400 feet. 
b.  If the driveway is on an arterial street, 1,250 feet. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 4(5-4-5), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 127, § 2, 3-26-90; Ord. No. 170, § 2, 6-8-92; Ord. No. 194, § 2, 10-11-93; Ord. No. 332, § 2, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 377, § 79, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-596. - Interim uses. 
    The following are interim uses in the "RR" District: 
(1)  Commercial kennels and stables. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 3, 2-12-90) 
Editor's note- Inasmuch as there exists a § 20-595, the provisions added by § 3 of Ord. No. 120 as § 20-595 have been redesignated as § 20-596. 
Secs. 20-597-20-610. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - "RSF" SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-611. - Intent. 
    The intent of the "RSF" District is to provide for single-family residential subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 5(5-5-1), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-612. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in an "RSF" District: 
(1)  Antennas as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(2)  Day care center for 12 or fewer children. 
(3)  Group home serving six or fewer persons. 
(4)  Public and private parks/open space. 
(5)  Single-family dwellings. 
(6)  Temporary real estate office and model home. 
(7)  Utility services. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 5(5-5-2), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 259, § 11, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 80, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-613. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in an "RSF" District: 
(1)  Garage. 
(2)  Storage building. 
(3)  Swimming pool. 
(4)  Tennis court. 
(5)  Signs. 
(6)  Home occupations. 
(7)  One dock. 
(8)  Private kennel. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 5(5-5-3), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-614. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in an "RSF" District: 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Recreational beach lots. 
(4)  Towers as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 5(5-5.4), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 120, § 4(4), 2-12-90; Ord. No. 259, § 12, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Sec. 20-615. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "RSF" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter and chapter 18: 
(1)  The minimum lot area is 15,000 square feet. For neck or flag lots, the lot area requirements shall be met after the area contained within the "neck" has been excluded from consideration. 
(2)  The minimum lot frontage is 90 feet, except that lots fronting on a cul-de-sac "bubble" shall be 90 feet in width at the building setback line. The location of this lot is conceptually illustrated below. 

Frontage Measured at Setback Line 
(3)  The minimum lot depth is 125 feet. 
(4)  Lot width on neck or flag lots and lots accessed by private streets shall be 100 feet as measured at the front building setback line. The location of these lots is conceptually illustrated below. 

Neck/Flag Lots 
(5)  The maximum lot coverage for all structures and paved surfaces is 30 percent, of which no more than 25 percent can be impervious surfaces. For flag/neck lots neither the area within the neck, nor the lot coverage of the driveway within the neck shall be included within the calculation of the lot area or lot coverage of the lot. 
(6)  The setbacks are as follows: 
a.  For front yards, 30 feet. 
b.  For rear yards, 30 feet. 
c.  For side yards, ten feet. 
(7)  The setbacks for lots served by private streets and/or neck lots are as follows: 
a.  For front yard, 30 feet. The front yard shall be the lot line nearest the public right-of-way that provides access to the parcel. The rear yard lot line is to be located opposite from the front lot line with the remaining exposures treated as side lot lines. On neck lots the front yard setback shall be measured at the point nearest the front lot line where the lot achieves a 100-foot minimum width. 
b.  For rear yards, 30 feet. 
c.  For side yards, ten feet. 
(8)  The maximum height is as follows: 
a.  For the principal structure, three stories/35 feet. 
b.  For accessory structures, 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 5(5-5-5), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 90, § 1, 3-14-88; Ord. No. 127, § 3, 3-26-90; Ord. No. 145, § 2, 4-8-91; Ord. No. 240, § 18, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 324, § 23, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 377, § 81, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 409, § 4, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 619, § 7, 2-27-17; Ord. No. 633, § 3, 6-25-18) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 145 purported to amend § 20-615(6)b. pertaining to accessory structures; such provision were contained in § 20-615(7)b., subsequent to amendment of the section by Ord. No. 127. Hence, the provisions of Ord. No. 145, § 2, were included as amending § 20-615(7)b. 
Sec. 20-616. - Interim uses. 
    The following are interim uses in the "RSF" District: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 3, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 612, § 5, 12-14-15; Ord. No. 621, § 6, 5-8-17) 
Secs. 20-617-20-630. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - "R-4" MIXED LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-631. - Intent. 
    The intent of the "R-4" District is to provide for single-family detached and attached residential development at a maximum net density of four dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 6(5-6-1), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, § 82, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-632. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in an "R-4" District: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Public and private parks and open space. 
(4)  Group home serving six or fewer persons. 
(5)  State-licensed day care center for 12 or fewer children. 
(6)  Utility services. 
(7)  Temporary real estate office and model home. 
(8)  Antennas as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 6(5-6-2), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 259, § 13, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-633. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in an "R-4" District: 
(1)  Garage. 
(2)  Storage buildings. 
(3)  Swimming pool. 
(4)  Tennis court. 
(5)  Signs. 
(6)  Home occupations. 
(7)  One dock. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 6(5-6-3), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-634. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in an "R-4" District: 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Private kennel. 
(5)  Towers as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 6(5-6-4), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 120, § 4(5), 2-12-90; Ord. No. 259, § 14, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Sec. 20-635. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "R-4" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  The minimum lot area is as follows: 
a.  For a detached single-family dwelling unit, 15,000 square feet per unit. 
b.  For a two-family dwelling, 10,000 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(2)  The minimum lot frontage is as follows: 
a.  For a single-family dwelling, 80 feet. 
b.  For a two-family dwelling, 50 feet per dwelling unit. 
c.  If the lot fronts on a cul-de-sac the width of the lot at the building setback lines shall be: 
1.  In the case of a single-family dwelling, 80 feet. 
2.  In the case of a two-family dwelling, 50 feet. 
(3)  The minimum lot depth is 125 feet. 
(4)  The maximum lot coverage for all structures and paved surfaces is 30 percent. 
(5)  The setbacks are as follows: 
a.  For front yards, 30 feet. 
b.  For rear yards, 30 feet. 
c.  For side yards, ten feet. 
(6)  The maximum height is as follows: 
a.  For the principal structure, three stories/35 feet. 
b.  For accessory structures, one story/15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 6(5-6-5), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 90, § 2, 3-14-88; Ord. No. 377, § 83, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-636. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-637. - Interim uses. 
    The following are interim uses in the "R-4" District: 
(1)  Private kennels. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 3, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 377, § 84, 5-24-04) 
Secs. 20-638-20-640. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - MIXED LOW AND MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - "RLM" RESIDENTIAL LOW AND MEDIUM DENSITY DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-641. - Intent. 
    The intent of the "RLM" District is to provide for single-family attached or detached residential development on land guided residential-low or medium density in the city's comprehensive plan with a maximum net density of eight units per acre. The "RLM" District is intended to be used where large areas of upland will be preserved or created as permanent open space to balance the higher lot coverage permitted on individual lots. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 85, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 431, § 1, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 628, § 26, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 20-642. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in an "RLM" District: 
(1)  Antennas as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(2)  Day care center 12 or less persons. 
(3)  Public and private parks and open spaces. 
(4)  Single-family dwelling. 
(5)  Temporary real estate office and model home. 
(6)  Townhouses, two-family and multifamily dwellings. 
(7)  Utility services. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 85, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-643. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in an "RLM" District: 
(1)  Garage. 
(2)  Home occupations. 
(3)  Signs. 
(4)  Storage building. 
(5)  Swimming pool. 
(6)  Tennis court. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 85, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-644. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in an "RLM" District: 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Day care center. 
(3)  Group home serving from seven to 16 persons. 
(4)  Recreational beach lots. 
(5)  Towers as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 85, 5-24-04) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Sec. 20-645. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "RLM" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  The minimum lot area is as follows: 
a.  If a single-family dwelling is located on the lot, 9,000 square feet per dwelling unit. 
b.  If a two-family dwelling is located on the lot, 7,260 square feet per dwelling unit. 
c.  If a townhouse or multiple-family project is located on the lot, an average of 5,445 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(2)  The minimum lot frontage: 
a.  Single-family and two-family dwellings are 50 feet except that in the case of a lot that fronts on a cul-de-sac or on the outside of a curve on a curvilinear street, the width of the lot at the building setback line shall be 50 feet. 
b.  Townhouses and multifamily dwellings are 30 feet except that in the case of a lot that fronts on a cul-de-sac or on the outside of a curve on a curvilinear street, the width of the lot at the building setback line shall be 30 feet. 
(3)  The minimum lot depth: 
a.  If a single-family dwelling, the minimum depth is 110 feet. 
b.  If a two-family dwelling minimum depth is 100 feet. 
c.  If a townhouse or multiple-family dwelling minimum depth is 100 feet. 
(4)  The maximum lot coverage is: 
a.  If a single-family dwelling, 35 percent. 
b.  If a two-family dwelling, 40 percent. 
c.  If a townhouse or multiple-family dwelling 50 percent. 
(5)  The setbacks are as follows: 
a.  If a single-family dwelling: 
1.  For front yards, 25 feet. 
2.  For rear yards, 25 feet. 
3.  For side yards, five feet on garage side and ten feet on house side. Minimum separation between structures on adjacent parcels shall be 15 feet. 
b.  If a two-family dwelling: 
1.  For front yards, 25 feet. 
2.  For rear yards, 30 feet. 
3.  For side yards, ten feet where no common wall is located. 
c.  If a townhouse or multiple-family dwelling: 
1.  For front yards, 25 feet. 
2.  For rear yards, 25 feet. 
3.  For side yards, ten feet where no common wall is located. 
(6)  The maximum height is as follows: 
a.  For the principal structure, three stories/35 feet. 
b.  For accessory structures, one story/15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 85, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 423, § 4, 6-12-06) 
Secs. 20-646-20-650. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - "R-8" MIXED MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-651. - Intent. 
    The intent of the "R-8" District is to provide for single-family detached or attached residential development at a maximum net density of eight dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 7(5-7-1), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 240, § 19, 7-24-95) 
Sec. 20-652. - Permitted uses. 
    The following are permitted uses in an R-8 district: 
(1)  Townhouses, two-family, multifamily dwellings. 
(2)  Public and private parks and open spaces. 
(3)  Utility services. 
(4)  Temporary real estate office and model home. 
(5)  Antennas as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(6)  Continuing care retirement facility, subject to the requirements of section 20-965. 
(7)  Adult day care, subject to the requirements of section 20-966. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 7(5-7-2), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 259, § 15, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 574, § 2, 10-22-12; Ord. No. 628, § 27, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 639, § 3, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 20-653. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in an "R-8" District: 
(1)  Garage. 
(2)  Storage building. 
(3)  Swimming pool. 
(4)  Tennis court. 
(5)  Signs. 
(6)  Home occupations. 
(7)  One dock. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 7(5-7-3), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-654. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in an "R-8" District: 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Day care center. 
(3)  Group home serving from seven to 16 persons. 
(4)  Recreational beach lots. 
(5)  Towers as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 7(5-7-4), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 259, § 16, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 87, 5-24-04) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Sec. 20-655. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "R-8" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  The minimum lot area is as follows: 
a.  For a two-family dwelling, 7,500 square feet per dwelling unit. 
b.  For a townhouse or multifamily dwelling, 5,500 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(2)  The minimum lot frontage is 50 feet per dwelling unit except that in the case of a lot that fronts on a cul-de-sac, the width of the lot at the building setback line shall be as follows: 
a.  If a two-family dwelling is located on the lot, 50 feet per dwelling unit. 
b.  If a townhouse or multiple-family project is located on the lot, 150 feet. 
(3)  The minimum lot depth is 150 feet. 
(4)  The maximum lot coverage is 35 percent. 
(5)  The setbacks are as follows: 
a.  For front yards, 25 feet. 
b.  For rear yards, 25 feet. 
c.  For side yards, ten feet. 
(6)  The maximum height is as follows: 
a.  For the principal structure, three stories/35 feet. 
b.  For accessory structures, one story/15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 7(5-7-5), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, § 88, 5-24-04). 
Secs. 20-656-20-670. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - "R-12" DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-671. - Intent. 
    The intent of the "R-12" District is to provide for townhouses and multifamily residential structures at a maximum density of 12 dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 8(5-8-1), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-672. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in an "R-12" District: 
(1)  Townhouses, two-family dwellings and multifamily dwellings. 
(2)  Public and private parks and open space. 
(3)  Utility services. 
(4)  Antennas as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(5)  Adult day care, subject to the requirements of section 20-966. 
(6)  Continuing care retirement facility, subject to the requirements of section 20-965. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 8(5-8-2), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 259, § 17, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 628, § 28, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 639, § 4, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 20-673. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in an "R-12" District: 
(1)  Garage. 
(2)  Storage building. 
(3)  Swimming pool. 
(4)  Tennis court. 
(5)  Signs. 
(6)  Home occupations. 
(7)  One dock. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art, V, § 8(5-8-3), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-674. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in an "R-12" District: 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Day care center. 
(3)  Group home serving from seven to 16 persons. 
(4)  Health services. 
(5)  Recreational beach lots. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Towers as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 8(5-8-4), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 120, § 4(6), 2-12-90; Ord. No. 259, § 18, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 88, 5-24-04) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Sec. 20-675. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "R-12" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  The minimum lot area is as follows: 
a.  For a two-family dwelling, 7,500 square feet per dwelling unit. 
b.  For a townhouse or multifamily dwelling, 3,600 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(2)  The minimum lot frontage is as follows: 
a.  If a two-family dwelling is located on the lot, 50 feet per dwelling unit, except that if the lot fronts on a cul-de-sac, the lot shall be 50 feet in width at the building setback line. 
b.  If a townhouse or multiple-family project is located on the lot, 150 feet. 
(3)  The minimum lot depth is 155 feet. 
(4)  The maximum lot coverage is 35 percent. 
(5)  The setbacks are as follows: 
a.  For front yards, 25 feet. 
b.  For rear yards, 25 feet. 
c.  For side yards, ten feet. 
(6)  The maximum height is as follows: 
a.  For the principal structure, three stories/35 feet. 
b.  For accessory structures, one story/15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 8(5-8-5), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, § 90, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-676. - Interim uses. 
    The following are interim uses in the "R-12" District: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Temporary real estate office and model homes. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 3, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 377, § 91; Ord. No. 377, § 91, 5-24-04) 
Secs. 20-677-20-679. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - "R-16" DISTRICT[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 123, adopted Mar. 12, 1990, amended Art. XV by adding §§ 20-680-20-684. At the editor's discretion, the new provisions have been included as Div. 2 to this Article. 

Sec. 20-680. - Intent. 
    The intent of the "R-16" District is to provide for multifamily residential structures at a maximum net density of 16 dwelling units per acre on land guided for high density residential uses by the city comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 1, 3-12-90) 
Sec. 20-681. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in an "R-16" District: 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(2)  Public and private parks and open space. 
(3)  Utility services. 
(4)  Antennas as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(5)  Adult day care, subject to the requirements of section 20-966. 
(6)  Continuing care retirement facility, subject to the requirements of section 20-965. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 1, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 259, § 19, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 628, § 29, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 639, § 5, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 20-682. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in an "R-16" District: 
(1)  Garage. 
(2)  Storage building. 
(3)  Swimming pool. 
(4)  Tennis court. 
(5)  Signs as per allowed in an "R-12" District. 
(6)  Home occupations. 
(7)  One dock. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 1, 3-12-90) 
Sec. 20-683. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in an "R-16" District: 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Day care center. 
(3)  Group home serving from seven to 16 persons. 
(4)  Health services. 
(5)  Recreational beach lots. 
(6)  Temporary real estate office and model home. 
(7)  Towers and antennas as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 1, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 259, § 20, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 92, 5-24-04) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Sec. 20-684. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "R-16" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  The minimum lot area is as follows: 
a.  Two thousand seven hundred square feet per dwelling unit. 
(2)  The maximum lot coverage is 50 percent. 
(3)  The building setbacks are as follows: 
a.  For front yards, 50 feet. 
b.  For rear yards, 50 feet. 
c.  For side yards, 50 feet. 
(4)  Parking setbacks shall be 25 feet from all property lines. 
(5)  The maximum height is as follows: 
a.  For the principal structure, three stories/35 feet. 
b.  For accessory structures, one story/15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 1, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 377, § 93, 5-24-04) 
Secs. 20-685-20-690. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - "BN" NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-691. - Intent. 
    The intent of the "BN" District is to provide for limited low intensity neighborhood retail and service establishments to meet daily needs of residents. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 10(5-10-1), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-692. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in a "BN" District: 
(1)  Antennas as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(2)  Community center. 
(3)  Convenience stores without gas pumps. 
(4)  Day care center. 
(5)  Health services. 
(6)  Home furnishings. 
(7)  Offices. 
(8)  Personal services. 
(9)  Private clubs and lodges. 
(10)  Shopping center. 
(11)  Small appliance repair shop. 
(12)  Specialty retail shop. 
(13)  Utility services. 
(14)  Veterinary clinics. 
(15)  Adult day care, subject to the requirements of section 20-966. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 10(5-10-2), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, § 94, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 628, § 30, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 20-693. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in a "BN" District: 
(1)  Parking lots. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Signs. 
(4)  Temporary outdoor sales and events (subject to the requirements of section 20-964). 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 10(5-10-3), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 243, § 3, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 240, § 20, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 377, § 95, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 619, § 8, 2-27-17) 
Sec. 20-694. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in a "BN" District: 
(1)  Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(2)  Convenience store with gas pumps. 
(3)  Banks with drive-through facilities. 
(4)  Fast-food restaurants without a drive-through as part of a shopping center. 
(5)  Motor fuel station. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Standard restaurants. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 10(5-10-4), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 116, § 5, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 120, § 4(7), 2-12-90; Ord. No. 277, § 1, 1-26-98; Ord. No. 377, § 96, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 628, § 31, 12-11-17) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Sec. 20-695. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a "BN" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  The minimum district area is three acres. This section may be waived in the case of expansion to an existing district. 
(2)  The minimum lot area is 15,000 square feet. 
(3)  The minimum lot frontage is 75 feet, except that lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum frontage of 60 feet in all districts. 
(4)  The minimum lot depth is 150 feet. 
(5)  The maximum lot coverage including all structures and paved surfaces is 65 percent. 
(6)  Off-street parking shall comply with district setback requirements except: 
a.  There is no minimum setback when it abuts a railroad right-of-way, except as provided in chapter 20, article XXV, division 3, pertaining to landscaping requirements. 
b.  There is no minimum setback when it abuts, without being separated by a street, another off-street parking area. 
c.  The minimum setback is 50 feet when it abuts a residential district without being separated from the residential district by a street or railroad right-of-way. 
d.  The minimum setback is 25 feet for side street side yards. 
e.  Parking setbacks along public rights-of-way may be reduced to a minimum of ten feet if the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that 100-percent screening is provided at least five feet above the adjacent parking lot. The intent of this section is that the city is willing to trade a reduced setback for additional landscaping that is both an effective screen and of high quality aesthetically. Acceptable screening is to be comprised of berming and landscaping. Screening through the use of fencing is not permitted. 
(7)  The maximum height is as follows: 
a.  For the principal structure, two stories when it abuts a residential district without being separated by a street, and three stories with a maximum height of 35 feet when separated by a street. 
b.  For accessory structures, one story. 
(8)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  For front yards, 35 feet. 
b.  For rear yards, 30 feet. 
c.  For side yards, 15 feet. 
d.  The minimum setback is 50 feet when it abuts a residential district without being separated from the residential district by a street or railroad right-of-way. 
e.  Buffer yards. The city comprehensive plan establishes a requirement for buffer yards. Buffer yards are to be established in areas indicated on the plan where higher intensity uses interface with low density uses and shall comply with chapter 20, article XXV, of the Chanhassen City Code. 
The buffer yard is not an additional setback requirement. The full obligation to provide the buffer yard shall be placed on the parcel containing the higher intensity use. 
The buffer yard is intended to provide physical separation and screening for the higher intensity use. As such, they will be required to be provided with a combination of berming, landscaping and/or tree preservation to maximize the buffering potential. To the extent deemed feasible by the city, new plantings shall be designed to require the minimum of maintenance, however, such maintenance as may be required to maintain consistency with the approved plan, shall be the obligation of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 10(5-10-5), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 94, §§ 1, 2, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 136, §§ IA, lB, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 451, § 3, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 474, §§ 9, 10, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 20-696. - Interim uses. 
    The following are interim uses in the "BN" District: 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 3, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 243, § 4, 2-13-95) 
Secs. 20-697-20-710. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - "BH" HIGHWAY AND BUSINESS SERVICES DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-711. - Intent. 
    The intent of the "BH" District is to provide for highway oriented commercial development restricted to a low building profile. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 11(5-11-1), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-712. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in a "BH" District: 
(1)  Adult day care, subject to the requirements of section 20-966. 
(2)  Antennas as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(3)  Brew pub, subject to the requirements of section 20-968. 
(4)  Brewery operated in conjunction with a taproom producing less than 3,500 barrels per year, subject to the requirements of section 20-969. 
(5)  Car wash. 
(6)  Community center. 
(7)  Convenience stores without gas pumps. 
(8)  Day care center. 
(9)  Fast-food restaurant. 
(10)  Financial institutions with or without drive-through services. 
(11)  Funeral homes. 
(12)  Health services. 
(13)  Liquor stores. 
(14)  Microdistillery operated in conjunction with cocktail room, subject to the requirements of section 20-967. 
(15)  Miniature golf. 
(16)  Motels and hotels. 
(17)  Offices. 
(18)  Personal services. 
(19)  Private clubs and lodges. 
(20)  Shopping center. 
(21)  Specialty retail shops. 
(22)  Standard restaurants. 
(23)  Utility services. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 11(5-11-2), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 116, § 6, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 122, § 1, 2-26-90; Ord. No. 173, § 1, 7-27-92; Ord. No. 259, § 21, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 97, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 377, § 97, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 628, §§ 32, 33, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 632, § 7, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 20-713. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in a "BH" District: 
(1)  Signs. 
(2)  Parking lots. 
(3)  Temporary outdoor sales and events (subject to the requirements of section 20-964). 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 11(5-11-3), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 243, § 5, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 377, § 98, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 619, § 9, 2-27-17) 
Sec. 20-714. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in a "BH" District: 
(1)  Automobile rental facilities. 
(2)  Automotive repair shops. 
(3)  Brewery operated in conjunction with a taproom, producing over 3,500 barrels per year. 
(4)  Convenience stores with gas pumps. 
(5)  Drive-through facilities. 
(6)  Emission control testing stations. 
(7)  Garden centers. 
(8)  Motor fuel stations. 
(9)  Outdoor storage. 
(10)  Small vehicle sales. 
(11)  Supermarkets. 
(12)  Towers as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 11(5.11-4), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 80-G, § 1, 1-11-88; Ord. No. 91, § 1, 6-27-88; Ord. No. 116, § 6, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 120, § 4(8), 2-12-90; Ord. No. 137, § 2, 2-11-91; Ord. No. 259, § 22, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 296, § 2, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 377, § 99, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 628, § 34, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 632, § 8, 6-11-18) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Sec. 20-715. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a "BH" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  The minimum district area is ten acres. This section may be waived by a condition use permit in the case of expansion of an existing district. 
(2)  The minimum lot area is 20,000 square feet. 
(3)  The minimum lot frontage is 100 feet, except that lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum frontage in all districts of 60 feet. 
(4)  The minimum lot depth is 150 feet. 
(5)  The maximum lot coverage is 65 percent. 
(6)  Off-street parking shall comply with district setback requirements except: 
a.  There is no minimum setback when it abuts a railroad right-of-way, except as provided in chapter 20, article XXV, division 3, pertaining to landscaping requirements. 
b.  There is no minimum setback when it abuts, without being separated by a street, another off-street parking area. 
c.  The minimum setback is 50 feet when it abuts a residential district without being separated from the residential district by a street or railroad right-of-way. 
d.  The minimum setback is 25 feet for side street side yards. 
e.  Parking setbacks along public rights-of-way may be reduced to a minimum of ten feet if the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that 100 percent screening is provided at least five feet above the adjacent parking lot. The intent of this section is that the city is willing to trade a reduced setback for additional landscaping that is both an effective screen and of high quality aesthetically. Acceptable screening is to be comprised of berming and landscaping. Screening through the use of fencing is not permitted. 
(7)  The maximum height is as follows: 
a.  For the principal structure, two stories. 
b.  For accessory structures, one story. 
(8)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  For front yards, 25 feet. 
b.  For rear yards, 20 feet. 
c.  For side yards, ten feet. 
d.  The minimum setback is 50 feet when it abuts a residential district without being separated from the residential district by a street or railroad right-of-way. 
e.  Buffer yards. 
1.  The city comprehensive plan establishes a requirement for buffer yards. Buffer yards are to be established in areas indicated on the plan where higher intensity uses interface with low density uses and shall comply with chapter 20, article XXV, of the Chanhassen City Code. 
2.  The buffer yard is not an additional setback requirement. The full obligation to provide the buffer yard shall be placed on the parcel containing the higher intensity use. 
3.  The buffer yard is intended to provide physical separation and screening for the higher intensity use. As such, they will be required to be provided with a combination of berming, landscaping and/or tree preservation to maximize the buffering potential. To the extent deemed feasible by the city, new plantings shall be designed to require the minimum of maintenance, however, such maintenance as may be required to maintain consistency with the approved plan, shall be the obligation of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 11(5-11-5), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 94, §§ 1, 3, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 136, §§ IA, lB, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 451, § 4, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 474, § 11, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 20-716. - Interim uses. 
    The following are interim uses in the "BH" District: 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Farmers markets. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 3, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 243, § 6, 2-13-95) 
Secs. 20-717-20-730. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - "CBD" CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-731. - Intent. 
    The intent of the "CBD" District is to provide for downtown business development supporting a strong central business district while enhancing the overall character of the community in conformance with downtown redevelopment plan, goals and objectives. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 12(5-12-1), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-732. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in a "CBD" District: 
(1)  Antennas as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(2)  Ballroom. 
(3)  Barber and beauty salons and spas including hair, nail, skin and scalp services. 
(4)  Bars and taverns. 
(5)  Bowling center. 
(6)  Brew pub, subject to the requirements of section 20-968. 
(7)  Brewery operated in conjunction with a taproom producing less than 3,500 barrels per year, subject to the requirements of section 20-969. 
(8)  Clothing rental. 
(9)  Clubs and lodges. 
(10)  Coin-operated service machines. 
(11)  Community center. 
(12)  Convenience stores without gas pumps. 
(13)  Convention and conference facilities. 
(14)  Costume rental. 
(15)  Cultural facilities. 
(16)  Day care center as part of shopping center. 
(17)  Fast-food restaurants as part of shopping center. 
(18)  Financial institutions. 
(19)  Health and recreation clubs, instructions and services. 
(20)  Health services, outpatient only. 
(21)  Hotels. 
(22)  Laundry and garment services including self-service. 
(23)  Locker rental. 
(24)  Microdistillery operated in conjunction with a cocktail room, subject to the requirements of section 20-967. 
(25)  Multiple-family dwellings, including senior citizen housing. 
(26)  Newspaper offices. 
(27)  Offices. 
(28)  Parking ramp. 
(29)  Photographic studios. 
(30)  Print shops. 
(31)  Quilting and scrap booking. 
(32)  Retail sales. 
(33)  Schools. 
(34)  Shoe repair shops and shoeshine parlors. 
(35)  Shopping center. 
(36)  Sporting goods rental. 
(37)  Standard restaurants. 
(38)  Tattoo and body art and piercing services (M.S. ch. 146B). 
(39)  Theatrical producers and services. 
(40)  Utility service. 
(41)  Wedding chapel. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 12(5-12-2), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 214, § 1, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 377, § 100, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 514, § 1, 11-22-10; Ord. No. 632, § 9, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 20-733. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in a "CBD" District: 
(1)  Parking lots and ramps. 
(2)  Signs. 
(3)  Temporary outdoor sales and events (subject to the requirements of section 20-964). 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 12(5-12-3), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 243, § 7, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 377, § 101, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 514, § 2, 11-22-10) 
Sec. 20-734. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in a "CBD" District: 
(1)  Brewery operated in conjunction with a taproom, producing over 3,500 barrels per year. 
(2)  Drive-through facilities. 
(3)  Convenience store with gas pumps. 
(4)  Freestanding fast-food restaurants. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 12(5-12-4), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 120, § 4(9), 2-12-90; Ord. No. 628, § 35, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 632, § 10, 6-11-18) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Sec. 20-735. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a "CBD" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  The minimum lot area is 10,000 square feet. 
(2)  The minimum lot frontage is 100 feet, except lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum frontage of 60 feet in all districts. 
(3)  The minimum lot depth is 100 feet. 
(4)  There is no maximum lot coverage. 
(5)  There are no minimum setback requirements for front, rear or side yard. 
(6)  There are no maximum height requirements for principal or accessory structures. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 12(5-12-5), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-736. - Interim uses. 
    The following are interim uses in the "CBD" District: 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Farmers markets. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 3, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 243, § 8, 2-13-95) 
Secs. 20-737-20-740. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII-A. - "CC" COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-741. - Intent. 
(a)  The intent of the Community Commercial District is to provide for moderate to large-sized commercial development. These large-scale commercial and office users need high visibility along arterial roads. While smaller scale ancillary commercial uses may be permitted integral to the principal use, the primary use of a building shall be medium to large-type users with a minimum tenant space of 15,000 square feet. The intent of the district is to accommodate larger uses. The creation of multi-tenant, small user, strip centers is prohibited. 
(b)  Location criteria for community commercial uses are: Access to arterial and collector streets, preferably at intersections with collector and arterial streets; moderate to large-sized sites; public water and sewer service; environmental features such as soils and topography suitable for compact development; and adequate buffering by physical features or adjacent uses to protect nearby residential development. 
(c)  The total building area on a single level or floor for an individual use shall be no more than 65,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 11-23-09; Ord. No. 639, § 6, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 20-742. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in a "CC" District: 
(1)  Arts and crafts supply store. 
(2)  Automotive parts and accessories. 
(3)  Bookstore. 
(4)  Building supply center. 
(5)  Consumer electronics and appliance store. 
(6)  Drugstore. 
(7)  Furniture and home furnishings. 
(8)  Garden center. 
(9)  Grocery store. 
(10)  Health and dental clinics. 
(11)  Hobby, toy and game stores. 
(12)  Office. 
(13)  Office equipment and supply. 
(14)  Personal services. 
(15)  Sewing and fabric store. 
(16)  Sporting goods. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 11-23-09; Ord. No. 639, § 6, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 20-743. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in a "CC" District: 
(1)  Antennas. 
(2)  Automatic teller machines (ATMs). 
(3)  Parking lots and ramps. 
(4)  Signs. 
(5)  Temporary outdoor sales and events (subject to the requirements of section 20-964). 
(6)  Utility services. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 11-23-09; Ord. No. 619, § 10, 2-27-17; Ord. No. 639, § 6, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 20-744. - Conditional use. 
    The following are conditional uses in a "CC" District: 
(1)  Drive-through facilities. 
(2)  Gun range, indoor (only in conjunction with and accessory to a sporting goods store). 
(3)  Screened outdoor storage. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 11-23-09; Ord. No. 527, § 3, 8-22-11; Ord. No. 628, § 36, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 639, § 6, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 20-745. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a "CC" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modification set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: One acre. 
(2)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage: 70 percent. 
(5)  Maximum building height: Four stories; 50 feet. 
(6)  Setbacks: Building/parking: 
a.  Front: 25 feet. 
b.  Side: 10 feet. 
c.  Rear: 10 feet. 
d.  Parking setback exemptions: 
1.  There is no minimum setback when it abuts, without being separated by a street, another off-street parking area. 
2.  Parking setbacks may be reduced to ten feet along public streets if the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that 100 percent screening is provided at least five feet above the adjacent parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 11-23-09; Ord. No. 639, § 6, 3-11-19) 
Secs. 20-746-20-750. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - "BG" GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-751. - Intent. 
    The intent of the "BG" District is to provide for downtown fringe commercial development identified as the least restricted business district. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 13(5-13-1), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-752. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in a "BG" District: 
(1)  Adult day care, subject to the requirement of section 20-966. 
(2)  Animal hospital. 
(3)  Antenna. 
(4)  Bars and taverns. 
(5)  Bowling center. 
(6)  Brew pub, subject to the requirements of section 20-968. 
(7)  Brewery operated in conjunction with a taproom producing less than 3,500 barrels per year, subject to the requirements of section 20-969. 
(8)  Community center. 
(9)  Convenience stores without gas pumps. 
(10)  Day care center. 
(11)  Entertainment. 
(12)  Fast-food restaurants. 
(13)  Financial institutions. 
(14)  Funeral homes. 
(15)  Garden centers. 
(16)  Hardware goods. 
(17)  Health and recreation clubs. 
(18)  Health services. 
(19)  Home improvement trades building supply centers. 
(20)  Microdistillery operated in conjunction with a cocktail room, subject to the requirements of section 20-967. 
(21)  Miniature golf. 
(22)  Motels. 
(23)  Newspaper and print shop. 
(24)  Offices. 
(25)  Personal services. 
(26)  Private clubs and lodges. 
(27)  Senior citizen housing. 
(28)  Small appliance and similar repair shops. 
(29)  Specialty retail. 
(30)  Standard restaurants. 
(31)  Supermarkets. 
(32)  Utility services. 
(33)  Veterinary clinic. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 13(5-13-2), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 116, § 8, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 377, § 102, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 628, §§ 37, 38, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 632, § 11, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 20-753. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in a "BG" District: 
(1)  Parking lots. 
(2)  Signs. 
(3)  Temporary outdoor sales and events (subject to the requirements of section 20-964). 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 13(5-13-3), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 243, § 9, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 377, § 102, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 619, § 11, 2-27-17) 
Sec. 20-754. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in a "BG" District: 
(1)  Brewery operated in conjunction with a taproom, producing over 3,500 barrels per year. 
(2)  Convenience stores with gas pumps. 
(3)  Drive-through facilities. 
(4)  Equipment rental. 
(5)  Major auto repair and body shops. 
(6)  Motor fuel stations. 
(7)  Screened outdoor storage. 
(8)  Truck, automobile, farm implement, recreational vehicles and boat sales and service. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 13(5-13-4), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 116, § 8, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 120, § 4(10), 2-12-90; Ord. No. 628, § 39, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 632, § 12, 6-11-18) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Sec. 20-755. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a "BG" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  The minimum lot area is 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  The minimum lot frontage is 100 feet, except that lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum frontage of 60 feet in all districts. 
(3)  The minimum lot depth is 150 feet. 
(4)  The maximum lot coverage is 70 percent. 
(5)  Off-street parking shall comply with district setback requirements except: 
a.  There is no minimum setback when it abuts a railroad right-of-way, except as provided in chapter 20, article XXV, division 3, pertaining to landscaping requirements. 
b.  There is no minimum setback when it abuts, without being separated by a street, another off-street parking area. 
c.  The minimum setback is 50 feet when it abuts a residential district without being separated from the residential district by a street or railroad right-of-way. 
d.  The minimum setback is 25 feet for side street side yards. 
e.  Parking setbacks along public rights-of-way may be reduced to a minimum of ten feet if the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that 100-percent screening is provided at least five feet above the adjacent parking lot. The intent of this section is that the city is willing to trade a reduced setback for additional landscaping that is both an effective screen and of high quality aesthetically. Acceptable screening is to be comprised of berming and landscaping. Screening through the use of fencing is not permitted. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  For front yards, 25 feet. 
b.  For rear yards, 25 feet. 
c.  For side yards, ten feet. 
d.  The minimum setback is 50 feet when it abuts a residential district without being separated from the residential district by a street or railroad right-of-way. 
e.  Buffer yards. The city comprehensive plan establishes a requirement for buffer yards. Buffer yards are to be established in areas indicated on the plan where higher intensity uses interface with low density uses and shall comply with chapter 20, article XXV, of the Chanhassen City Code. 
The buffer yard is not an additional setback requirement. The full obligation to provide the buffer yard shall be placed on the parcel containing the higher intensity use. 
The buffer yard is intended to provide physical separation and screening for the higher intensity use. As such, they will be required to be provided with a combination of berming, landscaping and/or tree preservation to maximize the buffering potential. To the extent deemed feasible by the city, new plantings shall be designed to require the minimum of maintenance, however, such maintenance as may be required to maintain consistency with the approved plan, shall be the obligation of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 13(5-13-5), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 94, §§ 1, 4, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 136, §§ 1A, 1B, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 451, § 5, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 474, § 12, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 20-756. - Interim uses. 
    The following are interim uses in the "BG" District: 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 3, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 243, § 10, 2-13-95) 
Secs. 20-757-20-770. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - "BF" FRINGE BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-771. - Intent. 
    The intent of the "BF" District is to accommodate limited commercial uses temporary in nature without urban services, while maintaining the integrity, minimizing impact, and protecting the natural environment. When urban services are available, land use may change to a higher and improved use of the property. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 14(5-14-1), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 220, § 1, 9-12-94) 
Sec. 20-771.1. - Permitted uses. 
    The following are permitted uses in a "BF" District: 
(1)  Agriculture. 
(2)  Antennas as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(3)  Private and public park/open space. 
(4)  Single-family dwelling (one unit per ten acres). 
(5)  Wholesale nursery/green house/no retail (subject to compliance with section 20-267). 
(Ord. No. 220, § 1, 9-12-94; Ord. No. 259, § 23, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 103, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-772. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in a "BF" District: 
(1)  Parking lots. 
(2)  Signs. 
(3)  Temporary outdoor sales and events (subject to the requirements of section 20-964). 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 14(5-14-3), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 243, § 11, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 377, § 104, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 619, § 12, 2-27-17) 
Sec. 20-773. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in a "BF" District: 
(1)  Automotive dealers/rental. 
(2)  Cold storage and warehousing. 
(3)  Commercial kennels. 
(4)  Commercial stables. 
(5)  Miniature golf course (pursuant to section 20-259). 
(6)  Motor fuel stations without car washes. 
(7)  Towers as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(8)  Utility services. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 14(5-14-2), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 80-D, § 1, 1-11-88; Ord. No. 103, § 1, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 116, § 9, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 120, § 4(11), 2-12-90; Ord. No. 220, § 2, 9-12-94; Ord. No. 247, § 1, 3-11-96; Ord. No. 259, § 24, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 105, 5-24-04) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Sec. 20-774. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a "BF" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  The minimum lot area is 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  The minimum lot frontage is 100 feet, except that lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum front footage of 60 feet in all districts. 
(3)  The minimum lot depth is 150 feet. 
(4)  The maximum lot coverage is 40 percent. 
(5)  Off-street parking shall comply with district setback requirements except: 
a.  There is no minimum setback when it abuts a railroad right-of-way, except as provided in chapter 20, article XXV, division 3, pertaining to landscaping requirements. 
b.  There is no minimum setback when it abuts, without being separated by a street, another off-street parking area. 
c.  The minimum setback is 50 feet when it abuts a residential district without being separated from the residential district by a street or railroad right-of-way. 
d.  The minimum setback is 25 feet for side street side yards. 
e.  Parking setbacks along public rights-of-way may be reduced to a minimum of ten feet if the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that 100-percent screening is provided at least five feet above the adjacent parking lot. The intent of this section is that the city is willing to trade a reduced setback for additional landscaping that is both an effective screen and of high quality aesthetically. Acceptable screening is to be comprised of berming and landscaping. Screening through the use of fencing is not permitted. 
(6)  The maximum height is as follows: 
a.  For the principal structure, one story. 
b.  For accessory structures, one story. 
(7)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  For front yards, 25 feet. 
b.  For rear yards, 20 feet. 
c.  For side yards, ten feet. 
d.  The minimum setback is 50 feet when it abuts a residential district without being separated from the residential district by a street or railroad right-of-way. 
e.  Buffer yards. The city comprehensive plan establishes a requirement for buffer yards. Buffer yards are to be established in areas indicated on the plan where higher intensity uses interface with low density uses and shall comply with chapter 20, article XXV, of the Chanhassen City Code. 
The buffer yard is not an additional setback requirement. The full obligation to provide the buffer yard shall be placed on the parcel containing the higher intensity use. 
The buffer yard is intended to provide physical separation and screening for the higher intensity use. As such, they will be required to be provided with a combination of berming, landscaping and/or tree preservation to maximize the buffering potential. To the extent deemed feasible by the city, new plantings shall be designed to require the minimum of maintenance, however, such maintenance as may be required to maintain consistency with the approved plan, shall be the obligation of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 14(15-14-4), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 94, §§ 1, 5, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 136, §§ 1A, 1B, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 451, § 6, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 474, § 13, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 20-775. - Interim uses. 
    The following are interim uses in the "BF" District: 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Outdoor storage. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 3, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 164, § 1, 2-24-92; Ord. No. 243, § 12, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 377, § 106, 5-24-04) 
Secs. 20-776-20-790. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - "OI" OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-791. - Intent. 
    The intent of the "OI" District is to provide for public or quasi-public nonprofit uses and professional business and administrative offices. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 15(5-15-1), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-792. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in an "OI" District: 
(1)  Antennas as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(2)  Community center. 
(3)  Churches. 
(4)  Fire station. 
(5)  Funeral homes. 
(6)  Health services/hospitals. 
(7)  Library. 
(8)  Museum. 
(9)  Nursing homes. 
(10)  Offices. 
(11)  Post office. 
(12)  Public parks/open space. 
(13)  Public recreational facilities. 
(14)  Schools. 
(15)  Utility services. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 15(5-15-2), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 259, § 25, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 107, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-793. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in the "OI" District: 
(1)  Adult day care as part of a church (subject to the requirements of section 20-966). 
(2)  Parking lots. 
(3)  Signs. 
(4)  Temporary outdoor sales and events (subject to the requirements of section 20-964). 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 15(5-15-3), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 243, § 13, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 377, § 108, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 619, § 13, 2-27-17; Ord. No. 632, § 13, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 20-794. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in the "OI" District: 
(1)  Adaptive reuse of vacant public or private school buildings for private business uses. 
(2)  Commercial towers as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 15(5-15-4), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 259, § 26, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Sec. 20-795. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "OI" District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  The minimum lot area is 15,000 square feet. 
(2)  The minimum lot frontage is 75 feet, except that lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum lot frontage of 60 feet. 
(3)  The minimum lot depth is 150 feet. 
(4)  The maximum lot coverage is 65 percent. 
(5)  Off-street parking shall comply with district setback requirements except: 
a.  There is no minimum setback when it abuts a railroad right-of-way, except as provided in chapter 20, article XXV, division 3, pertaining to landscaping requirements. 
b.  There is no minimum setback when it abuts, without being separated by a street, another off-street parking area. 
c.  The minimum setback is 50 feet when it abuts a residential district without being separated from the residential district by a street or railroad right-of-way. 
d.  The minimum setback is 25 feet for side street side yards. 
(6)  The maximum height is as follows: 
a.  For the principal structure, two stories. 
b.  For accessory structures, one story. 
(7)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  For front yards, 35 feet. 
b.  For rear yards, 30 feet. 
c.  For side yards, 15 feet. 
d.  The minimum setback is 50 feet when it abuts a residential district without being separated from the residential district by a street or railroad right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 15(5-15-5), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 94, §§ 1, 6, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 451, § 7, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 20-796. - Interim uses. 
    The following are interim uses in the "OI" District: 
(1)  Temporary classroom structures for use by public or private schools needed for temporary use. 
(Ord. No. 282, § 1, 6-22-98) 
Secs. 20-797-20-810. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - "IOP" INDUSTRIAL OFFICE PARK DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-811. - Intent. 
    The intent of the "IOP" District is to provide an area identified for large-scale light industrial and commercial planned development. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 16(5-16-1), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-812. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in an "IOP" District: 
(1)  Adult day care, subject to the requirements of section 20-966. 
(2)  Antennas as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(3)  Automotive repair shops. 
(4)  Brewery operated in conjunction with a taproom producing less than 3,500 barrels per year, subject to the requirements of section 20-969. 
(5)  Conference/convention centers. 
(6)  Health services. 
(7)  Indoor health and recreation clubs. 
(8)  Light industrial. 
(9)  Microdistillery operated in conjunction with a cocktail room, subject to the requirements of section 20-967. 
(10)  Offices. 
(11)  Off-premises parking lots. 
(12)  Print shops. 
(13)  Recording studios. 
(14)  Utility services. 
(15)  Vocational school. 
(16)  Warehouses. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 16(5-16-2), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 240, § 21, 7-25-95; Ord. No. 259, § 27, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 109, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 628, § 40, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 632, § 14, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 20-813. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in an "IOP" District: 
(1)  Automotive repair shop. 
(2)  Day care center. 
(3)  Parking lots and ramps. 
(4)  Signs. 
(5)  Temporary outdoor sales and events (subject to the requirements of sections 20-964). 
    Retail sales of products stored or manufactured on the site provided no more than 20 percent of the floor space is used for retail sales. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 16(5-16-3), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 93, § 1, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 377, § 110, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 619, § 14, 2-27-17) 
Sec. 20-814. - Conditional uses. 
    The following are conditional uses in an "IOP" District: 
(1)  Brewery operated in conjunction with a taproom, producing over 3,500 barrels per year. 
(2)  Contracting yards. 
(3)  Day care centers as part of a multi-tenant building. 
(4)  Day care centers as a separate facility. 
(5)  Food processing. 
(6)  Gun range, indoor. 
(7)  Home improvement trades. 
(8)  Hotels and motels. 
(9)  Lumber yards. 
(10)  Motor freight terminals. 
(11)  Outdoor health and recreation clubs. 
(12)  Screened outdoor storage. 
(13)  Research laboratories. 
(14)  Commercial towers as regulated by article XXX of this chapter. 
(15)  Electrical distribution and underground electric distribution substations. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 16(5-16-4), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 97, § 1, 10-24-88; Ord. No. 120, § 4(12), 2-12-90; Ord. No. 259, § 28, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 111, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 390, § 5, 3-14-05; Ord. No. 527, § 4, 8-22-11; Ord. No. 632, § 15, 6-11-18) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, M.S. § 462.3595. 
Sec. 20-815. - Lot requirements and setbacks. 
    The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an "IOP" district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  The minimum lot area is one acre. 
(2)  The minimum lot frontage is 150 feet, except that lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum frontage of 60 feet. 
(3)  The minimum lot depth is 200 feet. 
(4)  The maximum lot coverage is 70 percent. 
(5)  Off-street parking shall comply with district setback requirements except: 
a.  There is no minimum setback when it abuts a railroad right-of-way, except as provided in chapter 20, article XXV, division 3, pertaining to landscaping requirements. 
b.  There is no minimum setback when it abuts, without being separated by a street, another off-street parking area. 
c.  The minimum setback is 50 feet when it abuts a residential district without being separated from the residential district by a street or railroad right-of-way. 
d.  The minimum setback is 25 feet for side street side yards. 
e.  Parking setbacks along public rights-of-way may be reduced to a minimum of ten feet if the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that 100 percent screening is provided at least five feet above the adjacent parking lot. The intent of this section is that the city is willing to trade a reduced setback for additional landscaping that is both an effective screen and of high quality aesthetically. Acceptable screening is to be comprised of berming and landscaping. Screening through the use of fencing is not permitted. 
(6)  The maximum height is as follows: 
a.  For the principal structure, four stories/50 feet. 
b.  For accessory structures, one story. 
(7)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  For front yards, 30 feet. 
b.  For rear yards, ten feet. 
c.  For side yards, ten feet. 
d.  The minimum setback is 100 feet when it abuts a residential district without being separated from the residential district by a street or railroad right-of-way. 
In instances where existing topography and/or vegetation provide buffering satisfactory to the city, or where quality site planning is achieved, the city may reduce setback requirements by up to 50 percent. The applicant shall have the full burden of demonstrating that there is sufficient separation and screening for the higher intensity use. 
e.  Buffer yards. 
1.  The city comprehensive plan establishes a requirement for buffer yards. Buffer yards are to be established in areas indicated on the plan where higher intensity uses interface with low density uses and shall comply with chapter 20, article XXV, of the Chanhassen City Code. 
2.  The buffer yard is not an additional setback requirement. The full obligation to provide the buffer yard shall be placed on the parcel containing the higher intensity use. 
3.  The buffer yard is intended to provide physical separation and screening for the higher intensity use. As such, they will be required to be provided with a combination of berming, landscaping and/or tree preservation to maximize the buffering potential. To the extent deemed feasible by the city, new plantings shall be designed to require the minimum of maintenance, however, such maintenance as may be required to maintain consistency with the approved plan, shall be the obligation of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. V, § 16(5-16-5), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 94, §§ 1, 7, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 136, §§ 1A, 1B, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 451, § 8, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 474, §§ 14, 15, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 20-816. - Interim uses. 
    The following are interim uses in the "IOP" District: 
(1)  Churches. 
(2)  Concrete mixing plants. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 3, 2-12-90) 
Secs. 20-817-20-900. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - GENERAL SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-901. - Overhead transmission lines. 
    Installation of overhead transmission lines in excess of 69 kilovolts shall require the issuance of a conditional use permit through any district located in the city. The city council, in addition to the standards established in article IV, may also impose other conditions as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 2, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-902. - Multiple principal buildings on same lot. 
    In any single-family detached residential district, business, commercial, office, or industrial district not more than one principal building shall be permitted to be erected on a single building lot. Groupings of buildings may be permitted in planned unit development districts. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 3, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 619, § 15, 2-27-17) 
Sec. 20-903. - Zoning lots. 
(a)  The designation of a zoning lot shall be approved by the city planner if it complies with the lot requirements of the district in which it is located and has a single tax identification number. 
(b)  Interior lot lines within a zoning lot shall be disregarded in applying setbacks and other zoning ordinance standards. 
(c)  After designation of a zoning lot the lot may not be subdivided without complying with the city's subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 2, 6-4-90) 
Sec. 20-904. - Accessory structures. 
(a)  A detached accessory structure shall be located in the buildable lot area or required rear yard. No accessory use or structure in any residential district shall be located in any required front, side or rear setback with the following exceptions: 
(1)  In the A2, RR, RSF, RLM and R4 districts accessory structures shall not exceed 1,000 square feet. In the RSF, RLM and R4 districts these structures may encroach into the rear setback as follows: 
a.  Less than 140 square feet, minimum rear setback is five feet. 
b.  For buildable lot area of one hundred forty-one to 399 square feet, minimum rear setback is ten feet. 
c.  For buildable lot area of four hundred square feet and above, minimum rear setback is 30 feet, except in the RLM district where the minimum rear setback is 25 feet. 
(2)  On riparian lots, detached garages and storage buildings may be located in the front or rear yard but must comply with front, side and applicable ordinary high water mark setbacks and may not occupy more than 30 percent of the yard in which it is built. 
(3)  Tennis courts and swimming pools may be located in rear yards with a minimum side and rear yard setback of ten feet, but must comply with applicable ordinary high water mark setbacks. 
(b)  A detached accessory structure may occupy not more than 30 percent of the area of any rear yard. 
(c)  For parcels with less than three acres in any residential or agricultural district, no accessory structure or use shall be erected, constructed or commenced prior to the erection, construction or commencement of the principal permitted structure or use, but may be erected or commenced simultaneously. If the principal structure or use is subsequently removed, destroyed or discontinued, the accessory structure or use must be removed or discontinued within 12 months. 
(d)  Shall comply with the Freedom to Breathe Provision of the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act contained in M.S. §§ 1144.411 to 1144.417. 
(e)  Docks, which shall comply with section 20-920. 
(f)  Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593 subdiv. 9, the City of Chanhassen opts-out of the requirements of M.S. § 462.3593. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 5, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 145, § 1, 4-8-91; Ord. No. 215, § 1, 8-8-94; Ord. No. 377, § 112, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 451, § 9, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 474, § 16, 10-13-08; Ord. No. 595, § 6, 5-12-14; Ord. No. 614, § 1, 8-22-16) 
Sec. 20-905. - Single-family dwellings. 
    All single-family detached homes shall: 
(1)  Be constructed upon a continuous perimeter foundation that meets the requirements of the state building code. 
(2)  Conform to the following standards for living areas: 
a.  If a one-story rambler design, have an area of 960 square feet. 
b.  If a split level design, have an area of 1,050 square feet. 
c.  If a split foyer and two-story design, have an area of 600 square feet on the first floor. 
d.  A two-car garage must be provided with the single-family structure. 
(3)  Have an earth covered, composition, shingled or tiled roof or other materials approved by the Minnesota State Building Code as adopted and amended by the city. 
(4)  Receive a building permit. The application for a building permit in addition to other information required shall indicate the height, size, design and the appearance of all elevations of the proposed building and a description of the construction materials proposed to be used. 
(5)  Meet the requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted and amended by the city or the applicable manufactured housing code. 
(6)  Where access doors are proposed from a dwelling to the outdoors, which does not connect directly to a sidewalk or stoop, a minimum ten feet by ten feet area of patio shall be assumed. This patio area must be shown to comply with required property line, lake and wetland setbacks; may not encroach into conservation or drainage and utility easements; and shall not bring the site's lot coverage above that permitted by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 6, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 240, § 22, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 377, § 113, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 423, § 5, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 628, § 41, 12-11-17) 
Cross reference- Technical codes, § 7-16 et seq. 
Sec. 20-906. - Alternate lot size requirements in A-2 and RR residential zoning districts. 
    Minimum lot size requirements in the A-2 and RR residential zoning districts located outside of the Metropolitan Council's Urban Service Area shall be regulated by article IX and article X of this chapter, respectively, or in the alternative may be 15,000 square feet if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A one-unit per ten-acre density is maintained. This requirement shall not apply to lots of record in existence on January 15, 1987, or lots created thereafter, if they were subject to a pending subdivision application on that date and the lots were created as a result of that application. 
(2)  All lots must have soil and water conditions which permit a well. 
(3)  All lots must have conditions which will permit two on-site sewer systems installed in conformance with chapter 19, article IV. 
(4)  The one-unit per ten-acre density applies to contiguous property under single ownership. Acreage under single ownership, which is not contiguous, cannot be combined for increased density/building eligibility on one of the parcels. Transfer of development rights from one parcel of land to another is not allowed, except as permitted in subsection (7) below. 
(5)  Once a building eligibility has been used for a property, a development contract must be recorded with the county establishing the number of building eligibilities remaining or documenting that no building eligibility remains. Transfer of development rights from one parcel of land to another is not allowed. 
(6)  Each site must have an area which can support two septic system sites, on a slope of less than 25 percent. 
(7)  Parcels which do not have public street frontage and are landlocked may transfer building eligibilities to an adjacent parcel which does have public street frontage and meets other provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 7, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 170, § 3, 6-8-92; Ord. No. 194, § 3, 10-11-93; Ord. No. 240, § 23, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 307, § 1, 7-24-00) 
Sec. 20-907. - Height regulations. 
(a)  Where the average slope of a lot is greater than one foot rise or fall in seven feet of horizontal distance from the established street elevation at the property line, one story in addition to the number permitted in the district in which the lot is situated shall be permitted on the downhill side of any building. 
(b)  The height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Barns, silos or other farm buildings or structures on farms; church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, fire and hose towers, observation towers, chimneys, smoke stacks, flag poles, masts and aerials; communication transmission towers; parapet walls extending not more than four feet above the limiting height of the building. 
(2)  Places of public assembly in churches, schools and other public and semipublic buildings, provided that these are located on the first floor of such building and provided that for each three feet by which the heights of such building exceeds the maximum height otherwise permitted in the district, its side and rear yards shall be increased in width or depth by an additional foot over the side and rear yards required for the highest building otherwise permitted in the district. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 10, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-908. - Yard regulations. 
    The following requirements qualify or supplement district regulations. Yard measurements shall be taken from the nearest point of the wall of a building to the lot line in question, subject to the following qualifications: 
(1)  Every part of a required yard or court shall be open and unobstructed. 
(2)  A yard, court, or other open space of one building used to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall not again be used as a yard, court, or other open space for another building. 
(3)  Except as provided in the business, industrial and office districts, the front yard setback requirements shall be observed on each street side of a corner lot; provided, however, that the remaining two yards will meet the side yard setbacks. 
(4)  On double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. Whenever possible, structures should face the existing street. 
(5)  The following architectural elements of the principal structure or if the structure is attached to the principal structure shall not be considered to be obstructions (variances granted from a required setback are not entitled to the following additional encroachments): 
a.  Into any required front yard, or required side yard adjoining a side street lot line, cornices, canopies, eaves, or other architectural features may project a distance not exceeding two feet, six inches; fire escapes may project a distance not exceeding four feet, six inches; an uncovered stair and necessary landings may project a distance not to exceed six feet, provided such stair and landing shall not extend above the entrance floor of the building; bay windows, balconies, open porches and chimneys may project a distance not exceeding three feet; unenclosed decks and patios may project a distance not exceeding five feet. Other canopies may be permitted by conditional use permit. 
b.  The above-named features may project into any required yard adjoining an interior lot line, subject to the limitations cited above. 
c.  Porches that encroach into the required front yard and which were in existence on February 19, 1987, may be enclosed or completely rebuilt in the same location, provided that any porch that is to be completely rebuilt must have at least a ten-foot minimum front yard. 
d.  Subject to the setback requirements in section 20-904, the following are permitted in the rear yard: enclosed or open off-street parking spaces; accessory structures, toolrooms, and similar buildings or structures for domestic storage. Balconies, breezeways and open porches, unenclosed decks and patios, and one-story bay windows may project into the rear yard a distance not to exceed five feet. 
e.  Into any required front, rear or side yard: driveways, sidewalks, fences and retaining walls. 
f.  The intent of this section is to allow homes built prior to February 19, 1987, to add an open porch as an architectural feature to define the entrance into a residence or update a front elevation. 
1.  Homes built prior to February 19, 1987, may have open porches and/or balconies that encroach into the required front yard a distance not exceeding ten feet, provided they maintain a minimum front yard setback of 20 feet. The ten feet shall include the roof line, support columns and steps. This area shall not be enclosed nor screened with mesh, glass, or other similar material. Homes that are on the national register listing or have been considered eligible for listing on the national register shall be excluded from this ordinance unless approved by the national historical registrar's office. 
(6)  The placement of any structure within easements is prohibited, except for those structures specified herein. Fences, retaining walls, nonstructural fire pits, sidewalks, pathways, and patios not integral to the principal structure (the first ten feet adjacent to the principal structure shall be considered integral), and other encroachments may be allowed within an easement with an encroachment agreement if they do not alter the intended use of the easement and at the discretion of the community development director or designee. A driveway or sidewalk from the street to the house crossing drainage and utility easements at the front of the property are exempt from this requirement. 
(7)  Buildings shall not encroach in to any gas transmission pipeline easement. Additionally, all buildings shall maintain a minimum 20-foot setback from the gas transmission pipeline easement. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 11, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 144, § 2, 4-8-91; Ord. No. 274, § 1, 9-22-97; Ord. No. 303, § 2, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 377, §§ 114, 115, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 409, § 5, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 478, §§ 1, 2, 6-22-09; Ord. No. 595, § 7, 5-12-14) 
Sec. 20-909. - Outdoor storage. 
    As otherwise regulated, all outdoor storage is prohibited except: 
(1)  Clothes line poles and wires. 
(2)  Construction and landscaping material currently being used on the premises. 
(3)  Swings, slides and other play equipment. 
(4)  Outdoor furniture and lawn and garden equipment. 
(5)  Wood for burning in a fireplace, stove or furnace provided it is stored as follows: 
a.  In a neat and secure stack, not exceeding four feet. 
b.  The wood stack is not infested with rodents. 
c.  The wood is not kept in a front yard. 
(6)  Continued storage of boats, all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles and trailers may be stored in the side or rear yard, if owned by a resident owner or lessee of the property and subject to the following: 
a.  Such storage may not extend beyond the front of the principle structure. 
b.  On corner and double frontage lots, the front of the structure shall be defined as the side accessed by a driveway to the public street. 
(7)  Outside storage of tires is prohibited. 
(8)  PODS (personal on demand storage) and roll-off dumpsters may be located a property a minimum of six feet away from the house for fire protection and at least ten feet from any property line. Such containers may be kept on-site for a maximum of 30 days per year. An extension of the 30 days may be granted by the city if the container is used in conjunction with a valid and ongoing building permit. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 13, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, §§ 116, 117, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 423, § 6, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 595, § 8, 5-12-14) 
Sec. 20-910. - Storage of recreation vehicles. 
    Recreational vehicles may be parked or stored in a residential or agricultural district provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  No more than one recreational vehicle may be parked or stored outside on a residential lot. Additional recreational vehicles may be kept within an enclosed structure which otherwise conforms to the zoning requirements of the district. 
(2)  Recreational vehicles must be maintained in a clean, well-kept, operable condition. 
(3)  Recreational vehicles shall be mobile and shall not be permanently affixed in the ground in a manner that would prevent removal. 
(4)  Recreational vehicles may be parked or stored only on the rear or side yard behind the required front yard setback. The parking or storage of recreational vehicles on the rear or side yard, as permitted herein, may be on surfaced or unsurfaced areas. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles may be stored on a lot without regard to the location on the lot for the sole and express purpose of loading and unloading for a period not to exceed 24 hours. 
(6)  Unmounted slide-in pickup campers must be stored no higher than 20 inches above the ground and must be securely supported at least at four corners by solid support blocks or support mechanisms. 
(7)  Recreational vehicles may not be occupied or used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes for more than seven consecutive days or more than 21 days within a 365-day period. 
(8)  Except for routine maintenance or during emergency conditions when power supply is disrupted, the operation of a recreational vehicle power generator plant shall not be permitted in residential districts. Routine maintenance periods shall not exceed 60 minutes per month. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 14, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 533, 5-29-12) 
Sec. 20-911. - Accessory fuel storage tanks. 
    An accessory fuel storage tank is permitted in any zoning district. Fuel storage tanks shall be located in the buildable area of the lot or the rear yard, subject to fire code regulations. Any such fuel storage tank shall be fenced in accordance with the fire code regulations and, in addition, shall be painted in earth tone colors or landscaped with low hedges, evergreens, or other suitable screening material. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 15, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-912. - Storage of garbage and trash. 
(a)  No exterior incineration of trash or garbage is permissible. 
(b)  No exterior storage of trash or garbage is permissible except in an accessory building enclosed by walls and roof, or in closed containers within a totally screened area. 
(c)  Subsection (b) does not apply to covered garbage cans in agricultural and Single-Family Districts. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 16, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 639, § 7, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 20-913. - Lighting. 
(a)  Glare, whether direct or reflected, as differentiated from general illumination shall not be visible beyond the limits of the site from which it originates. 
(b)  No light which is flashing, revolving or otherwise resembles a traffic-control signal shall be allowed in any area where it could create a hazard for passing vehicular traffic. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 169.073. 
(c)  Lighting fixtures on poles shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All fixtures must be shielded, high pressure sodium or light-emitting diode (LED), with a total cutoff angle equal to or less than 90 degrees. 
(2)  Fixture height shall not exceed 30 feet. Recreational facility light poles shall not exceed 75 feet in height. 
(3)  Photometrics shall incorporate existing light fixtures, public or private, that may impact the site. 
(4)  All outdoor light fixtures existing and legally installed prior to February 22, 1999, are exempt from the requirements of this article, unless work is proposed in any one-year period so as to replace 50 percent or more of the existing outdoor light fixtures, or to increase to the extent of 50 percent or more the number of outdoor light fixtures on the premises. 
(d)  Wall-mounted lighting in commercial, industrial and institutional districts shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All wall-mounted light fixtures shall be shielded with a total cutoff angle equal to or less than 90 degrees. 
(e)  Lighting shall not be directed skyward except for lighting designed for illuminating the United States of America flag. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 17, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 290, § 2, 2-22-99; Ord. No. 377, § 118, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 479, § 1, 6-22-09; Ord. No. 533, 5-29-12) 
Sec. 20-914. - Private swimming pools. 
    No private swimming pool shall be allowed in any residential district except as an accessory structure for the enjoyment of the occupants of the principal building of the property on which it is located and their guests. Fence requirements as stipulated in division 5 of this article shall be met. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 18, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-915. - Antennas, satellite dishes and amateur radio towers. 
(a)  Satellite dishes, television antennas and ground-mounted vertical antennas shall be permitted accessory uses within all zoning districts. 
(b)  Amateur radio towers shall receive a conditional use permit in all districts prior to installation. 
(c)  In all residential districts, only one of the following are permitted per lot: 
(1)  Satellite dish. 
(2)  Amateur radio tower. 
(3)  Ground-mounted vertical antenna. 
(d)  A ground-mounted satellite dish shall not exceed 15 feet in height above ground level. 
(e)  No ground-mounted satellite dish, amateur radio tower, or ground-mounted vertical antenna shall be located within the required front yard setback or side yard setback. 
(f)  Ground-mounted satellite dishes, amateur radio towers and ground-mounted vertical antennas shall be set back from all adjoining lots a distance equivalent to the height of the dish, tower or antenna. If a portion of the tower or antenna is collapsible or securely fastened to a building, only the portion which can fall will be used to determine the setback from property lines. Location shall not adversely obstruct views from adjacent property. 
(g)  A building permit shall be required for the installation of any satellite dish, amateur radio tower or ground cover-mounted vertical antenna. Building permit applications shall require the submission of a site plan and structural components. When a satellite dish or radio antenna is located on the roof of a building, the applicant shall furnish the city building official with building plans and structural components displaying the means of securing it to the building. The building official must approve the building plans before installation. 
(h)  Each satellite dish, amateur radio tower and ground-mounted vertical antenna shall be grounded to protect against natural lightning strikes in conformance with the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the city. 
(i)  Satellite dish, amateur radio tower and ground-mounted vertical antenna, electrical equipment and connections shall be designed and installed in adherence to the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the city. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 21, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 90, § 8, 3-14-88) 
Cross reference- Technical codes, § 7-16 et seq. 
Sec. 20-916. - Rooftop screening. 
    All roof-mounted equipment on buildings located within the business, office and industrial districts shall provide for screening which is consistent with the exterior of the principle structure. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 22, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-917. - Chemical toilets (portable toilets). 
    Chemical toilets are permitted only on a temporary basis on construction sites, on city-owned parkland in conjunction with city park functions, or as part of an outdoor sale or event approved under section 20-964. These portable toilets must be models designed to minimize the potential for spilling, and those associated with construction sites must be removed within 24 hours of the completion of construction activities. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 23, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 619, § 16, 2-27-17) 
Sec. 20-918. - Landfills. 
    Hazardous and solid waste landfills, including landfills for low level radioactive contaminants and sludge ash, are prohibited in all districts. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 24, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-919. - Telephone equipment buildings. 
    Telephone equipment buildings are allowed in all zoning districts as an ancillary use subject to the following standards: 
(1)  The site must provide landscaping as required in article XXV. 
(2)  The driveway surface shall be surfaced with a hard, all-weather, dust-free and durable surfacing material. 
(3)  The applicant shall receive an access permit from the regulating agency. 
(4)  The building shall meet the required setbacks of the district in which it is located. 
(5)  The equipment building shall be architecturally consistent with surrounding structures. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 26, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 80-B, § 1, 6-15-87; Ord. No. 377, § 119, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-920. - Structures, boats and waterways. 
(a)  Exemption. This article does not apply to any lakeshore property owned or leased by the city. 
(b)  Nonconforming docks. 
(1)  Permanent docks existing on July 11, 1983, and which do not comply with the structure limitations set forth in this article, shall be deemed to be nonconforming uses. Seasonal docks utilized by privately owned commercial resorts or commercial boat landings prior to July 11, 1983, and which do not comply with the structure limitations set forth in this article shall also be deemed to be nonconforming uses. 
(2)  No nonconforming dock shall be enlarged or altered or increased, or occupy a greater area than that occupied by such dock on September 7, 1983, or on the effective date of or any amendment to this article. A nonconforming dock shall not be moved to any other part of the lakeshore site upon which the same is erected unless it is relocated in such a manner as to conform to the dock setback zone requirements of this chapter. Any nonconforming dock which is partially or totally destroyed by any cause may be restored to its former use and physical dimensions, if the restoration is completed within one year of its partial or total destruction. Maintenance and necessary structural repairs of a nonconforming dock are permitted provided that any such maintenance or repairs do not extend, enlarge or intensify such dock. 
(3)  All docks must conform to dock setback requirements. 
(c)  Location restrictions. No dock, mooring or other structure shall be so located as to: 
(1)  Obstruct the navigation of any lake; 
(2)  Obstruct reasonable use or access to any other dock, mooring or other structure authorized under this chapter; 
(3)  Present a potential safety hazard; or 
(4)  Be detrimental to significant fish and wildlife habitat or protected vegetation. 
(d)  Construction and maintenance generally. Docks, moorings and other structures may be constructed of such materials and in such a manner as the owner determines, provided that they shall be so built and maintained that they do not constitute a hazard to the public using the waters of the lake and they shall be maintained in a workman-like manner. 
(e)  Docks. 
(1)  No more than one dock shall be permitted on any lakeshore site. 
(2)  No dock shall exceed six feet in width and no dock shall exceed the greater of the following lengths: 
a.  50 feet; or 
b.  The minimum straight-line distance necessary to reach a water depth of four feet. 
(3)  The width (but not the length) of the crossbar of any dock shall be included in the computation of length described in the preceding sentence. The crossbar of any such dock shall not measure in excess of 25 feet in length. No dock shall encroach upon any dock setback zone; provided, however, that the owners of any two abutting lakeshore sites may erect one common dock within the dock setback zone appurtenant to the abutting lakeshore sites, if the dock is the only dock on the two lakeshore sites and if the dock otherwise conforms with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  No person shall store fuel upon any dock. 
(5)  No oscillating, rotating, flashing or moving sign or light may be used on any dock. 
(6)  No advertising signs shall be displayed from any dock. 
(7)  Access across wetlands shall be subject to the standards set forth in section 20-405. Docks shall be elevated a minimum of six to eight inches above the ordinary high water elevation. 
(f)  Mooring, docking, etc., of watercraft. 
(1)  Except for privately owned commercial resorts or commercial boat landings established prior to July 11, 1983, no person shall moor overnight, dock overnight, or store overnight, more than three watercraft on any lakeshore site or upon the waters of any lake. Docking of watercraft at any lakeshore site or storage of watercraft upon any lakeshore site is permissible however at any time other than overnight. 
(2)  No watercraft shall be moored or docked overnight on the water of any lake unless it is currently registered pursuant to M.S. ch. 86B, either in the name of the owner of the lakeshore site in from of which the watercraft is moored or docked, or in the name of a blood relative of the owner. 
(3)  Except as provided in subsection (f)(2) above, no watercraft or boat lift shall be kept, moored, docked or stored in the dock setback zone. 
(g)  Swimming rafts, ski jumps, diving towers, etc. 
(1)  Swimming rafts may only be located directly in front of a lakeshore site owned by the raft owner or with the written approval of the owner of the lakeshore site. All swimming rafts shall meet the minimum standards in this subsection. Their size shall not exceed 144 square feet. Swimming rafts shall project over the water surface not less than one foot and not more than five feet, measured vertically, above the surface of the lake. Swimming rafts shall not be located in areas with a depth of less than seven feet. Swimming rafts shall be reflectorized as provided in subsection (g)(2). Their distance from the ordinary high water mark shall not exceed 100 feet. 
(2)  Swimming rafts, ski jumps, diving towers and other structures surrounded by the waters of any lake, whether floating or on posts, shall be lighted with a light visible in all directions, or have attached thereto, sufficient reflectorized material so as to reflect light in all directions. The material shall be capable of retaining 80 percent of its dry weather reflective signal strength when wet. 
(h)  Fueling facilities. Installation of fueling facilities on docks, moorings and other structures shall be prohibited. Any fueling facilities which were in active use prior to September 7, 1983, shall be deemed to be nonconforming uses. No such nonconforming fueling facility shall be enlarged or altered or increased or occupy a greater area than occupied on September 7, 1983. Any nonconforming fueling facility which is partially or totally destroyed by any cause, may be restored to its former use and physical dimension if said restoration is completed within one year of its partial or total destruction. Maintenance and necessary structural repairs of a nonconforming fueling facility are permitted provided that any such maintenance or repairs do not extend, enlarge or intensify such fueling facility. 
(i)  Removal of seasonal docks, moorings, etc. All seasonal docks, moorings, and other structures shall be removed from the lake before November 1 of each year. All nonconforming structures, except legally nonconforming docks and swimming rafts, once removed may not be returned to the lake. Legal nonconforming moorings, docks and swimming rafts, e.g., the "Carver Beach" raft, may be returned to the lake. 
(j)  All structures shall comply with the department of natural resources regulations. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 1, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 20-921. - Pervious pavement. 
    Properly designed, installed, and maintained pervious pavements have the capacity to allow for stormwater detention and/or infiltration. When not properly designed, installed, and maintained pervious pavements fail to facilitate the detention and/or infiltration of stormwater. Additionally, pervious pavements contribute to the creation of heat islands and do not provide the same surface water management benefits as native vegetative cover. For these reasons, it is necessary to regulate the lot coverage, design, installation, and maintenance of these systems. 
(1)  Lot coverage: Pervious pavements are considered to constitute lot coverage; however, when built to the standards espoused in this section they do not constitute impervious surfaces. Systems not built to the standards espoused in this section are considered to constitute impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Location restrictions: 
a.  Pervious pavements may not be installed in areas where trash or garbage receptacles will be stored. 
(3)  Design and installation: 
a.  A building permit is required for the instillation of pervious pavement systems. 
b.  Pervious pavement systems must be designed to provide for rate and volume control for the first half-inch of treatment area and follow the current version of the City of Chanhassen Standard Specification and Detail Plates. Treatment area includes the total square footage of the pervious pavement system plus the total square footage of impervious surface draining directly to the pervious pavement system. 
c.  To meet the city's definition of pervious pavement the system must: 1) be designed in compliance with standards established by the Interlocking Concrete Pavement Institute (ICPI); 2) be installed by an ICPI certified installer; and 3) be designed to meet or exceed the standards listed in paragraph (3)b. 
d.  The city engineer may permit pervious pavement technologies other than permeable interlocking concrete pavers, so long as the city engineer determines: 1) they are functionally equivalent or better; 2) the system is designed in compliance with accepted guidelines and is installed by an appropriately certified installer; and 3) the system will meet or exceed the standards listed in paragraph (3)b. 
(4)  Maintenance: 
a.  The owner of a pervious paver system must enter into a maintenance agreement with the city to ensure the system performs as designed in perpetuity. This agreement must conform to the manufactures guidelines, and stipulate the frequency and type of maintenance to be performed. 
(5)  District restrictions: 
a.  Planned Unit Developments Residential Districts (PUDR) are limited to the lot coverage specified by their ordinance and/or compliance table. For PUDRs created before June 11, 2018, the terms hardcover, hard surface, impervious surface, and similar phrases, shall be understood to mean lot cover inclusive of both pervious pavements and impervious surfaces, and in no circumstance shall the failure of the ordinance or compliance table to mention pervious pavements be understood to mean that pervious pavements are not subject to the lot cover, hardcover, hardscape, or similarly identified limits that govern the PUDR. 
b.  Shoreland Management District restricts properties zoned Single-Family Residential District (RSF) to 25 percent lot coverage. 
(Ord. No. 633, § 4, 6-25-18) 
Secs. 20-922-20-950. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 20-951. - Noise. 
    Noise shall be muffled or otherwise controlled so as not to become a nuisance. Noise levels shall be regulated by the standards of the state pollution control agency. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 1(6-1-1), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-952. - Smoke and particulate matter. 
    The ambient air quality standards of the state pollution control agency shall apply to the release of airborne materials within the city. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 1(6-1-2), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-953. - Toxic or noxious matter. 
    The state pollution control agency standards governing toxic or noxious matter shall apply in the city. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 1(6-1-3), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-954. - Odors and air pollution. 
    The state pollution control agency standards governing odors and air pollution shall apply in the city. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 1(6-1-4), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-955. - Nuisances. 
    No land, existing building or proposed structure shall be used or occupied in any manner creating dangerous, noxious or otherwise objectionable conditions which could adversely affect the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 1(6-1-5), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-956. - Radiation and electrical emissions. 
    No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radioactivity beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no electrical disturbance (except from domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment including, but not limited to, radio and television reception other than that of the creator of the disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 1(6-1-6), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-957. - Vibration. 
(a)  Any use creating periodic earth-shaking vibrations, such as may be created from a drop forge shall be prohibited if such vibrations are perceptible beyond the lot line of the site on which the use is located. 
(b)  Subsection (a) does not apply to vibrations created during the process of construction. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 1(6-1-7), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-958. - Glare or heat. 
    Any use requiring an operation producing an intense heat or light transmission shall be performed with the necessary shielding to prevent such heat or light from being detectable at the lot line of the site on which the use is located. Lighting in all instances shall be diffused or directed away from R districts and public streets. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 1(6-1-8), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-959. - Explosives. 
    Any use requiring the storage, use or manufacturing of products which could decompose by detonation shall be located not less than 400 feet from any R district line, provided that this section shall not apply to the storage or use of liquefied petroleum or natural gas for normal residential or business purposes. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, 1(6-1-9), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-960. - Surface water management. 
    All development shall comply with the city's most recently adopted surface water management plan, which is incorporated herein by this reference. 
(Ord. No. 227, § 1, 10-24-94; Ord. No. 595, § 9, 5-12-14) 
Sec. 20-961. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-962. - Camping facilities. 
(a)  Camping or occupying camp facilities in the following areas is prohibited unless in a city-approved campground or with prior city authorization: 
(1)  Any park; 
(2)  Any street; 
(3)  Any publicly owned parking lot or publicly owned area, improved or unimproved. 
(b)  Camping, occupying camp facilities on a lot or parcel for more than seven consecutive days or more than 21 days in a 365-day period is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 120, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 377, § 120, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-963. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 628, § 42, adopted Dec. 11, 2017, deleted § 20-963 entitled "Drive-through facilities," which derived from Ord. No. 474, § 17, adopted Oct. 13, 2008. 
Sec. 20-964. - Temporary outdoor events, sidewalk sales, seasonal sales and special events. 
(1)  Purpose. It is the intent of this section to provide for temporary outdoor events, sidewalk sales, seasonal sales and special events which are distinguished from permanent outside business activities that are allowed only by conditional use permit or interim use permit approved by the city council. It is the intent of this section to promote the health, safety, general welfare, aesthetics, and image of the community by facilitating and regulating temporary outdoor events, sidewalk sales, seasonal sales and special events in the following manner: 
a.  Establish standards which permit businesses and organizations to conduct temporary outdoor events, sidewalk sales and seasonal sales in zoning districts where they are permitted accessory uses, and permit businesses, organizations, and individuals to sponsor special events while: 
1.  Ensuring that temporary outdoor events, sidewalk sales, seasonal sales and special events do not create safety hazards by occupying required parking spaces, emergency access, by impeding the efficient movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, or by placing an excessive burden on city services. 
2.  Ensuring that appropriate and necessary insurances and licenses for temporary outdoor events, sidewalk sales, seasonal sales and special events are obtained. 
3.  Providing open and transparent standards, guidelines, and procedures for an administrative review of temporary events, sidewalk sales, seasonal sales and special events. 
b.  Allow temporary events and sidewalk sales which require an outdoor location, while providing standards that will assure compatibility with the underlying zoning district and adjacent property uses. These events and sidewalk sales can include, but are not limited to, product demonstrations or promotions, employee or customer appreciation events, corporate anniversary celebrations and grand openings. 
c.  Allow certain uses which are seasonal in nature, while providing standards that will assure compatibility with the underlying zoning district and adjacent property uses. These uses can include, but are not limited to, farmers' markets, produce stands, and outdoor sales associated with public or religious holidays. 
d.  Limit temporary outdoor sales to activities which are short-term or seasonal and which do not require permanent improvements to the site. 
e.  Allow for special events, while providing standards that assure the health, safety, general welfare, aesthetics, and image of the community. Special events can include, but are not limited to, concerts, car shows, races and walks, parades and festivals. 
(2)  Findings. The city recognizes that temporary outdoor events, sidewalk sales, seasonal sales and special events play an important role in the success of businesses and in fostering an active, integrated, and appealing community. The city finds it necessary for the promotion and preservation of the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the community that the location, size and appearance of temporary outdoor events, sidewalk sales, seasonal sales and special events be controlled. Further, the city finds that: 
a.  Temporary outdoor events, sidewalk sales, seasonal sales and special events are an integral component of economic development. 
b.  Temporary outdoor events, sidewalk sales, seasonal sales and special events have a direct impact on and a relationship to the image of the community. 
c.  Temporary outdoor events, seasonal or sidewalk sales activities may present an obstacle to effective firefighting and other emergency services by blocking necessary exits, fire lanes or turnaround areas. 
d.  Uncontrolled and unlimited temporary outdoor events, sidewalk sales, seasonal sales and special events can adversely impact the image and aesthetics of the community and, thereby, undermine economic value and growth. 
e.  Uncontrolled temporary outdoor events, sidewalk sales, seasonal sales and special events may conflict with existing and neighboring uses. 
f.  Temporary outdoor events, sidewalk sales, seasonal sales and special events can exceed the city's capacity to provide municipal services. These municipal services include, but are not limited to, sanitary facilities, fire, police and utility services. Regulation is needed to ensure that the health, safety and general welfare of the community are not negatively impacted. 
(3)  Permit required. No person shall sponsor, host, or organize a temporary outdoor event, sidewalk sale, seasonal sale or special event without the relevant permit issued pursuant to this section. 
a.  A temporary outdoor event permit shall be required for an activity which will be entirely confined to the applicant's property, will last no longer than 72 hours, and is not reasonably expected to impact traffic, parking, public safety, or other municipal services. Typically, temporary events and sidewalk sales requiring an outdoor location would require this permit. 
b.  A seasonal sales permit shall be required for a commercial activity which will be entirely confined to the applicant's property, will last longer than 72 hours, and is not reasonably expected to impact traffic, parking, public safety, or other municipal services. Typically, seasonal sales requiring an outdoor location would require this permit. 
c.  A special event permit shall be required for an activity which will require the use of public spaces or services, or which is reasonably expected to impact traffic, parking, public safety, or other municipal services. 
(4)  Exemptions. The following events shall not require a permit under this section: 
a.  Indoor events not reasonably expected to impact traffic, parking, public safety, or other municipal services. 
b.  Noncommercial private events, including, but not limited to, weddings, wedding receptions, anniversaries, birthdays, family reunions, funeral processions and graduation parties. 
c.  Events for which a public gathering permit has been issued as provided for in section 14-58; provided that, the event is entirely confined to a city park and cannot be reasonably expected to impact traffic, parking, public safety, or other municipal services. 
d.  Community events organized by or in partnership with the City of Chanhassen. 
(5)  Application for permit. The applicant shall submit an application for the relevant permit to the city manager or their designee. Applications for temporary outdoor events and seasonal sales permits shall be submitted on forms provided by the city at least ten business days prior to the date of the requested activity. Applications for special events shall be submitted on forms provided by the city at least 60 days prior to the date of the requested activity. They [The] city manager or their designee may waive the ten or 60-day requirement if they find extenuating circumstances require a shorter review period. Included with application should be: 
a.  A signed letter of permission from the owner of the property, if different than applicant, stating that the applicant has permission to conduct the event. 
b.  A concise statement describing the purpose and nature of the activity, description of any commercial activity, dates and times of operation, number of employees or volunteers involved, estimated number of attendees, provisions for on-site parking and security, and any other pertinent information required by the city manager or their designee to fully evaluate the application. 
c.  A site plan or aerial photo of the property showing sufficient detail to evaluate the event's location and the placement of any temporary structures associated with the event. The city manager or their designee may require a copy of an approved site plan, drawn to scale, or an "as-built" survey, which accurately represents existing conditions on the site, including entrances and exits, and bona fide parking and driving areas, and which accurately indicates any proposed temporary structures, including tents, stands, chemical toilets and signs, when, in their judgement, such a plan is necessary to properly evaluate the permit. 
d.  An accurate floor plan of any building on the property, when, in the judgment of the city manager or their designee, such a plan is necessary to properly evaluate the location of the activity and the effectiveness of building entrances and exits. 
e.  Proof of liability insurance. The certificate of insurance must name the city, its officials, employees and agents as additional insured. The limits of insurance will not be less than: $1,000,000.00 each occurrence; $2,000,000.00 general aggregate. The city may waive or reduce this requirement in the event that: 
1.  The applicant signs a verified statement that the required insurance coverage cannot be obtained; or 
2.  The city manager or their designee determines that the insurance requirements are in excess of the risk presented by the proposed activity. 
f.  Applications or valid permits for all regulated activities associated with the event including, but not limited to, loudspeaker or similar device, temporary lifting of no parking requirements, street closures for neighborhood events, race addendum and those required for the sale of produce, prepared food, and/or alcohol. 
g.  If applying for a special event permit the applicant shall also provide: 
1.  A list of public spaces or services the event requires. 
2.  A statement detailing the events expected impact on traffic, parking, public safety, and any other relevant public services. A detailed plan for how the applicant will manage and mitigate these impacts shall also be included. 
h.  A nonrefundable fee which shall be imposed in accordance with the fee schedule established by the city council. The intent of this section is to recover costs associated with administering the ordinance from which this section derives. Permit fees shall reflect the costs of reviewing and processing permits, as well as costs associated with periodic enforcement activities and compliance checks. 
(6)  Procedure. The application will be processed as follows: 
a.  The city manager or their designee shall review applications for administrative permits and shall determine if the proposal is in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, and the specific standards for temporary outdoor events, seasonal sales, or special events as set forth in this section. The application shall also be reviewed by the public safety department and any other appropriate review agencies. 
b.  If the proposal is in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, and the general and specific standards for temporary outdoor events, seasonal sales or special events as set forth in this section, a written permit shall be issued to the applicant. Any conditions necessary to assure compliance with applicable codes, ordinances, and the standards in this section shall be attached to the permit. 
c.  If the city manager or their designee finds grounds for denying the permit, these findings shall be communicated to the applicant and the application for the permit shall be considered denied; unless, within ten days of the date of such notice, the applicant submits revised plans and/or information with which brings the proposal into compliance. 
d.  If the city manager or their designee deny an application for a temporary outdoor event, seasonal sale or special event, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city council. Such an appeal must be submitted to the city manager in writing no later than ten days from the date of the decision. 
(7)  Grounds for denial. A sales or event permit application may be denied if based on the application and other relevant information, the city finds that: 
a.  Information contained in the application or otherwise submitted by the applicant is false or insufficient to allow for an effective evaluation of the proposed sale or event. 
b.  The applicant fails to provide required or requested supplemental information after having been notified by the city that additional documentation is required. 
c.  The applicant fails to agree to all conditions and terms of permit. 
d.  The applicant has outstanding fees due to the city, unresolved code enforcement or noncompliant building permit issues, has violated the terms and conditions of a previously issued sale or event permit, or has had a previously issued sale or event permit revoked by the city. 
e.  The type of sale or event is not permitted by zoning or other statute. 
f.  The time, hours, location, size, or nature of the sale or event will substantially disrupt or burden traffic, parking, public safety, or other municipal services and the city does not have sufficient resources to mitigate these impacts. 
g.  The location or time of the sale or event conflicts with previously scheduled sales or events, and the city does not have sufficient resources available to adequately support both sales or events and/or normal operation of the city. 
h.  The location of the sale or event would interfere with construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along public property or right-of-way. 
i.  The location of the sale or event would cause undue hardship for adjacent uses. 
j.  The sale or event is likely to endanger public safety, health or property. 
k.  The applicant does not have the required liability insurance. 
(8)  Permit conditions. The city may place conditions on the time, place, and other aspects of any sale or event allowed by this section as deemed necessary to mitigate the activity's impact on traffic, parking, public safety, or other municipal services. These conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Changing the date(s), time(s), route, or location of the proposed activity. 
b.  Removing or altering an aspect of the activity which cannot be mitigated sufficiently to ensure public safety and welfare, or which causes liability to the city. 
c.  Alterations to the traffic control or safety/emergency plan. 
d.  Limiting the activity's maximum attendance. 
e.  Restricting the sale or consumption of food or alcohol. 
f.  Removal of advertising/promotional materials. 
g.  Requirements for the cleanup and restoration of any public property. 
1.  The applicant may be required to provide the city with an escrow in order to guarantee the cleanup and restoration of public property. The amount of the escrow shall be determined by the engineering department for potential impacts to streets and areas with the city right-of-way and by the park and recreation department for potential impacts to parks and trails. 
h.  Requirements for appropriate sanitation facilities, waste receptacles, and availability of potable water. 
i.  Requirements designed to ensure compliance with applicable local, state and federal laws. 
j.  Any other conditions which the city deems necessary. 
(9)  Limitations; general conditions. 
a.  All activities allowed by this section: 
1.  The site shall be cleared and all remaining debris removed from the sales or event site on the last remaining day of the permit. 
2.  Acceptable space for off-street parking and traffic circulation generated by the use must be provided. Curb and gutter with drive approaches is desired to provide safe turn movements. 
3.  Lighting shall be compatible with surrounding adjacent uses. 
4.  Signage should be limited to window signs, and one outdoor sign no greater than 24 square feet. Other signage for purposes of traffic direction and control may be authorized by the city manager or their designee. 
5.  Front yard, side yard and rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of ten feet. 
6.  All other pertinent city and state permits must be obtained. 
7.  The approved permit shall be kept on the premises for the duration of the activity. 
8.  No outdoor speaker system shall be allowed without permission from the city. 
b.  Temporary outdoor events: 
1.  Shall be permitted for the period specified in the administrative permit. 
2.  Shall not exceed 15 days per calendar year per property or center. 
3.  Shall have a maximum duration of three days. 
c.  Seasonal sales: 
1.  Permitted temporary outdoor sales activities are limited to the following: 
a.  Christmas tree sales. 
b.  Seasonal holiday markets. 
c.  Seasonal produce stands. 
2.  Shall be for the period specified in the administrative permit. 
3.  Shall not exceed 120 days per calendar year per property or center. 
4.  There shall be no more than three sales activities per year per property or center. 
d.  Special events: 
1.  Shall be permitted for the period specified in the administrative permit. 
2.  Shall have a maximum duration of seven days. 
3.  There shall be no more than four special event permits issued per property or center per calendar year. 
(10)  Administration and enforcement. 
a.  The city may inspect the property on which the sale or event is being held before the start of the sale or event and/or during the sale or event to verify compliance with the provisions of this section or any permit conditions. 
b.  The city manager or their designee may, upon written notice, suspend or revoke the sale or event permit of any person who violates any of the provisions of this section or any of the conditions of the permit. 
c.  Any sale or event permit issued may be summarily revoked by the city's chief law enforcement officer or fire chief at any time when by reason of an emergency, the law enforcement officer or fire chief determines that the safety of the public or property requires such revocation. 
d.  If, at any time, a permit under the provisions of this section is suspended or revoked, it shall thereafter be unlawful for that person or organization to operate, open, maintain, manage or conduct any temporary outdoor event, seasonal sale or special event. 
e.  Violation of an issued permit or the provisions of this section may be grounds for denial of future permit applications during a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 1, 10-11-10; Ord. No. 619, § 17, 2-27-17) 
Sec. 20-965. - Continuing care retirement facility. 
    The following applies to the continuing care retirement facilities: 
(1)  The facility shall maintain state licensing. 
(2)  The facility shall conform to the requirements of the Minnesota State Building Codes and Fire Codes. 
(3)  The facility shall be connected to municipal services. 
(4)  The facility shall be of residential style and character with a maximum structure height of 35 feet. 
(5)  Parking areas shall be screened from public or private right-of-way and adjacent single-family residential areas. 
(6)  One-third parking space per bed shall be provided with an additional parking space for every employee on the largest single shift. 
(7)  The facility shall be located in a medium or high-density district with a gross density not exceeding 16 beds per acre. 
(8)  Access to the site shall be from a collector or arterial street as defined in the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 574, § 3, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 20-966. - Adult day care. 
(a)  The site shall have loading and drop-off points designed to avoid interfering with traffic and pedestrian movements. 
(b)  The adult day care shall obtain all applicable state, county and city licenses. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 43, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 20-967. - Microdistillery operated in conjunction with a cocktail room. 
    The following applies to all microdistilleries operated in conjunction with a cocktail room: 
(1)  The microdistillery shall not produce more than 40,000 proof gallons of distilled spirits per year. 
(2)  An outdoor seating area is permitted provided it has an enclosure and the enclosure is not interrupted; access to the seating area must be through the principle building; its hours of operation shall be no later than 10:00 p.m. Sunday-Thursday and 12:00 a.m. Friday - Saturday; and the outdoor seating area must be located and designed so as not to interfere with pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
(3)  Shipping and receiving areas shall be located behind the facility or otherwise screened from view. 
(Ord. No. 632, § 16, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 20-968. - Brew pub. 
    The following applies to all brew pubs: 
(1)  The brew pub shall not produce more than 3,500 barrels per year. 
(2)  An outdoor seating area is permitted provided it has an enclosure and the enclosure is not interrupted; access to the seating area must be through the principle building; its hours of operation shall be no later than 10:00 p.m. Sunday-Thursday and 12:00 a.m. Friday - Saturday; and the outdoor seating area must be located and designed so as not to interfere with pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
(3)  Shipping and receiving areas shall be located behind the facility or otherwise screened from view. 
(Ord. No. 632, § 16, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 20-969. - Brewery operated in conjunction with a taproom, producing less than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor per year. 
    The following applies to all breweries operated in conjunction with a taproom: 
(1)  The brewery shall not produce more than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor per year. 
(2)  An outdoor seating area is permitted provided it has an enclosure and the enclosure is not interrupted; access to the seating area must be through the principle building; its hours of operation shall be no later than 10:00 p.m. Sunday-Thursday and 12:00 a.m. Friday - Saturday; and the outdoor seating area must be located and designed so as not to interfere with pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
(3)  Shipping and receiving areas shall be located behind the facility or otherwise screened from view. 
(Ord. No. 632, § 16, 6-11-18) 
Secs. 20-970-20-975. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOME OCCUPATIONS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 302, § 2, adopted May 8, 2000, amended Div. 3 in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance Div. 3 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 20-976. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to regulate home occupations in residential zoning districts to ensure that they are incidental to the primary residential use of the property and to establish standards by which home occupations can be conducted without compromising the character of the residential neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 2, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 20-977. - Subordinate use. 
    The use of a dwelling unit for any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its residential use. Not more than 25 percent of the floor area of one floor of a dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation. No garage or accessory buildings except accessory agricultural buildings existing on February 19, 1987, shall be used for any home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 2, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 20-978. - Occupations prohibited. 
    Contractors' yards/landscaping businesses are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 2, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 377, § 121, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-979. - Outside appearance. 
    The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a fully enclosed building. No change in the outside appearance of the building or land, or other visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation shall be permitted. Outdoor storage of anything is prohibited in connection with a home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 2, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 20-980. - Hours of operation. 
    The hours of operation of any home occupation shall be limited to between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 2, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 20-981. - Use of equipment. 
    No mechanical or electrical equipment requiring the use of voltage in excess of 220 volts single phase shall be used in the conduct of a home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 2, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 20-982. - Traffic and parking. 
(a)  No traffic shall be generated by any home occupation in greater volume than would be normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and no home occupation involving the need for more than three parking spaces for the occupants and visitors shall be permitted. 
(b)  Adequate off-street parking facilities required to service the home occupation shall be provided on the premises, but no such parking facilities shall be established within any required front or side yard, except upon an established driveway. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 2, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 20-983. - Retail and wholesale sales prohibited. 
    No commodities, merchandise or supplies shall be sold or offered for sale upon or from the premises, whether at retail or wholesale. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 2, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 20-984. - Nonresident employee. 
    Only one nonresident of the dwelling unit may be employed upon the premises of a home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 2, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 20-985. - Commercial equipment and vehicles. 
    Exterior parking of trailers, steer skid loaders, landscaping equipment, cement mixers, and other similar types of equipment used in conjunction with the home occupation is prohibited. Parking of commercial vehicles in excess of 22 feet in length is prohibited. No commercial vehicles in excess of 9,000 pounds gross weight shall be used in connection with the home occupation or parked on the property. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 2, 5-8-00) 
Secs. 20-986-20-1000. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ANIMALS 

Sec. 20-1001. - Keeping. 
    The following animals may be kept in the city: 
(1)  Household pets are an allowed use in all zoning districts. 
(2)  Horses in the A-2, RR and RSF zoning districts in accordance with chapter 5, article III. 
(3)  Honey bees in accordance with chapter 5, article IV. 
(4)  Chickens in accordance with chapter 5, article V. 
(5)  Farm animals are an allowed use on all farm property zoned A2 or RR, which permit agricultural use, with a minimum parcel area of ten acres, except as otherwise specifically provided in the City Code. Farm animals may not be confined in a pen, feed lot or building within 100 feet of any residential dwelling not owned or leased by the farmer. 
(6)  Wild animals may not be kept in the city. 
(7)  Animals may only be kept for commercial purposes if authorized in the zoning district where the animals are located. 
(8)  Animals may not be kept if they cause a nuisance or endanger the health or safety of the community. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 9(6-9-1), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 480, § 2, 6-22-09; Ord. No. 612, § 6, 12-14-15; Ord. No. 634, § 3, 6-25-18; Ord. No. 639, § 8, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 20-1002. - Care and treatment. 
    Animals kept within any zoning district shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The size, number, species, facilities for and location of animals kept shall be maintained so as not to constitute a danger or nuisance by means of odor, noise or otherwise. 
(2)  Facilities for housing animals shall be: 
a.  Constructed of such material as is appropriate for the animals involved. 
b.  Maintained in good repair. 
c.  Controlled as to temperature, ventilated and lighted compatible with the health and comfort of the animals. 
d.  Of sufficient size to allow adequate freedom of movement. Inadequate space may be indicated by evidence of malnutrition, poor condition of debility, stress or abnormal behavior patterns. 
e.  Cleaned as often as necessary to prevent contamination of the animals contained therein and to minimize disease hazards and reduce odors. 
(3)  Animals shall be provided wholesome, palatable food and water free from contamination and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain all animals in good health. 
(4)  Animals kept in pet shops or kennels shall be kept in accordance with regulations for pet shops and kennels in addition to the regulations provided by this division. Pet shop or kennel owners shall receive a license as required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 6-9-2, 12-15-86) 
Secs. 20-1003-20-1015. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FENCES AND WALLS 

Sec. 20-1016. - Intent. 
    The intent of this division is to provide standards for fences along the perimeter of lots that act as boundaries and/or barriers. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 12(6-12-1), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1017. - Permit. 
    A permit shall be obtained for any permanent fence installed for any purpose, other than an agricultural purpose prior to installation of same. The installation of temporary or seasonal fencing, e. g., snow fencing, garden fencing, etc., without permanent posts is exempt from this requirement. A site plan showing the location of the fence shall be submitted with the permit application. The city may require a permit applicant to provide a registered land survey establishing property lines. A building permit, in lieu of a zoning compliance review permit, shall be required for fences in excess of six feet in height and retaining walls in excess of four feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 12(6-12-2, 6-12-4, 6-12-5), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, § 122, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-1018. - Commercial and industrial fences. 
(a)  Fences for screening or storage purposes installed on property used for commercial or industrial uses may have a maximum height of eight feet. When commercial or industrial uses abut property used or zoned for residential uses, a fence at least six feet in height may be placed between the residential and the commercial and industrial property if the city determines that there is a need for a fence. The city may elect to use landscaping consisting of berms and vegetation to provide screening. If a fence is used, such fence must be 100 percent opaque. Commercial or industrial fences over eight feet shall require a conditional use permit. 
(b)  Fences utilizing barbed wire in all commercial and industrial districts shall require a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 12(6-12-10), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 90, § 3, 3-14-88; Ord. No. 255, § 2, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 20-1019. - Location. 
(a)  Generally. All fences and retaining walls shall be located entirely upon the property of the fence or retaining wall owner unless the owner of the adjoining property agrees, in writing, that said fence or retaining wall may be erected on the property line of the respective properties. Such agreement shall be submitted at the time of building permit application. Encroachment into a city easement shall require an encroachment agreement between the property owner and the city. Fences shall not be placed within the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Wetlands. No fences shall be permitted below the ordinary high water mark of a wetland or within the required wetland buffer area. 
(c)  Buffers. No fences shall be permitted between a required landscape buffer and a collector or arterial street. 
(d)  Temporary fences . Temporary fencing, such as fencing installed to enclose a seasonal garden or snow fencing in winter, may not be located within the front yard setback. Snow fencing shall not be located within any drainage or utility easement. 
(e)  Bluffs . No fences shall be permitted within the 30-foot bluff setback. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 12(6-12-3), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 181, § 1, 3-8-93; Ord. No. 255, § 3, 7-22-96; Ord. No. 377, § 123, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 423, § 7, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 20-1020. - Construction and maintenance. 
    Every fence shall be constructed in a substantial, workmanlike manner and of material reasonably suited for the purpose for which the fence is proposed to be used. Every fence shall be maintained in such condition as to not become a hazard, eyesore, or public or private nuisance. All fences shall be constructed so that the side containing the framing supports and cross pieces face the interior of the fence owner's lot. Any fence which does not comply with the provisions of this chapter or which endangers the public safety, health or welfare shall be considered a public nuisance. Abatement proceedings may be instituted by the proper city official after 15 days' notification, if the owner of such fence has not undertaken the necessary repairs to abate the nuisance. Link fences shall be constructed in such a manner that no barbed ends shall be exposed. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 12(6-12-6), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1021. - Swimming pool fences. 
    All in-ground swimming pools shall be protected by a fence not less than five feet in height. All gates shall have a self-closing and self-latching latch installed on the pool side of the fence. All fences shall be nonclimbable and shall have intermediate rails or ornamental pattern such that a sphere four inches in diameter cannot pass through. Subsection (a) does not apply to pools which are located on property which are completely enclosed by perimeter fence five feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 12(6-12-7), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 110, § 2, 8-28-89) 
Sec. 20-1022. - Shoreline fences. 
    Fences to be installed on riparian lots shall have a maximum height of three and one-half feet in the rear yard (lake side). 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 12(6-12-8), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1023. - Height. 
    Any fence over six and one-half feet must receive a conditional use permit. The fence height is measured from grade to the highest point on the fence. All other residential fences shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Side yards and rear yards. In any side or rear yard on lots, the height of fences shall not exceed six and one-half feet. 
(2)  Front yards. Fences in the required front yard setback area that are opaque shall not exceed three feet in height. Chain link fences in this area shall not exceed four feet in height. All other open fences in this area shall not exceed six and one-half feet in height. 
(3)  Corner or double fronted lots. In addition to the other provisions contained in this section, fences located on corner or double fronted lots shall be subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Any fence within the required front yard setback area shall not exceed three feet in height if opaque construction, or four feet in height if open construction. 
b.  The maximum height of a fence shall conform to the requirements of fences in front yards within the corner site triangle. Two sides of corner site triangle commence at the corner of the lot located at the intersection of the two streets and run a distance of 30 feet back along the lot lines abutting the streets. The third side of the triangle is a straight line joining the end points of the adjacent sides. 
c.  The front shall be determined by the location of the garage. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 12(6-12-9), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 181, § 2, 3-8-93; Ord. No. 240, § 25, 7-24-95) 
Sec. 20-1024. - Barbed wire and electric fences. 
    Barbed wire and electric fences are prohibited in all residential districts. Barbed wire and electric fences are permitted in agricultural districts. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 4, 3-14-88; Ord. No. 451, § 10, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 20-1025. - Retaining walls. 
    Retaining walls exceeding four feet in height, including stage walls which cumulatively exceed four feet in height, must be constructed in accordance with plans prepared by a registered engineer or landscape architect and shall be constructed of a durable material. A permit is required for the construction of such retaining walls. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 124, 5-24-04) 
Secs. 20-1026-20-1040. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS) 

Sec. 20-1041. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to establish standards and procedures by which the installation and operation of WECS shall be governed. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-1), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1042. - Ornamental wind devices. 
    Ornamental wind devices that are not a WECS shall be exempt from the provisions of this division and shall conform to other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-8), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1043. - When allowed. 
    Wind conversion systems may be allowed as a conditional use subject to the regulations and requirements of this division, provided the property upon which the system is to be located is zoned agricultural, commercial or industrial and is constructed and maintained on any parcel of at least two and one-half acres in size. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-2), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1044. - Declaration of conditions. 
    The planning commission may recommend and the city council may impose such conditions on the granting of WECS conditional use permit as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-3), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1045. - Site plan. 
    All applications for a WECS conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a detailed site plan drawn to scale and dimensioned, displaying the following information: 
(1)  Lot lines and dimensions. 
(2)  Location and height of all buildings, structures, above-ground utilities and trees on the lot, including both existing and proposed structures and guy wire anchors. 
(3)  Location and height of all adjacent buildings, structures, above-ground utilities and trees located within 350 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property in question. 
(4)  Existing and proposed setbacks of all structures located on the property in question. 
(5)  A sketch evaluation of the premises accurately depicting the proposed WECS and its relationship to structures on adjacent lots. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-4), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1046. - Inspection. 
    The city reserves the right upon issuing any WECS conditional use permit to inspect the premises on which the WECS is located. If a WECS is not maintained in operational condition and poses a potential safety hazard, the owner shall take expeditious action to correct the situation. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-9), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1047. - Abandonment. 
    Any WECS or tower which is not used for six successive months shall be deemed abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed from the property at the expense of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-10), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1048. - Compliance with technical codes. 
(a)  Standard drawings of the structural components of the wind energy conversion system and support structures, including base and footings shall be provided along with engineering data and calculations to demonstrate compliance with the structural design provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code as adopted. Drawings and engineering calculations shall be certified by a registered engineer. 
(b)  WECS electrical equipment and connection shall be designed and installed in adherence to the National Electrical Code as adopted and amended by the city. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-5, 6-20-6), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, § 125, 5-24-04) 
Cross reference- Technical codes, § 7-16 et seq. 
Sec. 20-1049. - Height. 
(a)  The permitted maximum height of a WECS shall be determined in one of two ways. In determining the height of the WECS the total height of the system shall be included. System height shall be measured from the base of the tower to the highest possible extension of the rotor. 
(1)  A ratio of one foot to one foot between the distance of the closest property line to the base of the WECS to the height of the system. 
(2)  A maximum system height of 175 feet. 
(b)  The shortest height of the two above-mentioned methods shall be used in determining the maximum allowable height of a WECS system. The height of a WECS must also comply with FAA Regulation part 77 "Objects Affecting Navigable Air Space" and/or MnDOT Rule 14, MCAR 1.3015 "Criteria for Determining Obstruction to Air Navigation." 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-7(1)), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1050. - Setbacks. 
    No part of a WECS (including guy wire anchors) shall be located within or above any required front, side or rear yard setback. WECS towers shall be set back from the closest property line one foot for every one foot of system height. WECS shall not be located within 30 feet of an aboveground utility line. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-7(2)), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1051. - Rotors. 
    All WECS rotors shall not have rotor dimensions greater than 26 feet. Blade arcs created by the WECS shall have a minimum of 30 feet of clearance over any structure or tree within a 200-foot radius. Each WECS shall be equipped with both a manual and automatic braking service capable of stopping the WECS operation in high winds (40 miles per hour or greater). 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-7(3)-(5)), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1052. - Lightning protection. 
    Each WECS shall be grounded to protect against natural lightning strikes in conformance with the National Electrical Code as adopted and amended by the city. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-7(6)), 12-15-86) 
Cross reference- Technical codes, § 7-16 et seq. 
Sec. 20-1053. - Tower access. 
    To prevent unauthorized climbing, WECS towers must comply with one of the following provisions: 
(1)  Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located within 12 feet of the ground. 
(2)  A locked anti-climb device shall be installed on the tower. 
(3)  Tower capable of being climbed shall be enclosed by a locked, protective fence at least six feet high. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-7(7)), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1054. - Signs. 
    WECS shall have one sign, not to exceed two square feet posted at the base of the tower and said sign shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Warning high voltage. 
(2)  Manufacturer's name. 
(3)  Emergency phone number. 
(4)  Emergency shutdown procedures. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-7(8)), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1055. - Lighting. 
    WECS shall not have affixed or attached any lights, reflectors, flashers or any other illumination, except for illumination devices required by FAA Regulations part 77 "Objects Affecting Navigable Air Space" and FAA Advisory Circular 70/7460-1K CHG1 April 15, 2000. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-7(9)), 12-15-86; Ord. No. 377, § 126, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-1056. - Electromagnetic interference. 
    WECS shall be designed and constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-26-7(10)), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1057. - Noise emissions. 
    Noises emanating from the operation of WECS shall be in compliance with and regulated by the state pollution control standards, Minnesota Regulations NPC 1 and 2, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-7(11)), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1058. - Utility company interconnection. 
    No WECS shall be interconnected with a local electrical utility company until the utility company has reviewed and commented upon it. The interconnection of the WECS with the utility company shall adhere to the National Electrical Code as adopted and amended by the city. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VI, § 20(6-20-7(12)), 12-15-86) 
Cross reference- Technical codes § 7-16 et seq. 
Sec. 20-1059. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND OFFICE-INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 20-1060. - Purpose. 
    These design standards govern site planning, placement of building masses, use of materials, enable the city to enhance what otherwise might result in low quality development. These design standards will: 
(1)  Promote high-quality architectural and site design. 
(2)  Protect creek corridors, wetlands, and significant stands of mature trees through the use of careful site design, protective easements, sensitive alignment and design of roadways and utilities, incorporation of natural features, landscaping and massing of trees that enhance existing natural features and views, and the practices delineated in the city's surface water management plan. 
(3)  Create a unified, harmonious and high-quality visual environment throughout the city. 
(4)  Foster a distinctive and positive community image, thereby identifying Chanhassen as a special place with a unique identity in the Twin Cities Region as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-24-01; Ord. No. 445, § 1, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 20-1061. - Intent. 
    The city intends that all commercial, industrial, and office-institutional development within the city should strive toward the highest level of quality in both design and construction. The criteria by which new development in the city shall be judged are as follows: 
(1)  Consistency with all provisions of the comprehensive plan, as amended from time to time; the surface water protection program; all provisions of the zoning ordinance and subdivision ordinance not specifically overridden by the provisions of these design standards; and all other applicable land use regulations. 
(2)  Preservation of the natural conditions found on each site to the greatest extent possible, through minimized removal of trees and other vegetation and soil, minimized site grading, and application of the practices found in the city's surface water management plan. 
(3)  Establishment throughout the district of harmonious physical and visual relationships among existing, new, and proposed buildings, open spaces, natural terrain, and plant materials and placement with the intent of creating a unique and unified appearance for the entire city. 
(4)  Use of appropriate materials, lighting, textures, colors, and architectural and landscape forms to create a unified, high-quality design concept for each site that is compatible with adjacent and neighboring structures and functions, including but not limited to natural areas, city-owned property, and vacant land subject to future development in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Creation of unified site designs, each with a sense of internal order, that provide desirable environments for site users and visitors and the community as a whole and that consider all site elements including: the relationship of buildings to surrounding landforms; grading; architectural design; building, parking and loading dock orientation; building height; use of manmade materials, including paving; site furnishings (lighting, outdoor seating, signage, etc.); landscaping (retention of natural vegetation, plant selection and placement, retention and incorporation of water features, etc.); and other visible outdoor site elements. 
(6)  Creation of a suitable balance between the amount and arrangement of open space, landscaping, and view protection and the design and function of man-made features on the other. Achieving this balance shall take into account screening, buffering, size and orientation of open spaces, personal and property security, localized wind and solar effects, and protection of important public ways. 
(7)  Provision of safe and adequate access to and from sites giving ample consideration to the location and number of access points from public streets, the safety and convenience of merging and turning movements, and traffic management and mitigation. 
(8)  Provision of on-site vehicular, bicycling, and pedestrian circulation by way of interior drives, parking areas, pathways, and walkways adequate to handle anticipated needs and to safety buffer pedestrians and cyclists from motor vehicles. Ample consideration shall be given to the width of interior drives, internal traffic movement and flow, separation of pedestrian, cycling, automobile; and delivery traffic, and the safe, convenient, and practical arrangement of parking spaces. 
(9)  Adequate separation and protection of each site from adjacent properties, through reasonable provisions for surface water drainage, sound and sight buffers, view protection, privacy, and other aspects of design that may not be specifically covered by these or other regulations but are found to have significant effect on any or all of the properties and roadways. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-24-01; Ord. No. 445, § 2, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 20-1062. - District applications. 
    The design standards shall apply to all commercial, industrial and Office institutional development. Within each zoning district the design standards shall be in addition to the underlying requirements. single-family residential lots are exempt from the design standards. The design standards apply with the following exceptions: 
 Internal alterations to buildings that affect less than 50 percent of the building's gross floor area and do result in a change to the building height, roof line or footprint. 
 Replacement or repair of existing materials. 
 The standards shall apply only to the building or site elements being developed or altered. A proposal for changes to a building would be required to meet only those standards that pertain to buildings while changes to a parking area would be required to meet all standards for parking areas not for buildings. 
    The planning commission shall apply the design standards proportionately to the degree of change proposed. Minor improvements may be made to existing uses without costly upgrades or a complete change to the site. The planning commission may make a recommendation to waive specific design standards based on the scale of the project. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-24-01) 
Sec. 20-1063. - Architectural style/building character. 
    Architectural style shall not be restricted. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design and on its relationship to its surroundings, guided by the provisions of this section. Site characteristics to be evaluated for this purpose include building and plant materials, colors, textures, shapes, massing, rhythms of building components and details, height, roof-line and setback. Designs that are incompatible with their surroundings or intentionally bizarre or exotic are prohibited. 
    Monotony of design, both within projects and between any project and its surroundings, is prohibited. Variation in detail, form, and siting shall provide visual interest. Site characteristics that may be used for this purpose include building and plant materials, sizes, colors, textures, shapes, massing, rhythms of building components and details, height, roof-line, and setback. 


Building Character 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-24-01) 
Sec. 20-1064. - Size, portion, and placement. 
    Site designs and configurations that tend to catch and accumulate trash, leaves, and dirt shall be avoided. In addition, provisions for washing and cleaning buildings, other structures, and building grounds shall be considered and included in the design. 
    All building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, soffits, and parapets, shall have good proportions that relate to the facade of the building and shall relate well with one another. 
    All buildings shall be located as close as possible to the principal building setback line and the majority of parking shall be to the rear or side of the building or screened area. Building entrances shall be as close as possible to abutting streets. 


Size, Portion and Placement 
(1)  Entries. The main entrance should always face the primary street with secondary entrances to the side or rear. In the case of a corner building or a building abutting more than one street, the planning commission will determine which street should be considered "primary" based on the visibility and access patterns. The main entrance shall be placed at grade. Main entries shall be designed, with one or more of the following: 
 Canopy, portico, overhang or arch above the entrance 
 Recesses or projections in the building facade surrounding entrance 
 Peaked roof or raised parapet over the door 
 Display windows surrounding the entrance 
 Architectural detailing such as tile work or ornamental moldings 
 Permanent planters or window boxes for landscaping 


Entries 
(2)  Articulation. To avoid long unbroken expanses, buildings of more than 40 feet in width shall be divided into smaller increments (between 20 and 40 feet) through articulation of the facade. This can be achieved through combinations of the following techniques: 
 Facade modulation-stepping back or forward or extending a portion of the facade 
 Vertical divisions using different textures or materials 
 Division into storefronts with separate display windows and entrances 
 Variation in the rooflines by alternating dormers and stepped roofs. Gables or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation intervals equal to the articulation interval 
 Providing a lighting fixture, trellis, tree, or other landscape feature with each interval 


Articulation 
(3)  The ground level of any multi-story structure must be visually distinct from the upper stories. This can be achieved through the use of one or more of the following techniques, and others may meet the objective: 
 An intermediate cornice line 
 A sign band 
 An awning arcade or portico 
 A change in building materials, texture or detailing 
 A change in window shape or treatment 


Ground Level Expression 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-24-01) 
Sec. 20-1065. - Material and detail. 
    All manmade architectural, landscape, and paving materials shall reflect the highest quality possible and should be used in a manner suitable to the nature of the material, its role in the design, general durability, expected level of use or abuse, weathering characteristics, and ease and frequency of maintenance. The following materials or equivalent materials are acceptable: 
  Brick 
  Stone 
  Glass 
  Textured masonry units 
  Wood, consisting of lap siding with an exposure no greater than seven inches or wood shakes; surfaces must be painted 
  Stucco 
  Tilt up concrete panels that are grid or brick like in appearance 
    Accent material may occupy up to 15 percent of the building's facade. These may include metal, glass block, spandrel glass or similar materials approved by the city. 


Material and Detail 
    The following may not be used in any visible exterior application except when specifically permitted by the city in areas with limited public view or accent areas: 
  Plain/painted poured concrete panels "cast in place" 
  Painted brick 
  Painted concrete panels 
  Painted rock faced block 
  Unadorned plain or painted concrete block 
  Tilt-up concrete panel that are ribbed or corduroy in appearance 
  Prefabricated steel or sheet metal panels 
  Reflective glass 
  Aluminum, vinyl, fiberglass, asphalt or fiberboard siding 
  EIFS (exterior insulation and finish system) may be used as an accent but not a primary material 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-24-01; Ord. No. 377, § 127, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-1066. - Color. 
    Colors shall be harmonious. Building colors shall consist of muted colors with low reflectance. Recommended colors include browns, grays, tans, beiges and dark or muted green, blues and reds. Bright or brilliant colors and sharply contrasting colors may be used only for accent purposes occupying a maximum of ten percent of building facades. 


Color 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-24-01) 
Sec. 20-1067. - Height and roof design. 
    Building heights shall be limited to three stories or 40 feet in the Highway 5 Corridor District. Otherwise building heights shall be consistent with the standards of the underlying zoning district. Measurement of the highest point shall exclude antennas for television and radio reception, but shall include architectural details (e.g., parapet walls), transmission antennas, satellite dishes and transmission equipment, microwave-transmission equipment, and other nonstructural building elements. 
    Pitched roofs should have a minimum roof pitch of one rise to four feet of run. Flat roofs should be defined with an ornamental parapet or cornice. Average parapet height shall not exceed 15 percent of the height of the supporting wall and maximum parapet height at any point shall not exceed one-third of the support wall. 
    Mechanical equipment, satellite dishes, and other utility hardware, whether located on the roof or exterior of the building or on the ground adjacent to it, shall be screened from the public view and with materials identical to or strongly similar to building materials or by heavy landscaping that will be effective in winter or they shall be located so as not to be visible from any public way. Use of parapet walls or pitched roof elements to screen equipment is encouraged. In no case shall wooden fencing be used as a rooftop equipment screen. 
    Each building shall contain one or more pitched elements (pitched roof, awnings, entries, etc.). 


Height and Roof Design 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-24-01) 
Sec. 20-1068. - Facade transparency. 
    Fifty percent of the first floor facade that is viewed by the public shall be designed to include transparent windows and/or doors to minimize expanses of blank walls. (Reflective glass is not permitted.) If the building is a one-story design and the first floor elevation exceeds 12 feet, then only the first 12 feet in building height shall be included in calculating the facade area. 
    The remaining 50 percent of the first floor facade that is viewed by the public shall be designed to include any or all of the following: 
  Landscape materials (plant material, vertical trellis with vines, planter boxes, etc.). 
  Architectural detailing and articulation that provides texture on the facade and/or parking structure openings. 


Facade Transparency 
    For buildings with a use or function that does not readily allow windows, e.g., cooler or freezer areas, mechanical rooms, security areas, storage areas or warehouse or manufacturing space in commercial or industrial buildings, the fenestration standards may be reduced. However, the architecture detailing must be provided by the use of upper level windows, the use of spandrel glass or architectural detailing which provides arches, patterning, recesses and shadowing that provide aesthetic interest. 
    Architectural detailing may include such things as change in materials, change in color, and other significant visual relief provided in a manner or at intervals in keeping with the size, mass, and scale of the wall. Architectural detailing may include arcades, arches, bosses, buttresses, clerestories, colonnades, columns, corbeling, loggias, pilasters, portals, quoins, silos, tiling and towers. Additional architectural elements may include the use of awnings, canopies, embrasures, lunettes, plant boxes, recesses and shutters. 
    For buildings that were built prior to September 24, 2001, the city will encourage the use of transparent windows or doors as part of any building expansion. However provided the expansion, at a minimum, maintains the existing patterns and details of the existing building architecture, the proposed expansion would not be required to meet the 50 percent transparency requirement. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-24-01; Ord. No. 377, § 128, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 452, § 2, 7-9-07) 
Sec. 20-1069. - Site furnishing. 
    Site furnishings located on private property shall be designed as part of the site's architectural concept and landscape. Materials and colors shall be in harmony with buildings, surroundings, and other furnishings; scale shall be appropriate to the site and the design; and proportions shall be attractive. 
    Site furnishings, community features and landscaping located in any public way or on other public property shall be harmonious with the design of adjacent buildings and with the generally character of the city. 
    Lighting in connection with site furnishings (e.g., to highlight a ground sign) shall meet the criteria applicable to site, landscape, buildings, and signs. 
    Benches, tables and chairs or similar features shall be required with all new developments. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-24-01) 
Sec. 20-1070. - Franchise architect. 
    Franchise architecture (building design that is trademarked or identified with a particular chain or corporation and is generic in nature) shall be revised if it does not comply with the design standards. 


Franchise Architect 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-24-01) 
Sec. 20-1071. - Loading areas, refuse areas, etc. 
    Screening of service yards, refuse, and waste-removal areas, loading docks, truck parking areas, and other areas which tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, dense planting, or any combination of these elements. Screening shall block views from public right-of-way (pedestrian views) and shall be equally effective in winter and summer. 


Screening 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-24-01) 
Sec. 20-1072. - Landscaping. 
(a)  Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to the beauty or utility of a development, they shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible. Modification to topography will be permitted where and to the extent that it contributes to good design. All topographic modifications shall adhere to the practices delineated in the city's surface water management plan. 
(b)  The grades of all walks, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas shall conform with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. In addition, they shall provide an inviting and stable appearance for walking. Stairs and ramps may be substituted for slanted pavement when necessary. 
(c)  All landscape shall preserve and enhance natural features (such as wetlands, drainage ways, mature stands of trees, and the like), enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas and important axes, and provide shade. 
(d)  Landscaping shall emphasize massing of plant materials over isolated or scattered placement of individual specimens. Reforestation as prescribed by the city's tree preservation and reforestation ordinance is encouraged. 

(e)  Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and other materials, and by correlation with natural existing materials and adjacent developments where appropriate. 


Unity of Design 
(f)  Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture and color, and for its ultimate growth size. Plants that are indigenous to the area and others that will be hardy, harmonious to the design of good appearance, and of relatively easy maintenance shall be used. 
(g)  In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrian or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or similar devices. 


Tree Diagram 
(h)  Where building sites limit planting, the placement of trees in parkways, gardens, or paved areas is encouraged. Trees should be clustered whenever possible, and consideration shall be given to the special needs of plants surrounded by impervious surfaces. In these instances, preference is given to surrounding plantings with pervious pavement to allow for the infiltration of stormwater into the root zone. 


Tree Placement 
(i)  In areas where general planting will not prosper, other solutions-such as fences, walls, rock gardens, raised planters, or paving of wood, brick stone, gravel, or cobbles-shall be used. Carefully selected plants shall be included. 


Rock Gardens 
(j)  Landscaping and tree removal shall be consistent with article XXV in the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-24-01; Ord. No. 452, § 3, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 628, § 45, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 20-1073. - Lot frontage and parking location. 
(a)  Highway 5 corridor district. 
(1)  In any lot that abuts Highway 5, directly, the lot line abutting the highway shall be considered the front lot line. 
(2)  In any lot that abuts either of the access boulevards parallel to Highway 5, the lot line abutting the boulevard shall be considered the front lot line. 
(3)  In any lot that abuts both Highway 5 and one of the access boulevards, the lot shall be regarded as having two front lot lines. The lot lines abutting the boulevard shall take design precedence. Such a lot shall be regarded as having no rear lot line or yard. 
(4)  One row of parking shall be allowed within the required minimum front (primary or secondary) yard setback of any lot. The majority of parking shall be located to the side or rear of the building. 
(b)  All other commercial, industrial or office-institutional districts. Parking areas should be distributed around large buildings in order to shorten the distance to other buildings and reduce the overall scale of the paved surface. No more than 50 percent of the parking area for the entrance of the site shall be located between the front facade of the principal building and the primary abutting street. 


Highway 5 Corridor Parking 

(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-24-01) 
Secs. 20-1074-20-1079. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 20-1080. - Location of business. 
(a)  In addition to the licensing requirements of chapter 10 of this Code, sexually oriented businesses shall not be located within 500 feet of: 
(1)  A public or private elementary or secondary school; 
(2)  A licensed day care center; 
(3)  A residential district; 
(4)  A multifamily residential building. 
(5)  A public park adjacent to a residential district; 
(6)  A church; 
(7)  City hall; 
(8)  Public libraries; or 
(9)  Another sexually oriented business. 
(b)  For the purposes of subsection (a), measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school or licensed day care center, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot, or the nearest portion of a building or structure used for multifamily residential which is not located within a residential district. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(d)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this ordinance that is in violation of subsections (a), (b), or (c) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 500 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business(es) is nonconforming. 
(e)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use or residential district listed in subsection (a) of this section within 500 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 129, 5-24-04) 
Secs. 20-1081-1084. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 20-1085. - Purpose. 
    These design standards govern site planning, placement of building masses, use of materials, and enables the city to enhance what otherwise might result in low quality development. These design standards will: 
(1)  Promote high-quality architectural and site design. 
(2)  Create a unified, harmonious and high-quality visual environment throughout the city. 
(3)  Protect creek corridors, wetlands, and significant stands of mature trees through the use of careful site design, protective easements, sensitive alignment and design of roadways/access and utilities, incorporation of natural features, landscaping and massing of trees that enhance existing natural features and views, and the practices delineated in the city's surface water management plan. 
(4)  Foster a distinctive and positive community image, thereby identifying Chanhassen as a special place with a unique identity in the Twin Cities Region as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 11-8-04; Ord. No. 452, § 4, 7-9-07) 
Sec. 20-1086. - Intent. 
    The city intends that all multifamily developments within the city should strive toward the highest level of quality in both design and construction. The criteria by which new development in the city shall be judged are as follows: 
(1)  Consistency with all of the provisions of the comprehensive plan, as amended from time to time; the surface water management plan; all provisions of the zoning ordinance and subdivision ordinance not specifically overridden by the provision of these design standards; and all other applicable land use regulations. 
(2)  Preservation and enhancement of the natural conditions found on each site to the greatest extent possible, through minimized removal of trees and other vegetation and soil, minimized site grading, and application of the practices found in the city's Best Management Practices Handbook. 
(3)  Establishment throughout the district of harmonious physical and visual relations among existing, new and proposed buildings, open spaces, natural terrain, and plant materials and placement with the intent of creating a unique and unified appearance for the entire city. 
(4)  Use of appropriate materials, lighting, textures, colors, and architectural and landscape forms to create a unified, high-quality design concept for each site that is compatible with adjacent and neighboring structures and functions, including but not limited to natural area, city-owned property, and vacant land subject to future development in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Creation of unified site designs, each with a sense of internal order, that provide desirable environments for site users and visitors and the community as a whole and that consider all site elements including the relationship of buildings to surrounding landform, grading, architectural design, building orientation, entry treatment, use of material including variety, articulation detail roof pitch and lighting, landscaping and site elements. 
(6)  Creation of suitable balance between the amount and arrangement of open space, landscaping, and view protection and the design and function of man-made features. Achieving this balance shall take into account screening buffering, size and orientation of open spaces, personal and property security, wind and solar effects and the protection of important public ways. 
(7)  Provision of safe and adequate access to and from sites giving ample consideration to the location and number of access points from public streets, the safety and convenience of merging and turning movements and traffic management mitigation. 
(8)  Provision for on-site vehicular, bicycling, and pedestrian circulation by the way of interior drives, parking areas, pathways, and walkways adequate to handle anticipated needs to safely buffer pedestrians and cyclists from motor vehicles. Consideration shall be given to the width of interior drives, internal traffic movement and flow, separation of pedestrian, cycling, and automotive traffic, and the safe, convenient and practical arrangement of parking spaces based on three of units and building orientation. 
(9)  Adequate separation and protection of each site from adjacent properties through reasonable provisions of surface water drainage, sound and sight buffer, view protection privacy, and other regulations that are found to have significant effect on any or all of the properties and roadways. 
(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 20-1087. - District applications. 
    The design standards shall apply to multifamily developments. With each zoning district the design standards shall be in addition to the underlying requirement. Single-family lots are exempt from the design standards. 
(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 20-1088. - Architectural style. 
(1)  Architectural style shall not be restricted. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design and in relationship to its surroundings, guided by the provisions of this section. Site characteristics to be evaluated for this purpose include building and landscaping, colors, textures, shapes, massing of rhythms of building components and detail, height of roof line, setback and orientation. Designs that are incompatible with their surroundings or intentionally bizarre or exotic are not acceptable. 
(2)  Monotony of design, both within projects and between adjacent projects and its surroundings, is prohibited. Variation in detail, form, and siting shall provide visual interest. Site characteristics that may be used for this purpose include building and landscaping, colors, textures, shapes, massing of rhythms of building components and detail, height of roof line, setback and orientation. 
(3)  All building shall have a minimum of 20 percent of accent material. Accent material may include brick, stone cut face block or shakes. The use of any EFIS shall not be on the first story of any building or one story in height. 
(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 20-1089. - Land use. 
    All development shall create a unified design of internal order that provides desirable environments for site uses, visitors and the community. The following design elements shall be incorporated into a project: 
(1)  The project shall create a unique neighborhood identity. 
(2)  Creation of interconnecting neighborhoods in collaboration with adjoining landowners (street, walkways, preservation of natural features, parks and gathering places). 
(3)  Each neighborhood has a focal point or gathering place including parks, greens, squares, entrance monuments, historic structures (silos/barns) or public furniture (gazebos, benches, pergolas). 


Monument, Gazebo 
(4)  Recreation facilities (playgrounds, tot lots, swimming pools and gardens). 


Fountain, Playground 
(5)  Diversity of product type and design to accommodate different age groups and individuals in different socio-economics circumstances. 
(6)  Broad variety of housing choices-twin homes, row houses, town homes, flats above garages, apartments over shops, garden apartments, senior living opportunities and condominiums. 
(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 20-1090. - Curb appeal. 
    To encourage roadway image or curb appeal projects shall create a variety of building orientation along the roadways; attractive streetscape and architectural detail. All projects shall incorporate two or more of the following design elements: 
(1)  Orientation to the street or access road: 
(a)  Setbacks 
(b)  Spacing between buildings and view sheds. 


Curb Appeal 
(2)  Architectural detail/decorative features. 
(a)  Windows. 
(b)  Flower boxes. 
(c)  Porches, balconies, private spaces. 


Porches 
(d)  Location and treatment of entryway. 


Location 
(e)  Surface materials, finish and texture. 


Surface Materials 
(f)  Roof pitch. 
(g)  Building height and orientation. 
(3)  Location of garages. 


Garages 
(4)  Landscaping including fencing and berming. 
(5)  Street lighting. 


Street Lighting 
(6)  Screening of parking, especially in apartment and condominium developments. 


Parking Lot Screening 
(7)  Variations/differentiations in units including, but not limited to, color, material, articulation etc. 
(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 20-1091. - Transportation diversity. 
    All developments shall be incorporate multi-modal transportation including two or more of the following elements: 
(1)  Streets with trails incorporated. 
(2)  Off road trials and bike paths. 
(3)  Provisions for mass transit with bus stops and shelters incorporated into the developments. 


Bus Shelter 
(4)  Sidewalk connecting internal developments. 
(a)  Undulating sidewalks. Use of pavers or stamped concrete. 


Sidewalks 
(b)  On-street parking and use of roundabouts. 


Roundabout 
(c)  Landscaped boulevards or medians. 


Boulevards 
(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Sec. 20-1092. - Integration of parks, open space, natural historic or cultural resources. 
(1)  Integrate nature and wildlife with urban environment. 
(a)  Trails and sidewalks. 


Trails and Sidewalks 
(b)  Vistas. 
(c)  Historic features. 


Barns, Silos 
(2)  Preservation of natural features that support wildlife and native plants (slopes, trees, wetlands). 


Wetlands 
(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 11-8-04) 
Secs. 20-1093-20-1100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIV. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-1101. - Driveway and private street setbacks and widths in business, industrial, office and multiple-family districts. 
    The following controls driveway and private street setbacks and widths in the business, industrial, office, and multiple-family districts: 
(1)  The width shall be measured between driveway or private street edges and shall be as follows: 
Type of Driveway 
or Private Street District Maximum Minimum One-way traffic Business 22 20 Two-way traffic Business 36 26 One-way traffic Industrial 22 20 Two-way traffic Industrial 36 26 One-way traffic Office 22 20 Two-way traffic Office 36 26 One-way traffic Multifamily 22 20 Two-way traffic Multifamily 36 24  
(2)  Minimum driveway distances from street intersections shall comply with the minimum distances provided in the most recent issue of the Institute of Transportation Engineers publication available at the time of installation. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VII, § 3, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 209, § 2, 6-27-94; Ord. No. 377, § 130, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-1102. - Parking of trucks in R-districts. 
    No trucks or other commercial vehicle with multiple axles shall be parked on any residential premises or street in any R-district overnight; provided that nothing herein shall prevent the parking of such vehicle in a fully enclosed garage or similar permanent structure, or the parking of necessary construction vehicles during the construction period on the premises where construction is in progress. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VII, § 4, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1103. - Private streets. 
(a)  Private streets are prohibited unless created and maintained pursuant to City Code subsections 18-57(n), (o), (p) and (s). Lots of record created prior to December 10, 1990 are exempt from the private streets requirements. 
(b)  Private streets are required to use traffic control that is consistent with the current version of the Minnesota Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Ord. No. 209, § 3, 6-27-94; Ord. No. 324, § 24, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 628, § 44, 12-11-17) 
Secs. 20-1104-20-1115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING AND LOADING[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note- Division 2 was amended in its entirety to read as set out herein by Ord. No. 117, § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 1990. Former Div. 2 §§ 20-1116-20-1125, pertained to similar provisions and derived from Ord. No. 80, Art. VII, §§ 1(7-1-1-7-1-10), adopted Dec. 15, 1986. 

Sec. 20-1116. - Scope. 
    This division applies to off-street parking and loading. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 1, 1-8-90) 
Sec. 20-1117. - General standards. 
    Parking and loading shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the following: 
(1)  No change of use, tenancy or occupancy of a parcel of land or building, including construction of a new building or an addition to a building, which requires additional parking or loading spaces shall be allowed until such additional parking or loading is approved and furnished. Review may be required under the site and building plan review procedures of division 6 of this article. 
(2)  Required parking and loading areas and the driveways providing access to them shall not be used for storage, display, sales, rental or repair, of motor vehicles or other goods or for the storage of inoperable vehicles or snow. 
(3)  Required parking and loading spaces shall be located on the same development site as the use served. On-street parking, if allowed in the vicinity of the site, cannot be used to satisfy parking requirements. The city may approve off-site parking if the city council finds the following: 
a.  Reasonable access shall be provided from the off-site parking facilities to the use being served; 
b.  The parking shall be within 400 feet of a building entrance of the use being served; 
c.  The parking area shall be under the same ownership and merged into a single tax parcel as the site served, under public ownership or the use of the parking facilities shall be protected by a recorded instrument, acceptable to the city; 
d.  Failure to provide on-site parking shall not encourage parking on the public streets, other private property or in private driveways or other areas not expressly set aside for such purposes; and 
e.  The off-site parking shall be maintained until such time as on-site parking is provided or an alternate off-site parking facility is approved by the city as meeting the requirements of this ordinance; 
f.  Certain uses that have their highest peak demand for parking at substantially different times of the day or week can consider a plan to provide required parking by sharing parking with adjacent uses based on the following criteria: 
1.  Up to 30 percent of the off-street parking stalls required for a theatre, bowling alley, dance hall, bar, or restaurant may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by types of uses specified as a primarily daytime use in subsection (3)f.4. below. 
2.  Up to 30 percent of the off-street parking stalls required for any use specified under subsection (3)f.4. below, as primary daytime uses may be supplied by the parking facilities provided by the following nighttime or Sunday uses: auditoriums incidental to a public or parochial school, churches, bowling alleys, dance halls, theatres, bars or restaurants. 
3.  Up to 30 percent of the off-street parking stalls required for a church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be supplied by off-street parking facilities provided by uses specified under subsection (3)f.4. below, as primarily daytime uses. 
4.  For the purpose of this section, the following uses are considered as primarily daytime uses: banks, business offices, retail stores/shopping centers, personal service shops, household equipment or furniture shops, clothing or shoe repair or service shops, manufacturing, wholesale, and similar uses. 
(4)  a.  Because of the hours of operation of the respective uses, their sizes and their modes of operation there will be available to each use during its primary hours of operation an amount of parking sufficient to meet the needs of such use by sharing parking with adjacent uses based on the following criteria: 
1.  Up to 30 percent of the off-street parking stalls required for a theatre, bowling alley, dance hall, bar, or restaurant may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by types of uses specified as a primarily daytime use in subsection (4)a.4., below. 
2.  Up to 30 percent of the off-street parking stalls required for any use specified under subsection (4)a.4., below as primary daytime uses may be supplied by the parking facilities provided by the following nighttime or Sunday uses: auditoriums incidental to a public or parochial school, churches, bowling alleys, dance halls, theatres, bars or restaurants. 
3.  Up to 30 percent of the off-street parking stalls required for a church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be supplied by off-street parking facilities provided by uses specified under subsection (4)a.4., below as primarily daytime uses. 
4.  For the purpose of this section, the following uses are considered as primarily daytime uses: banks, business offices, retail stores/shopping centers, personal service shops, household equipment or furniture shops, clothing or shoe repair or service shops, manufacturing, wholesale, and similar uses. 
b.  The joint use of the parking facilities shall be protected by a recorded instrument, acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 1, 1-8-90; Ord. No. 612, §§ 7, 8, 12-14-15) 
Sec. 20-1118. - Design of parking stalls and drive aisles. 
(a)  Parking spaces shall be designed in conformance with the following: parking stalls shall have a minimum paved dimension of nine feet by 18 feet. Stall and aisle dimensions shall be as noted below for the given angle: 
Angle Curb Length Stall Length Aisle 45 degree 12.0' 18.0' 15* 60 degree 10.0' 18.0' 18.5'* 90 degree 9' 18.0' 26' Parallel 20.0' 8.0' 22'  
*One-way aisles only. 
Dead end aisles must be provided with a 26 feet by ten feet unencumbered area at the end to facilitate vehicle turning movement. 
(b)  All parking areas except those serving one- and two-family dwellings on local streets shall be designed so that cars shall not be required to back into the street. If deemed necessary for traffic safety, turn-around areas may be required in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(c)  All parking and loading areas, aisles and driveways shall be bordered with raised concrete curbs or equivalent approved by the city. 
(d)  All parking, loading and driveway areas shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete or equivalent material approved by the city. 
(e)  All parking stalls shall be marked with painted lines not less than four inches wide in accordance with the approved site and building plan. 
(f)  All parking lots shall provide islands for traffic control as needed. 
(g)  All parking areas shall be properly maintained in a neat and serviceable condition. 
(h)  Up to 25 percent of the total number of required spaces may be for compact cars and have minimum paved dimensions as follows: 
Angle Curb Length Stall Length 45° 10.0' 16.0' 60° 8.5' 17.5' 90° 7.5' 16.0' Parallel 16.0' 8.0'  
*One-way aisles 


Aisles 
    Compact car parking may be provided if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The parking area shall have a total size of at least 20 stalls; 
(2)  Compact car stalls shall be identified by appropriate directional signs consistent with the city sign ordinance; 
(3)  Compact car stalls shall be distributed throughout the parking area so as to have reasonable proximity to the structure served, but shall not have generally preferential, locations such that their use by noncompact cars will be encouraged; 
(4)  The design of compact car areas shall to the maximum feasible extent be such as to discourage their use by noncompact cars; and 
(5)  Compact parking stalls shall not be permitted for high turnover parking lots. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 1, 1-8-90; Ord. No. 321, § 2, 5-29-01; Ord. No. 377, § 131, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-1119. - Computing requirements. 
    In computing the number of parking spaces required, the following shall govern: 
(1)  "Floor space" means the gross floor area of the specific use as defined by article II. 
(2)  Where fractional spaces result, each fraction of one-half or more shall constitute another space. 
(3)  Parking standards for uses not specifically mentioned in this division shall be determined by the city. The factors to be considered in such determination shall include size of building, type of use, number of employees, expected volume and turnover of customer traffic and expected frequency and number of delivery or service vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 1, 1-8-90; Ord. No. 507, § 2, 6-28-10) 
Sec. 20-1120. - Yards. 
    On-site parking and loading facilities shall not be permitted in the required front yard, side yard or rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 1, 1-8-90) 
Sec. 20-1121. - Buffer fences and planting screens. 
    On-site parking and loading areas near or abutting residential districts shall be screened in conformance with the provisions of article XXV. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 1, 1-8-90) 
Sec. 20-1122. - Access and driveways. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide minimum design criteria, setback and slope standards for vehicular use. The intent is to reduce interference with drainage and utility easements by providing setback standards; reduce erosion by requiring a hard surface for all driveways; to limit the number of driveway access points to public streets and to direct drainage toward the street via establishment of minimum driveway slope standards. Parking and loading spaces shall have proper access from a public right-of-way. The number and width of access drives shall be located to minimize traffic congestion and abnormal traffic hazard. All driveways shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Driveways shall be setback at least ten feet from the side property lines, except on lots that access off of a cul-de-sac "bubble", neck or flag lot where the lot frontage may prohibit meeting the side yard setback requirement. Beginning 20 feet from the front property line, driveways may be setback a minimum of five feet from the side property line or the distance of the existing drainage and utility easement on the particular lot or parcel. Encroachment into a side yard drainage and utility easement must be reviewed and approved by the city and may require an encroachment agreement. 
(2)  Driveway grades shall be a minimum of one-half of one percent and a maximum grade of ten percent at any point in the driveway. If extenuating circumstances exist, the city engineer may approve driveway grades in excess of ten percent. Examples of extenuating circumstances include: bluffs, existing steep grades, shoreland setbacks, wetland conditions, and tree preservation. 
(3)  Within the right-of-way driveways should access city streets at 90 degrees. 
(4)  In areas located within the Metropolitan Urban Services Area (MUSA) as identified on the comprehensive plan, driveways shall be surfaced with bituminous, concrete or other hard surface material, as approved by the city engineer. In areas outside the MUSA, driveways shall be surfaced from the intersection of the road through the right-of-way portion of the driveway with bituminous, concrete or other hard surface material, as approved by the city engineer. 
(5)  On corner lots, the minimum corner clearance from the roadway right-of-way line shall be at least 30 feet to the edge of the driveway. 
(6)  For A-2, PUD-R for single-family detached houses, RR, RSF, R-4 and RLM for single-family detached residential uses, the width of the driveway access shall not exceed 24 feet at the right-of-way line. No portion of the right-of-way may be paved except that portion used for the driveway. Inside the property line of the site, the maximum driveway width shall not exceed 50 feet. For flag/neck lots the lot coverage of the driveway access within the neck portion of flag/neck lots shall not exceed 33 percent of the neck's area. For all lots the minimum driveway width shall not be less than ten feet. 
(7)  For all other uses, the width of the driveway access shall not exceed 36 feet in width measured at the roadway right-of-way line. No portion of the right-of-way may be paved except that portion used for the driveway. 
(8)  Driveway setbacks may be reduced subject to approval by the city engineer and the following criteria: 
a.  The driveway will not interfere with any existing drainage swale or easement in which a utility is contained; 
b.  Shall require an easement encroachment agreement from the engineering department; 
c.  The driveway must be designed to maintain stormwater drainage runoff on the property to ensure that it will not cause runoff onto adjacent properties; 
d.  Snow storage may not be placed on adjacent properties; and 
e.  Lot frontage on lots that access off of a cul-de-sac "bubble", neck or flag lot do not permit adequate driveway access width or side yard setback. 
(9)  Accessory driveways shall be maintained as natural grass or be constructed of bituminous, concrete, or paver surface. 
(10)  One driveway access is allowed from a single residential lot to the street. 
(11)  A turnaround is required on a driveway entering onto a state highway, county road or collector roadway as designated in the comprehensive plan, and onto city streets where this is deemed necessary by the city engineer, based on traffic counts, sight distances, street grades, or other relevant factors. If the engineer requires a turnaround, this requirement will be stated on the building permit. 
(12)  Separate driveways serving utility facilities are permitted. 
(13)  All driveways must be constructed in accordance with current construction requirements/details. A driveway permit is required when any alteration is made to a driveway in the public right-of-way. A zoning permit may be required for any other driveway work not in the public right-of-way along with other requirements to determine if the improvement will meet zoning ordinance requirements of the particular lot or parcel. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 1, 1-8-90; Ord. No. 330, § 1, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 409, § 6, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 452, § 3, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 507, § 3, 6-28-10; Ord. No. 612, § 9, 12-14-15; Ord. No. 619, § 18, 2-27-17; Ord. No. 628, § 46, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 20-1123. - Lighting. 
    All commercial, industrial, and multifamily parking lots shall be lighted. Lighting shall use shielded fixtures and be directed away from the public right-of-way and adjacent residential or agricultural districts. Sufficient lighting shall be provided to illuminate all areas of the parking lot to provide adequate levels of safety. To minimize off-site impact, light levels as measured at the property line shall not exceed one-half-foot candle as measured at the property line. 
Sec. 20-1124. - Required number of on-site parking spaces. 
    On-site parking areas of sufficient size to provide parking for patrons, customers, suppliers, visitors, residents and employees shall be provided on the premises of each use. The following standards are minimum criteria. The city may increase the requirements beyond the minimum based upon findings that, due to proposed use and/or design, that additional parking demand is anticipated. The number of required parking spaces shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Calculating the number of spaces shall be in accordance with the following: 
a.  If the number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, each fraction of one-half or more shall constitute another space. 
b.  In churches and other places of public assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each 24 inches of such seating shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of this division. 
c.  Except in shopping centers or where joint parking arrangements have been approved, if a structure contains two or more uses, each use shall be calculated separately in determining the total off-street parking spaces required. 
d.  For mixed use buildings, parking requirements shall be determined by the city based on the existing and potential uses of the building. In cases where future potential uses of a building will generate additional parking demand, the city may require a proof of parking place for the difference between minimum parking requirements and the anticipated future demand. 
e.  If warranted by unique characteristics and/or documented parking demand for similar developments, the city may allow reductions in the number of parking spaces actually constructed as long as the applicant provides a proof of future parking plan. The plan must show the location for all minimum required parking spaces in conformance with applicable setback requirements. The city may require installation of the additional parking spaces whenever a need arises. 
f.  Accessible parking spaces shall be in compliance with the Minnesota State Building Code. 
g.  The parking requirement for uses not listed in this division may be established by the city based on the characteristics of the use and available information on parking demand for such use. 
(2)  The minimum number of required on-site parking spaces for the following uses shall be: 
a.  Assembly or exhibition hall, auditorium, theater or sports arena-One parking space for each four seats, based upon design capacity. 
b.  Auto sales, trailer sales, marine and boat sales, implement sales, garden supply store, building materials sale, auto repair, automobile rental facilities-One parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area. 
c.  Automobile service station-Four parking spaces, plus two parking spaces for each service stall; such parking spaces shall be in addition to parking space required for gas pump areas. 
d.  Bowling alley-Seven parking spaces for each bowling lane. 
e.  Churches-One parking space for each three seats, based on the design capacity of the main seating area, plus one space per classroom. 
f.  Dwelling: 
1.  Single-family-Two parking spaces, both of which must be completely enclosed. No garage shall be converted into living space unless other acceptable on-site parking space is provided. 
2.  Multifamily: 
(i)  Efficiency units and one-bedroom units-One and one-half stalls, one of which must be completely enclosed in a garage. 
(ii)  Two-bedroom and larger units-Two stalls, one must be completely enclosed in a garage. 
(iii)  Senior housing- designed and limited to senior citizens, age restricted to those 55 years of age and older, shall provide one parking stall per dwelling unit, which must be enclosed in a garage. Assisted living facilities shall provide one-third parking stall per dwelling unit. All required parking for assisted living dwelling units must be enclosed in a garage. 
(iv)  Garage stalls for multifamily buildings containing more than 20 dwellings must be placed underground or attached to the primary structure. The city may allow freestanding garage stalls only when the applicant demonstrates that the architectural design of the building results in an inability to accommodate all the stalls under the building and when the majority of this requirement is met with underground parking. 
(v)  In multifamily rental buildings, the use of at least one enclosed stall shall be included in the lease or rental rate of each apartment. In multifamily owner-occupied buildings at least one enclosed stall shall be included in the sales price of each home. 
(vi)  One visitor parking stall shall be provided for each four dwellings. 
g.  Financial institution-One space for each 250 square feet of floor space. 
h.  Furniture or appliance store-One space for each 400 feet of floor space. 
i.  Hospitals and nursing homes-One space for every two beds, plus one space for every two employees on the largest single shift. 
j.  Manufacturing or processing plant-One off-street parking space for each employee on the major shift and one off-street parking space for each motor vehicle when customarily kept on the premises. 
k.  Medical and dental clinics and animal hospitals-One parking space for each 150 square feet of floor area. 
l.  Mortuaries-One space for every three seats. 
m.  Motel or hotel-One parking space for each rental room or suite, plus one space for every two employees. 
n.  Office buildings (administrative, business or professional)-Buildings under 49,999 square feet, five stalls per 1,000 square feet gross floor area; buildings from 50,000 to 99,999 square feet, four stalls per 1,000 square feet gross floor area; and buildings over 100,000 square feet, three stalls per 1,000 square feet gross floor area. Building area square footages shall exclude common areas such as reception areas, cafeterias, hallways, etc. in calculating the parking requirements for an office building. 
o.  Public service buildings, including municipal administrative buildings, community center, public library, museum, art galleries, and post office-One parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area in the principal structure, plus one parking space for each four seats within public assembly or meeting rooms. 
p.  Recreational facilities, including golf course, country club, swimming club, racquet club, public swimming pool-20 spaces, plus one space for each 500 square feet of floor area in the principal structure or two spaces per court. 
q.  Research, experimental or testing stations-One parking space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area within the building, whichever is greater. 
r.  Restaurant, cafe, nightclub, tavern or bar: 
1.  Fast-food: 
(i)  Without drive-thru-One space per 60 square feet of gross floor area. 
(ii)  With drive-thru-One space per 80 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Restaurant: 
(i)  Without full liquor license-One space per 60 square feet of gross floor area. 
(ii)  With full liquor license-One space per 50 square feet of gross floor area. 
s.  Retail stores and service establishments-One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
t.  School, elementary (public, private or parochial)-One parking space for each classroom or office room, plus one space for each 150 square feet of eating area including aisles, in any auditorium or gymnasium or cafeteria intended to be used as an auditorium. 
u.  School, junior and senior high schools and colleges (public, private or parochial)-Four parking spaces for each classroom or office room plus one space for each 150 square feet of seating area including aisles, in any auditorium or gymnasium or cafeteria intended to be used as an auditorium. 
v.  Shopping center-On-site automobile parking shall be provided in a ratio of not less than one parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area; separate on-site space shall be provided for loading and unloading. If restaurant use constitutes 25 percent or less of the building gross floor area, then the shopping center parking standard shall still apply. If restaurants constitute between 25 and 50 percent of the building gross square footage, the portion of restaurant use square footages between 25 and 50 percent of the gross floor area of the building must provide one parking space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. If more than 50 percent of the building square footage is in restaurant use, then the restaurant parking standard for that portion in excess of 50 percent of the gross building square footage shall be provided. In addition, one space for each company vehicle (delivery) operating from the premises shall be provided. The applicant shall demonstrate that the number of employees in the restaurant will be accommodated by the required number of spaces. The applicant shall submit a letter to the city assuring that if there is to be any increase in employees or if there is an insufficient amount of parking to accommodate the restaurant uses and its employees, the applicant agrees to provide additional parking area, which must be within 600 feet of the restaurant. 
w.  Storage, wholesale, or warehouse establishments-One space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area up to 10,000 square feet and one additional space for each additional 2,000 square feet, plus one space for each company vehicle operating from the premises. If it can be demonstrated by the applicant that the number of employees in the warehouse or storage area will require less than the required number of spaces, and if the applicant shall submit a letter to the city assuring that if there is to be any increase in employees, the applicant agrees to provide additional parking area, the city may approve a lesser number of parking spaces. 
x.  Day care centers-One stall for each six children of design capacity. 
y.  Adult day care-One stall per employee plus one stall per facility vehicle, plus one stall per 15 clients of design capacity. 
z.  Brew pub, brewery operated in conjunction with a taproom, or microdistillery operated in conjunction with a cocktail room-One space for each 50 square feet of gross taproom, cocktail room, or restaurant floor area, and one space for each 1,000 square feet of gross production area. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 1, 1-8-90; Ord. No. 124, § 1, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 296, § 3, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 321, § 1, 5-29-01; Ord. No. 377, §§ 132, 133, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 423, § 8, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 612, §§ 10, 11, 12-14-15; Ord. No. 628, § 48, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 632, § 17, 6-11-18) 
Secs. 20-1125-20-1140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OFF-STREET LOADING AND TRASH REMOVAL AREAS 

Sec. 20-1141. - Scope. 
    This division applies to off-street loading and trash removal areas. 
Sec. 20-1142. - Location. 
    All required loading or unloading into or out of railroad cars or trucks in excess of three-fourths-ton capacity shall be conducted at facilities specifically designed or designated for that purpose. These facilities shall be located upon the lot of the principal use for which they are required. All berths beyond one shall be separate from areas used for off-street parking. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VII, § 2(7-2-1), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1143. - Access. 
    Each required off-street loading berth shall be so designed as to avoid interference with other vehicular, pedestrian or rail access or use of public streets, alleys, or other public transport systems. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VII, § 2(7-2-2), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1144. - Surfacing. 
    All off-street loading facilities, including loading berths and maneuvering areas, shall be surfaced with a hard, all-weather, dust-free, durable surfacing material and shall be well drained, with concrete curb, and landscaped and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VII, § 2(7-2-3), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1145. - Landscaping and screening. 
    All berths shall be screened from public rights-of-way and from view from the property across the street frontage and/or from the zoning district boundary when the adjacent property or property across the street frontage or side street frontage is zoned or used for residential purposes. The screening shall be accomplished as required in article XXV. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VII, § 2(7-2-4), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1146. - Design. 
    All loading areas shall consist of a maneuvering area in addition to the berth and shall not use any of that portion of the site containing parking stalls. Maneuvering areas shall be of such size as to permit the backing of truck tractors and coupled trailers into a berth without blocking the use of other berths, drives, maneuvering areas or public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VII, § 2(7-2-5), 12-15-86) 
Sec. 20-1147. - Required loading areas. 
(a)  Any use which the city believes requires the provision of designated spaces for the loading, unloading or parking of trucks or semi-trailers shall provide such spaces and maneuvering area in the number and configuration which shall be deemed necessary in order to prevent interference with the use of the public right-of-way and with vehicles entering onto or exiting from the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Semi-trailer spaces shall be at least 55 feet in length, ten feet in width and 14 feet in height plus necessary additional maneuvering space. 
(c)  Spaces shall not be located on a street side of any building, or, if so located, shall be provided with screening deemed adequate by the city. 
(d)  Spaces and the associated maneuvering area shall be at least 50 feet from the property line of any residentially designated property. 
(e)  No trucks shall be parked in areas other than those designed for such purpose on an approved site plan. 
(Ord. No. 80, Art. VII, § 2(7-2-6), 12-15-86) 
Secs. 20-1148-20-1175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXV. - LANDSCAPING AND TREE REMOVAL[17] 
Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 153, adopted Nov. 4, 1991, amended Art. XXV to read as set out herein. Prior to amendment, Art. XXV contained §§ 20-1176-20-1179, 20-1191-20-1194, 20-1211-20-1214, 20-1231-20-1234, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 80, Art. VIII, §§ 1-7, adopted Dec. 15, 1986. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-1176. - Intent, scope and compliance. 
(a)  The intent of this ordinance is to improve the appearance of vehicular use areas and property abutting public rights-of-way; to require buffering between noncompatible land uses; and to protect, preserve and promote the aesthetic appeal, character and value of the surrounding neighborhoods; to promote public health and safety through the reduction of noise pollution, air pollution, visual pollution and glare. 
(b)  Except for buffer yard requirements specified in subsection 20-1176(f) below, this ordinance does not apply to single-family developments in A1, A2, RR, RSF, and R4 zoning districts which are regulated by landscaping requirements contained in the subdivision ordinance (chapter 18). 
(c)  No new site development, building, structure or vehicular use area is allowed, unless landscaping is provided as required in this ordinance. 
(d)  No property lines shall be altered nor shall any building, structure or vehicular use area be expanded, unless the minimum landscaping required by the provisions of this ordinance is provided for the entire property. 
(e)  The landscaping standards shall provide for screening for visual impacts associated with a given use, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Truck loading areas; 
(2)  Trash storage; 
(3)  Parking lots, interior lot areas and perimeters; 
(4)  Large unadorned building massing; 
(5)  Garage doors associated with auto oriented uses; and 
(6)  Vehicular stacking areas for drive through uses. 
(f)  Buffering shall be provided between high intensity and low intensity uses, between a site and major streets and highways, and in areas where buffering is required by the comprehensive plan. Such buffering shall be located within a required buffer yard. The buffer yard is a unit of yard together with the planting required thereon. The amount of land and the type and amount of planting specified for each buffer yard required by this subsection are designed to ameliorate nuisances between adjacent land uses or between a land use and a public road. The planting units required of buffer yards have been calculated to ensure that they do, in fact, function to "buffer." 
(1)  Buffer yards shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel extending to the lot or parcel boundary line, except where easements, covenants or natural features may require the buffer yard to be set back from the property line. Subject to review and approval by the city engineering department, buffer yards that are compatible with the typical city boulevard planting requirements may be located within a portion of an existing municipal public collector or arterial right-of-way. 
(2)  To determine the buffer yard required between two adjacent parcels or between a parcel and a street, the following procedure shall be followed: 
a.  Identify the proposed land use of the parcel and the land use of the adjacent parcel or functional classification of abutting right-of-way based on the city future land use plan. 
b.  Determine the buffer yard required on each boundary, or segment thereof, of the property by referring to the following table of buffer yard requirements and illustrations set at the end of subsection (2), which specify the buffer yard required between adjacent uses and streets. 
c.  Buffer yard requirements are stated in terms of the width of the buffer yard and the number of plant units required per 100 linear feet of buffer yard. Each illustration depicts the minimum buffer yard required between two uses or adjacent to a collector or arterial right-of-way. The project developer shall be responsible for providing 75 percent of the required plantings. If abutting property owner(s) desire to bring the buffering to 100 percent of the required buffer yard plantings, then the adjacent property owner(s) may install the remaining 25 percent of the required plantings on their own property. When the parcel abuts public property, such as roads or parks, the developer shall be responsible for 100 percent of the required plantings. 
d.  Whenever a wall, fence, or berm is required within a buffer yard, these are shown as "structure required" in the buffer yard illustrations. The erection and maintenance of all required structures shall be the responsibility of the buffer yard provider (project developer). Maintenance of the structure shall be the responsibility of the landowner on whose property the structure is located. 
e.  All buffer yards shall be maintained free from all forms of development or storage of equipment or materials. A ground cover of vegetative or organic material shall be provided. Buffer yards shall be maintained free from junk and debris. Dead or diseased vegetation shall be removed and replaced with healthy vegetation. The responsibility to maintain, remove or replace plant materials shall be that of the landowner on whose property the plant material needing maintenance or replacement is located. 
TABLE OF BUFFER YARD REQUIREMENTS 
Proposed Development Adjacent Land Use LL/LD MD HD OFF MIX COM PUB ACT PASS OFF/ 
IND LL/LD none B C C C D B B A D MD none A B B C D B B A D HD none A A B C D B B A D OFF none B B A B B B B B B MIX none C C B B B C C C B COM none C D B B A C C C B PUB none A A B C C A A A C ACT none A B B B C A A A C PASS none A A B B C A A A C OFF/IND none C C B B B C B B B ROAD B B B B B B B B B C  
The land use abbreviations are as follows: 
LL/LD-Large lot and low density residential 
MD-Medium density residential 
HC-High density residential 
OFF-Office 
MIX-Mixed use 
COM-Commercial 
PUB-Public/semi-public 
ACT-Active park/open space 
PASS-Passive park/open space 
OFF/IND-Office/industrial 
ROAD-Collector and arterial road 


Bufferyard A 


Bufferyard B 


Bufferyard C 


Bufferyard D 


Fences 
(3)  Plant material existing on a parcel which meets the buffer yard planting requirements of location, size and species may be counted toward the total buffer yard plant material requirement. Existing natural features such as slopes, woodlands or wetlands which provide physical separation between developments or between a development and a collector and arterial road may satisfy the buffering function of the required buffer yard. If approved by the city, proposed berms three feet and higher in the buffer yard may be substituted for up to one-half of the required understory trees and shrubs, depending on the length of the berm. For instance, if a berm runs the entire length of the buffer yard, the understory and shrub plantings may be reduced by one-half. Any boulevard trees or reforestation plantings required in the buffer yard can be counted towards required overstory buffer yard plantings if there is insufficient room for both types of plantings. 
(4)  Buffer yards may be used for passive recreation and may contain a trail, provided that no plant material is eliminated, the total width of the buffer yard is maintained, and all other regulations of this subsection are met. Utility easements may be included within buffer yards, provided that the utility requirements and buffer yard requirements are compatible and canopy trees are not planted within such easement. 
(5)  Where front, side and rear yards are required by this subsection, buffer yards may be established within such required yards. 
(6)  Canopy trees are defined as those trees specified as primary or secondary deciduous trees or conifers in the city's subdivision ordinance. Conifers to be used as overstory trees shall have a minimum height of eight feet when planted. Arborvitae shall not be used as an overstory tree. 
(7)  Understory trees are defined as those trees specified as ornamental or conifer trees in the city's subdivision ordinance. Conifers to be used as understory trees shall have a minimum height of six feet when planted. 
(8)  In instances in which the city deems it necessary to provide year-round screening, the city may designate that all planting be of conifers. 
(g)  The city shall encourage reforestation through boulevard and streetscape planting. 
(h)  Mature stands of trees shall be preserved. 
(i)  Reforestation shall be pursued as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 1, 11-4-91; Ord. No. 250, §§ 2, 3, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 309, § 1, 8-14-00; Ord. No. 377, § 134, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-1177. - Plan submission; time of completion; financial guarantees. 
    The property owner or developer shall prepare a landscape plan drawn by a registered landscape architect or other professional acceptable to the city for review by the city. The city shall apply the following conditions in approval or disapproving the plan: 
(1)  The contents of the plan shall include the following: 
a.  Plot plan, drawn to an easily readable scale, showing and labeling by name and dimensions, all existing and proposed property lines, easements, buildings, and other structures, vehicular use areas (including parking stalls, driveways, service areas, square footage), water outlets and landscape material (including botanical name and common name, installation size, on-center planting dimensions where applicable, and quantities for all plants used). 
b.  Typical elevations and/or cross sections as may be required. 
c.  Title block with the pertinent names and addresses (property owner, person drawing plan, and person installing landscape material), scale date, north arrow (generally orient plan so that north is to top of plan), and zoning district. 
d.  Existing landscape material shall be shown on the required plan and any material in satisfactory condition may be used to satisfy this ordinance in whole or in part. 
(2)  Where landscaping is required, no building permit shall be issued until the required landscaping plan has been submitted and approved, and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the landscaping is completed as certified by an on-site inspection by the building inspector, unless a financial guarantee acceptable to the city has been submitted. 
(3)  When screening, landscaping or other similar improvements to property are required by this ordinance, a letter of credit or cash escrow shall be supplied by the owner in an amount equal to at least 110 percent of the value of such screening, landscaping or other improvements. The security must be satisfactory to the city and shall be conditioned upon reimbursement of all expenses incurred by the city for engineering, legal or other fees in connection with making or completing such improvements. The guarantee shall be provided prior to the issuance of any building permit and shall be valid for a period of time equal to one full growing season after the date of installation of the landscaping. In the event construction of the project is not completed within the time prescribed by building permits and other approvals, the city may, at its option, complete the work required at the expense of the owner and the surety. 
    The city may allow an extended period of time for completion of all landscaping if the delay is due to conditions which are reasonably beyond the control of the developer. Extensions which may not exceed nine months, may be granted due to seasonal or weather conditions. When an extension is granted, the city shall require such additional security as it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 1, 11-4-91) 
DIVISION 2. - TREE PRESERVATION[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Cross reference- Landscaping and tree preservation requirements, § 18-61. 

Sec. 20-1178. - Generally. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city to preserve natural woodland areas throughout the city and with respect to specific site development to retain as far as practical, substantial tree stands which can be incorporated into the overall landscape plan. 
(b)  No clearcutting of woodland areas shall be permitted except as approved in a subdivision, planned unit development or site plan application. 
(c)  The standards in City Code subsection 18-61(d) shall be used in evaluating site plans. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 1, 11-4-91; Ord. No. 204, § 4, 5-9-94) 
DIVISION 3. - LANDSCAPING STANDARDS 

Sec. 20-1179. - Landscape budget. 
(a)  Landscaping shall be provided that meets the minimum landscaping budget provided in the table below: 
Project Value Minimum Landscape Value (Including building construction, site preparation, and site improvements) Below $1,000,000 2% $1,000,001-2,000,000 $20,000 + 1% of project value in excess of $1,000,000 $2,000,001-3,000,000 $30,000 + 0.75% of project value in excess of $2,000,000 $3,000,001-4,000,000 $37,500 + 0.25% of project value in excess of $3,000,000 Over $4,000,000 1%  
(b)  At the city's discretion, the value of tree preservation may be utilized to offset landscaping requirements. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 1, 11-4-91) 
Sec. 20-1180. - Screening for visual impacts. 
(a)  Undesirable visual impacts must be screened. Undesirable visual impacts include, but are not limited to, truck loading areas, trash storage, parking lots, interior lot areas and perimeters, outdoor storage areas, large unadorned building massing, garage doors associated with auto-oriented uses and vehicular stacking areas for drive-through uses. 
(1)  Required screening for any visual impact may be achieved with fences, walls, earth berms, hedges or other landscape materials. All walls and fences shall be architecturally harmonious with the principal building. The use of wooden screen fences or chain link fences equipped with slats is prohibited. Earth berms shall not exceed a slope of 3:1 unless provided with landscaping designed to minimize maintenance. The screen shall be designed to provide effective visual barrier during all seasons. 
(2)  All required screening shall be located on the lot occupied by the use, building, facility or structure to be screened. No landscape screening shall be located on any public right-of-way or within eight feet of the traveled portion of any street or highway. 
(3)  Screening required by this section shall be of a height needed to accomplish the goals of this section. Height of plantings required under this section shall be measured at the time of installation. 
(4)  Parking lot screening shall limit direct views of pavement and direct views of vehicles parked near the exterior of the site. It is not intended that this requirement result in significantly obscuring views of principal structures or permitted signage. 
(5)  The city may make special allowances for establishing screening requirements for long term parking areas such as those developed for transit related park-and-ride facilities. Due to their characteristics of long duration parking coupled with long hours having little or no activity, these lots may present special problems related to safety that require enhanced visibility. 
(b)  The following uses shall be screened in accordance with the requirements of this subdivision: 
(1)  Principal buildings and structures and any building or structure accessory thereto located in any business, industrial or planned unit development district containing nonresidential uses shall be buffered from lots used for any residential purpose. 
(2)  Principal buildings and structures and any building or structure accessory thereto located in any R4, R8, R12, R16 district or planned unit development district containing residential development at densities exceeding four units per acre shall be screened from lots located in any A1, A2, RR or RSF district. 
(3)  Additional buffer yard requirements are established by the city comprehensive plan and listed in individual district standards. 
(4)  Outside storage in any district subject to these provisions and allowed by other provisions of this ordinance, shall be screened from all public views. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 1, 11-4-91; Ord. No. 195, § 1, 11-11-93) 
Sec. 20-1181. - Vehicular areas. 
(a)  When parking lot perimeters where vehicular areas, including driveways and drive aisles, are not entirely screened visually by an intervening building or structure or land mass from any abutting right-of-way, there shall be provided landscaping designed to buffer direct views of cars and vehicular use areas. The landscaping must break up expanses of vehicular use areas, help to visually define boulevards and soften direct views of parking areas and provide for reforestation with overstory tree from the approved tree species list identified for parking or other species as approved by city staff. All new planting areas must have an irrigation system installed. Publicly owned and operated parking lots used for long duration parking may be exempt from this requirement when there is a demonstrated concern regarding security safety. 


Illustration 
(b)  Interior landscaping for vehicular use areas: 
(1)  Any open vehicular use areas containing more than 6,000 square feet of area, or 20 or more vehicular parking spaces, shall provide interior landscaping in accordance with this division in addition to "perimeter" landscaping. Interior landscaping may be peninsular or island types. Landscaped area shall include all parking lot and drive islands and perimeter green spaces. Required setback areas shall be excluded. 
(2)  For each 100 square feet, or fraction thereof, of vehicular use area, eight square feet of landscaped area shall be provided. 
(3)  The minimum landscape area permitted shall be 200 square feet, with a six-foot minimum dimension to all trees from edge of pavement where vehicles overhang and a four-foot minimum dimension to all trees where vehicles do not overhang. 
(4)  In order to encourage the required landscape area to be properly dispersed, a minimum of one peninsular, island, or boulevard type landscaped area shall be located within each 6,000 square feet of vehicular use area. 
(5)  A minimum of one tree shall be required for each 250 square feet or fraction thereof, of required landscape area. Trees shall have a clear trunk of at least five feet above the ground, and the remaining area shall be landscaped with shrubs, or ground cover (not to include rocks or gravel except as a mulch around shrubs and ground cover), not to exceed two feet in height. 
(6)  The inside width, behind the curb in landscape islands or peninsulas, shall be a minimum of ten feet. 
(7)  All landscaped areas shall be protected by concrete curbing. 
(8)  All landscaping area shall have the proper soil preparation to ensure the viability of the vegetation to survive. The landscaping plan shall provide specifications for proper soil preparation. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 1, 11-4-91; Ord. No. 195, § 2, 11-11-93; Ord. No. 219, § 1, 9-12-94; Ord. No. 377, § 135, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 628, § 47, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 20-1182. - Foundation and aesthetic plantings. 
(a)  Landscaping plans shall provide for an appropriate mix of plantings around the exterior footprint of all buildings. The intent of this section is to improve the appearance of the structures and, where necessary, break up large unadorned building elevations. These plantings are not intended to obscure views of the building or accessory signage. 
(b)  All undeveloped areas of the site, excluding protected wetlands and tree preservation areas, shall be seeded or sodded. In addition, an appropriate mix of trees and other plant material shall be provided to create an aesthetically pleasing site. 
(c)  Where undeveloped or open areas of a site are located adjacent to public right-of-way, the plan shall provide for over-story boulevard trees. A minimum of one tree for every 30 feet of frontage is required. The city may approve alternatives if it meets the intent of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 1, 11-4-91) 
Sec. 20-1183. - Landscaping materials. 
(a)  The landscaping materials shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Walls and fences. Walls shall be constructed of natural stone, brick or other appropriate materials. Fences shall be constructed of wood. Chain link fencing will be permitted only if covered with plant material or otherwise screened. 
(2)  Earth berms. Earth berms shall be physical barriers which block or screen the view similar to a hedge, fence or wall. Mounds shall be constructed with proper and adequate plant material to prevent erosion. A difference in elevation between areas requiring screening does not constitute an existing earth mound, and shall not be considered as fulfilling any screening requirement. 
(3)  Plants. All plant materials shall be living plants; artificial plants are prohibited. Plant materials shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Deciduous trees. Shall be species having an average crown spread of greater than 15 feet and having trunk(s) which can be maintained with over five feet of clear wood in areas which have visibility requirements, except at vehicular use area intersections where an eight-foot clear wood requirement will control. Trees having an average mature spread of crown less than 15 feet may be substituted by grouping of the same so as to create the equivalent of a 15-foot crown spread. A minimum of ten feet overall height or minimum caliper (trunk diameter, measured six inches above ground for trees up to four inches caliper) of at least two and one-half inches immediately after planting shall be required. Trees of species whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be placed closer than 15 feet to such public works, unless the tree root system is completely contained within a barrier for which the minimum interior containing dimensions shall be five feet square and five feet deep and for which the construction requirements shall be four inches thick, reinforced concrete. 
b.  Evergreen trees. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet high with a minimum caliper of one and one-half inches when planted when counted as an understory tree. Overstory evergreens shall be a minimum of eight feet high. 
c.  Shrubs and hedges. Deciduous shrubs shall be at least two feet in average height when planted, and shall conform to the opacity and other requirements within four years after planting. Evergreen shrubs shall be at least two feet in average height and two feet in diameter. 
d.  Vines. Vines shall be at least 12 inches high at planting, and are generally used in conjunction with walls or fences. 
e.  Grass or ground cover. Grass shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns, and may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded; except in swales or other areas subject to erosion, where solid sod, erosion reducing net, or suitable mulch shall be used, nurse-grass seed shall be sown for immediate protection until complete coverage otherwise is achieved. Grass sod shall be clean and free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases. Ground cover such as organic material shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and 75 percent of complete coverage after two complete growing seasons, with a maximum of 15 inches on center. In certain cases, ground cover also may consist of rocks, pebbles, sand and similar materials if approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 1, 11-4-91; Ord. No. 195, § 4, 11-11-93; Ord. No. 377, § 136, 5-24-04) 
DIVISION 4. - MAINTENANCE AND INSTALLATION 

Sec. 20-1184. - Generally. 
    The owner, tenant, and their respective agents shall be held jointly and severally responsible to maintain their property and landscaping in a condition presenting a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and free from refuse and debris. Plants and ground cover which are required by an approved site or landscape plan and which have died shall be replaced within three months of notifications by the city. However, the time for compliance may be extended up to nine months by the director of planning in order to allow for seasonal or weather conditions. 
(Ord. No. 153, § 1, 11-4-91) 
Sec. 20-1185-20-1250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVI. - SIGNS[19] 
Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 231, adopted Jan. 9, 1995, amended Art. XXVI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Art. XXVI contained §§ 20-1251-20-1277 and 20-1301-20-1305, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 80, adopted Dec. 15, 1986; Ord. No. 90, adopted March 14, 1988; and Ord. No. 92, adopted July 11, 1988. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-1251. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this sign ordinance is intended to establish an effective means of communication in the city, maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth, to improve pedestrian and traffic safety, to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property, and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations. It is the intent of this section, to promote the health, safety, general welfare, aesthetics, and image of the community by regulating signs that are intended to communicate to the public, and to use signs which meet the city's goals: 
(1)  Establish standards which permit businesses a reasonable and equitable opportunity to advertise their name and service; 
(2)  Preserve and promote civic beauty, and prohibit signs which detract from this objective because of size, shape, height, location, condition, cluttering or illumination; 
(3)  Ensure that signs do not create safety hazards; 
(4)  Ensure that signs are designed, constructed, installed and maintained in a manner that does not adversely impact public safety or unduly distract motorists; 
(5)  Preserve and protect property values; 
(6)  Ensure signs that are in proportion to the scale of, and are architecturally compatible with, the principal structures; 
(7)  Limit temporary commercial signs and advertising displays which provide an opportunity for grand opening and occasional sales events while restricting signs which create continuous visual clutter and hazards at public right-of-way intersections. 
(b)  Findings. The city finds it is necessary for the promotion and preservation of the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the community that the construction, location, size and maintenance of signs be controlled. Further the city finds: 
(1)  Permanent and temporary signs have a direct impact on, and a relationship to, the image of the community; 
(2)  The manner of installation, location and maintenance of signs affects the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the community; 
(3)  An opportunity for a viable identification of community business and institutions must be established; 
(4)  The safety of motorists, cyclists, pedestrians and other users of public streets and property is affected by the number, size, location and appearance of signs that unduly divert the attention of drivers; 
(5)  Installation of signs suspended from, projecting over, or placed on the tops of buildings, walks or other structures may constitute a hazard during periods of high winds and an obstacle to effective firefighting and other emergency service; 
(6)  Uncontrolled and unlimited signs adversely impact the image and aesthetic attractiveness of the community and, thereby, undermine economic value and growth; 
(7)  Uncontrolled and unlimited signs, particularly temporary signs, which are commonly located within or adjacent to public right-of-way, or are located at driveway/street intersections, result in roadside clutter and obstruction of views of oncoming traffic. This creates a hazard to drivers and pedestrians and also adversely impacts a logical flow of information. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95) 
Sec. 20-1252. - Permit and variance fees. 
    Fees for sign permit applications and variance requests shall be imposed in accordance with the fee schedule established by city council in chapter 4 of this Code. The intent of this section is to recover costs associated with administering this article. Permit fees shall reflect the costs of reviewing and processing permits, as well as costs associated with periodic enforcement activities and compliance checks. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 377, § 138, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-1253. - Variances. 
    The city council, upon the recommendation of the planning commission, may grant a variance from the requirements of this article where it is shown that by reason of topography or other conditions, strict compliance with the requirements of this article would cause a hardship; provided that a variance may be granted only if the variance does not adversely affect the spirit or intent of this article. Written application for a variance shall be filed with the planning department and shall be supplemented with reproducible copies of the proposed sign. The application shall be processed in conformance with the public hearing requirements dictated for variances in section 20-29. No variance shall be granted by the city council unless it has received the affirmative vote of at least simple majority of the full city council. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95) 
Sec. 20-1254. - Permit generally. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 20-1255, no sign or sign structure shall be erected, constructed, altered, rebuilt or relocated until a permit has first been issued by the city. 
(b)  The following information for a sign permit shall be supplied by an applicant if requested by the city: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of person making application. 
(2)  A site plan to scale showing the location of lot lines, building structures, parking areas, existing and proposed signs and any other physical features. 
(3)  Plans, location, specifications, materials, method of construction and attachment to the buildings or placement method in the ground. 
(4)  Copy of stress sheets and calculations. 
(5)  Written consent of the owner or lessee of any site on which the sign is to be erected. 
(6)  Any electrical permit required and issued for the sign. 
(7)  Such other information as the city shall require to show full compliance with this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the city. Information may include such items as color and material samples. 
(8)  Receipt of sign permit fee. 
(9)  The planning director, upon the filing of any application for a permit, shall examine such plans, specifications and other data. If the proposed sign complies with this article and other applicable ordinances, the city shall issue a sign permit unless city council approval is required. If city council approval is required, the matter shall be promptly referred to the council for action. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95) 
Sec. 20-1255. - Signs allowed without permit. 
    The following signs are allowed without a permit: 
(1)  Political campaign signs. Temporary political campaign signs are permitted according to the following: 
a.  The sign must contain the name of the person responsible for such sign, and that person shall be responsible for its removal. 
b.  Signs are not permitted in the public right-of-way, or within the sight triangle. 
c.  Shall comply with the Fair Campaign Practices Act contained in M.S. § 211B.045. 
d.  The city shall have the right to remove and destroy signs not conforming to this subsection. 
e.  Permitted from 46 days before the state primary in a state general election year until ten days following the state general election and 13 weeks prior to any special election until ten days following the special election. 
f.  No such sign shall be located within 100 feet of any polling site. 
g.  Sign shall be located on private property with permission of the property owner. 
(2)  Directional signs. 
a.  On-premises signs shall not be larger than four square feet. The maximum height of the sign shall not exceed five feet from the ground. The placement of directional signs on the property shall be so located such that the sign does not adversely affect adjacent properties (including site lines or confusion of adjoining ingress or egress) or the general appearance of the site from public rights-of-way. No more than four signs shall be allowed per lot. The city council may allow additional signs in situations where access is confusing or traffic safety could be jeopardized. 
b.  Permanent off-premises signs shall be allowed only in situations where access is confusing and traffic safety could be jeopardized or traffic could be inappropriately routed through residential streets. The size of the sign shall be no larger than what is needed to effectively view the sign from the roadway and shall be approved by the city council. Temporary off-premises signs are prohibited, unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
c.  On-premises signs for industrially zoned land in excess of 40 acres shall not exceed 12 square feet. The maximum height of the sign shall not exceed five feet from the ground. The placement of directional signs on the property shall be so located such that the sign does not adversely affect adjacent properties or the general appearance of the site from public right-of-way. No more than four signs shall be allowed per site. The city council may allow additional signs in situations where access is confusing or traffic safety could be jeopardized. 
(3)  Community signs or displays which contain or depict a message pertaining to a religious, national, state or local holiday or event and no other matter, and which are displayed for a period not to exceed 40 days in any calendar year. 
(4)  Motor fuel price signs are permitted on the premises of any automobile service station or convenience store selling fuel, only if such signs are affixed to the fuel pumps or are made an integral part of a ground low profile or pylon business sign otherwise permitted in that zoning district. Motor fuel price signs affixed to a fuel pump shall not exceed four square feet in sign display area. When such signs are made an integral part of a freestanding business sign, the sign display area devoted to the price component shall not exceed 30 percent of the total sign display area of the sign. 
(5)  Nameplate or integral signs not exceeding two square feet per building and does not include multi-tenant names. 
(6)  Nonilluminated construction signs confined to the site of the construction, alteration or repair. Such a sign must be removed within one year from the date of issuance of the first building permit on the site, and may be extended until the project is completed. One sign shall be permitted for each street the project abuts. Commercial and industrial signs may not exceed 50 square feet in sign area, and residential construction signs may not exceed 24 square feet in sign area. Where a nonilluminated construction sign and a temporary development project advertising sign are proposed at the entrance to the project, such signage shall be combined on one sign with a maximum sign area of 64 square feet. 
(7)  Signs of a public, noncommercial nature, informational signs erected by a governmental entity or agency, including safety signs (O.S.H.A.), directional signs to public facilities, trespassing signs, traffic signs, signs indicating scenic or historical points of interest, memorial plaques and the like. Signs shall not exceed 16 square feet. 
(8)  Rummage (garage) sale signs. Rummage sale signs shall be removed within two days after the end of the sale and shall not exceed four square feet. Rummage sale signs shall not be located in any public rights-of-way. The city shall have the right to remove and destroy signs not conforming to this subsection. The city may assess a fee in the amount established in chapter 4 of this Code for sign permits for each sign removed by the city. 
(9)  Temporary development project advertising signs erected for the purpose of selling or promoting any nonresidential project, or any residential project of ten or more dwelling units, located in the City of Chanhassen, shall be permitted subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Not more than one nonilluminated sign per street frontage, provided that the total number of signs do not exceed two per project. 
b.  Such signs shall only be located along streets that provide primary access to the project site. 
c.  Such sign shall be setback at least ten feet from any property line for signs ten feet in height or less, plus one additional foot for each additional foot of sign height. Signs shall be firmly anchored to the ground. 
d.  No such sign shall be located closer than 100 feet from an existing residential dwelling unit, church, or school which is not a part of the project being so advertised. 
e.  Such signs shall not be located closer than 100 feet from any other sign located on the same side of the street. 
f.  Sign display area shall not exceed 64 square feet, and the height of such signs shall not exceed 15 feet. 
g.  Such signs shall be removed when the project being advertised is sold or leased, or after three years. The planning director may permit a sign for longer than three years if the project being advertised is not sold or leased. 
h.  Where a nonilluminated construction sign and a temporary development project advertising sign are proposed at the entrance to the project, such signage shall be combined on one sign with a maximum sign area of 64 square feet. 
(10)  Temporary real estate signs which advertise the sale, rental or lease of real estate subject to the following conditions: 
a.  On-premises real estate signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which the sign is located. 
1.  One nonilluminated sign is permitted per street frontage. 
2.  Sign display area shall not exceed 16 square feet per sign on property containing less than ten acres in area, and 32 square feet per sign on property containing ten or more acres. 
3.  No such sign shall exceed ten feet in overall height, nor be located less than ten feet from any property line. 
4.  All temporary real estate signs shall be removed within seven days following sale, lease or rental of the property. 
5.  Window signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of a building are permitted subject to the conditions of subsection 20-1265(g). 
b.  Off-premises real estate signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of business and industrial buildings: 
1.  One nonilluminated sign is permitted per building. 
2.  Such signs shall only be permitted in business and industrial districts, and on property located within the same subdivision or development as the building being advertised. 
3.  Such signs shall not be located closer than 100 feet from any other such sign located on the same side of the street. 
4.  Sign display area shall not exceed 32 square feet, and the height of such signs shall not exceed ten feet. 
5.  Such sign shall be setback at least ten feet from any property line. 
6.  Such signs shall be removed within seven days following the lease or sale of the building floor space which it is advertising. 
7.  Provide written permission of property owner. 
c.  Off-premises directional signs which show direction to new residential developments in accordance with the following. The intent of this subsection is to allow short-term signage, for residential development, to familiarize the public with the new development. 
1.  Such sign shall only be permitted along major arterials and collectors as identified in the comprehensive plan. 
2.  Only one sign per corner of an intersection per development shall be permitted. There shall not be more than four signs per intersection. Signs shall not be located in any site distance triangle, measured 30 feet from the point of intersection of the property line. 
3.  Sign display area shall not exceed 32 square feet and the height of such signs shall not exceed ten feet. 
4.  Such sign shall not be located closer than ten feet from any street right-of-way line, and shall be firmly anchored to the ground. 
5.  Written permission must be obtained from the property owner upon whose land the proposed sign is to be located. 
6.  Such sign shall be nonilluminated and kept in good condition. 
7.  Such sign shall be removed 12 months after the sign has been erected. A sign shall be permitted for each phase of a development. 
8.  Signs for home promotions (Parade of Homes, Spring Preview, etc.) shall be limited to four square feet and shall be permitted only for the duration of the event. 
(11)  Off-premises sign for open house, house for sale or rent, parade of homes, etc. Such signs shall be removed within two days after the end of the event and shall not exceed four square feet. The property owner upon which a sign is located shall provide their approval. The signs shall not be located in any public rights-of-way. The city shall have the right to remove and destroy signs not conforming to this section. The city may assess a fee in the amount established in chapter 4 of this Code for sign permits for each sign removed by the city. 
(12)  Employment opportunity signs; (help wanted) which advertise job opportunities for a specific location upon which the sign is located subject to the following conditions: 
a.  One nonilluminated sign is permitted per street frontage. 
b.  A banner shall not exceed 100 square feet of display area and must be affixed to the principle structure. 
c.  Freestanding signs shall not exceed 16 square feet of display area and eight feet in height. 
d.  No such sign shall be located less than ten feet from any property line. 
e.  All temporary employment opportunity signs shall be removed within seven days after the posted position has been filled. 
(13)  Corporate flags are limited to one per business. 
(14)  Pickup signs; big box retailers and grocery stores are allowed one sign to designate an area of the parking lot for pickup/driveup loading of goods purchased in advance subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The pickup sign must be located within the parking lot and the placement of pickup sign shall be so located such that the sign does not adversely affect adjacent properties or navigability of the parking lot (including sight lines, confusion of adjoining ingress or egress) or the general appearance of the site from public rights-of-way. 
b.  No more than one pickup sign shall be allowed per business 
c.  The pickup sign may not exceed 13 feet in height. 
d.  The pickup sign's base shall be not more than two feet wide on a side, and no portion of the sign may project beyond the base. 
e.  The pickup sign is limited to four square feet of display area per sign face, and no more than 30 percent of the display area shall be used for the business logo or identification. 
f.  Businesses with a drive-through facility may not also have a pickup sign. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 252, § 1, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 377, §§ 139, 140, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 423, §§ 9, 10, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 431, § 2, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 459, § 1, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 468, § 1, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 507, §§ 4, 5, 6-28-10; Ord. No. 510, § 1, 9-13-10; Ord. No. 632, § 18, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 20-1256. - Permit for temporary signs, searchlights, banners, etc. 
    Temporary signs are permitted as follows: 
(1)  Banners attached to the principal structure shall not exceed 140 square feet. 
(2)  Detached banners shall not exceed 32 square feet and six feet in height. 
(3)  Portable signs shall not exceed 32 square feet and six feet in height. 
(4)  All temporary signage shall meet the following standards: 
a.  A 30-day display period to coincide with the grand opening of a business or a new development (business park or shopping center which shall be in addition to subsection (4)b.). 
b.  A business may display an attached or detached banner or portable sign on up to four occasions per calendar year, with a maximum ten-day display period for each occasion. 
c.  Messages must relate to on-premises products or services, or any noncommercial message. 
d.  Attached banners, detached banners and portable signs must be located on the property which is owned or leased by the business which the sign is advertising. Nonprofit and governmental event banners are excluded from this provision. 
e.  Portable signs and detached banners shall not be located in the public right-of-way. 
f.  Portable signs and detached banners are limited to the driveway entrance area. 
g.  No more than one portable sign or detached banner shall be permitted per entrance at any given time. 
(5)  Inflatable advertising devices are permitted according to the following: 
a.  For each site or center, two occasions per calendar year with each occasion not to exceed seven days. 
b.  Written authorization from the property owner or their designee must be submitted with the sign permit application. 
c.  Sign permit issued by city. 
d.  Maximum height of the inflatable shall be 25 feet. 
(6)  Flashing or blinking portable signs, stingers, and pennants are not permitted. 
(7)  Large flags flown in high winds may cause a noise nuisance and are subject to removal upon complaint from residents or businesses. 
(8)  The use of searchlights shall be limited to three occasions per year with each occasion not to exceed two days. The use of searchlights shall be controlled in such a way so as not to become a nuisance. Searchlights may not be illuminated between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 468, § 2, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 485, § 1, 10-12-09; Ord. No. 545, § 1, 6-25-12) 
Sec. 20-1257. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-1258. - Legal action. 
    If the city planning director or an administrative officer finds that any sign regulated by this division is prohibited as to size, location, content, type, number, height or method of construction; or erected without a permit first being granted to the installer of the sign to the owner of the property upon which the sign has been erected or is improperly maintained, or is in violation of any other provision of this chapter, he shall give written notice of such violation to the owner or permittee thereof. If the permittee or owner fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the provisions set forth in this chapter within ten calendar days following receipt of said notice: 
(1)  Such permittee or owner may be prosecuted for violating this chapter and if convicted shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95) 
Sec. 20-1259. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs are prohibited: 
(1)  Advertising or business signs on or attached to equipment, such as semitruck trailers, where signing is a principal use of the equipment on either a temporary or permanent basis. 
(2)  Motion signs and flashing signs, except barber poles, which may be permitted by conditional use permits (see sections 20-231 through 20-237). 
(3)  Projecting signs, not including awning or canopies as defined in this chapter. 
(4)  Roof signs, except that a business sign may be placed on the roof, facia or marquee of a building provided it does not extend above the highest elevation of the building, excluding chimneys, and provided: 
a.  Roof signs shall be thoroughly secured and anchored to the frames of the building over which they are constructed and erected. 
b.  No portion of roof signs shall extend beyond the periphery of the roof. 
(5)  Wall graphics and design treatments depicting corporate logos and company symbols. 
(6)  Temporary signs or banners except as permitted in section 20-1256. 
(7)  Signs which are placed or tacked on trees, fences, utility poles or in the public right-of-way. 
(8)  Bench signs are prohibited except at designated transit stops as authorized by the local transit authority. 
(9)  Billboards. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 7-24-06; Ord. No. 431, § 3, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 20-1260. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  When the principal use of land is legally nonconforming under this chapter, all existing or proposed signs in conjunction with that land, shall be considered conforming if they are in compliance with the sign provisions for the most restrictive zoning district in which the principal use is allowed. 
(b)  Excluding normal maintenance, face changes and repair, a nonconforming sign shall not be moved, altered, enlarged or reconstructed unless it is brought into compliance with the sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95) 
Secs. 20-1261-20-1264. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-1265. - General location restrictions. 
(a)  No sign or sign structure shall be closer than ten feet to any lot line. Signs shall not be located in the sight distance triangle of any private driveway or access. Signs shall not be located in any sight distance triangle of a public intersection. 
(b)  Signs on nonresidential property which are immediately adjacent to residential uses or districts shall be positioned so that the copy is not visible along adjoining side and rear yard property lines. 
(c)  No sign, other than governmental signs, shall be erected or placed upon any public street, right-of-way, or project over public property unless approved by the city and contingent upon an approved encroachment agreement. Temporary signs may not be erected or placed in a public easement unless approved by the city. No sign shall be placed within any drainage or utility easement without an approved encroachment agreement. 
(d)  Signs shall not create a hazard to the safe, efficient movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. No private sign shall contain words which might be construed as traffic controls, such as "Stop", "Caution", "Warning", unless the sign, is intended to direct traffic on the premises. 
(e)  No signs, guys, stays or attachments shall be erected, placed or maintained on rocks, fences or trees, nor interfere with any electric light, power, telephone or telegraph wires or the supports thereof. 
(f)  No sign or sign structure shall be erected or maintained that prevents free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign or sign structure shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
(g)  Window signs shall not cover more than 50 percent of the total window area in which they are located. The area of a window sign shall be interpreted as the total window area for that face of the building. In no case shall the total window sign area exceed the permitted wall sign area defined in this chapter for said district. Buildings with less than 32 square feet of window area are exempt from this provision. Signage visible through windows shall not blink, flash, scroll or have any but constant illumination, when illuminated, nor be excessively bright. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 431, § 5, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 451, § 11, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 20-1266. - Maintenance and repair. 
    Signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained and kept in a safe condition. Sign or sign structures which are rotted, unsafe, deteriorated or defaced shall be repainted, repaired, replaced or removed by the licensee, owner or agent of the building upon which the sign stands immediately upon notification by the city. If the permittee or owner fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the provisions set forth in this chapter within 30 calendared days following receipt of written notice: 
(1)  Such permittee or owner may be prosecuted for violating this chapter and if convicted shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
    All signs shall be subject to inspection by the building official, or any other official of the city who may be appointed by him, to ascertain if the provisions of this chapter are being met. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95) 
Sec. 20-1267. - Uniformity of construction, design, etc. 
(a)  All permanent signs shall be designed and constructed in a uniform manner and, to the extent possible, as an integral part of the building's architecture. Multi-tenant commercial and industrial buildings shall have uniform signage. When buildings or developments are presented for site plan review, proposed signs for the development shall be presented concurrently for staff review. All planned centers and multi-tenant buildings shall submit a comprehensive sign plan for approval by the planning commission and city council. 
(1)  All wall signage shall use individual dimension letters, at least one-half inch deep. Company symbols, display messages (not greater than six inches tall), pictorial presentations, illustrations, or decorations (anything other than wording) and less than 20 percent of the total sign display area are exempt from the individual dimension letter requirement. 
(2)  Wall signs shall be either illuminated or non-illuminated and shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  Backlit or exposed lighting shall be architecturally compatible with the building and other signage if in a multi-tenant building. 
b.  If a neon sign is illuminated by exposed neon or LED, the luminous shall not to exceed 5,000 Nits between the hours of civil sunrise and civil sunset and not to exceed 500 Nits between the hours of civil sunset and civil sunrise. 
c.  If a sign is non-illuminated, downcast decorative lighting compatible with the building architecture may be used. 
(3)  Company logos shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the sign display area and are exempt from the individual dimension letter requirement. 
(b)  All permanent monument or pylon signs shall be designed and constructed in a uniform manner and, to the extent possible, as an integral part of the building's architecture. Multi-tenant commercial and industrial buildings shall have uniform signage. When buildings or developments are presented for site plan review, proposed signs for the development shall be presented concurrently for staff review. All planned centers and multi-tenant buildings shall submit a comprehensive sign plan for approval by the planning commission and city council. 
(1)  All center, development name or an individual tenant building signage on a monument or pylon sign shall use individual dimension letters, at least one-half inch deep. 
(2)  Registered trademarks, company symbols, display messages (less than six inches tall), pictorial presentations, illustrations, or decorations (anything other than wording) and less than 20 percent of the total sign display area are exempt from the individual dimension letter requirement. 
(3)  In multi-tenant buildings, tenant panels may be used and shall be exempt from the individual dimension letter requirement. 
(4)  Company logos shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the sign display area and are exempt from the individual dimension letter requirement. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 423, § 11, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 468, § 3, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 485, § 2, 10-12-09; Ord. No. 507, § 6, 6-28-10; Ord. No. 544, § 1, 6-25-12) 
Sec. 20-1268. - Noncommercial speech. 
    Signs containing noncommercial speech are permitted anywhere that signs are permitted, subject to the same size regulations applicable to such signs. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95) 
Sec. 20-1269. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-1270. - Compliance with Minnesota State Building Code. 
    The design and construction standards as set forth in Appendix H of the International Building Code, as may be amended, are adopted. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 377, § 141, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 639, § 9, 3-11-19) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 20-1270 was entitled "Uniform Sign Code," which was amended by Ord. No. 639. 
Secs. 20-1271-20-1274. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-1275. - Construction standards. 
(a)  A freestanding sign or sign structure shall be constructed so that if the faces are not back to back, then they shall not have an angle separating the faces exceeding 45 degrees, unless the total area of both sides added together does not exceed the maximum allowable sign area for that district. 

45 Degree Maximum Angle 
(b)  All on-premises freestanding signs must have structural supports covered or concealed with pole covers. The actual structural supports should not be exposed, and the covers should be architecturally and aesthetically designed to match the building. Pole covers shall be a minimum height of eight feet. The exposed uprights, superstructure and/or backside of all signs shall be painted a neutral color such as light blue, gray, brown or white, unless it can be illustrated that such part of the sign designed or painted in another manner is integral to the overall design of the sign. 

Shopping Center 
(c)  The installation of electrical signs shall be subject to the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the city. Electrical service to such sign shall be underground. 
(d)  No sign shall be attached or be allowed to hang from any building until all necessary wall and roof attachments have been approved by the building official. Any canopy or awning sign shall have a minimum of an eight-foot clearance. 
(e)  Illuminated signs shall be shielded to prevent lights from being directed at oncoming traffic in such brilliance that it impairs the vision of the driver. No such signs shall interfere with or obscure an official traffic sign or signal; this includes indoor signs which are visible from public streets. Illumination for a sign or groups of signs shall not exceed one-half foot candle in brightness as measured at the property line. 
Sec. 20-1276. - Electronic message center signs. 
    Electronic message center (EMC) signs and time and temperature signs shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  No electronic message center sign may be erected that, by reason of position, shape, movement or color interferes with the proper functioning of a traffic sign, signal or which otherwise constitutes a traffic hazard. 
(2)  Electronic and nonelectronic message center space used on a sign shall not exceed the following display area: 
Sign display area EMC Display 0-24 sq. ft. 50% 25-64 sq. ft. 45% 65-80 sq. ft. 40%  
(3)  Electronic message center displays shall not exceed 5,000 Nits between the hours of civil sunrise and civil sunset and shall not exceed 500 Nits between the hours of civil sunset and civil sunrise. 
(4)  Electronic message center signs shall not cause direct glare, nor become a distraction due to excessive brightness. 
(5)  The lamp wattage and luminance level in candelas per square meter (Nits) shall be provided at the time of permit applications. 
(6)  There shall be no electronic message center signs in the front setback area within 50 feet of a street intersection (as measured from intersecting right-of-way lines) except where lighting for such sign is indirect or diffused and in no way constitutes a traffic hazard. 
(7)  There shall be no electronic message center signs within 125 feet of a residential district. 
(8)  Flashing, special effects or animated scenes on electronic message center signs shall be prohibited. 
(9)  Electronic message center signs shall not be located in agricultural or residential zoning districts. 
(10)  Electronic message center sign display use for signs within 500 feet of single-family residential homes shall be limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 8-10-09) 
Secs. 20-1277-20-1300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SIGNS ALLOWED IN SPECIFIC DISTRICTS BY PERMIT 

Sec. 20-1301. - Agricultural and residential districts. 
    The following signs are allowed by permit in the A-2, RR, RSF, R-4, RLM, R-8, R-12, R-16, and residential PUD districts: 
(1)  Public and institutional signs. One ground low profile or wall sign, not exceeding 24 square feet of sign display area, shall be permitted on the premises of any public or institutional property giving the name of the facility and nature of the use and occupancy. Such sign shall be located at least ten feet from any property line, and shall not exceed five feet in height. 
(2)  Area identification/entrance signs. Only one monument sign may be erected at the entrance(s). Total sign area shall not exceed 24 square feet of sign display area, nor be more than five feet high. More than one sign per entrance may be erected, provided that the total sign area does not exceed 24 square feet. Any such sign or monument shall be designed with low-maintenance, high quality materials. The adjacent property owner or a homeowners association shall be responsible for maintenance of the identification/entrance sign and surrounding grounds and landscaped areas. Such sign shall be located so as not to conflict with traffic visibility or street maintenance operation, and shall be securely anchored to the ground. 
(3)  Nonresidential uses. Only one monument sign may be permitted on the site. The total sign area shall not exceed 24 square feet of sign display area, nor be more than five feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 252, § 2, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 314, § 1, 3-26-01; Ord. No. 377, § 142, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-1302. - Neighborhood business, fringe business and office and institutional districts. 
    The following signs shall be allowed by permit in any OI, BF or BN districts: 
(1)  Ground low profile business signs. One ground low profile business or institutional sign not exceeding 24 square feet of sign display area shall be permitted. Such sign shall be located at least ten feet from any property line and shall not exceed five feet in height. 
(2)  Wall business signs. 
a.  One wall business sign shall be permitted on the street frontage for each business occupant within a building. In buildings where individual entrances do not front on a public street, a wall sign may be permitted on the entrance facade consistent with the approved comprehensive sign plan. 
b.  The sign may contain the name, logo, company symbols, display messages, pictorial presentations, illustrations, or decorations of the business only and shall have a sign display area that is in compliance with the district standards. Wall business signs shall not be mounted upon the wall of any building which faces any adjoining residential district without an intervening building or street. 
c.  The total of all wall mounted sign display areas for each business shall not exceed the square footage established in the following table: 
Maximum Percentage 
of Wall Area Wall Area in Square Feet 15%  0-600 13%  601-1,200 11%  1,201-1,800 9% 1,801-2,400 7% 2,401-3,200 5% 3,201-4,500 3% 
not to exceed 275 square feet 4,500+  
(3)  Wall signs shall not include product advertising. Wall signs shall only include tenant identification, tenant logo or registered trademark, center name, or any combination of the three. 
(4)  Public/community signs on property owned or leased by a governmental unit and operated by a governmental unit. 
a.  One monument sign shall be permitted per site for each street frontage. Such sign shall not exceed 120 square feet in display area nor be greater than eight feet in height. 
b.  Electronic message center signs may be permitted as part of the sign display area. Such sign does not require a conditional use permit. 
c.  Electronic message center signs shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Electronic message center space used on a sign shall not exceed a total of 40 square feet. 
2.  No electronic message center sign may be erected that, by reason of position, shape, movement or color interferes with the proper functioning of a traffic sign, signal or which otherwise constitutes a traffic hazard. 
3.  Electronic message center displays shall not exceed 5,000 Nits between the hours of civil sunrise and civil sunset and shall not exceed 500 Nits between the hours of civil sunset and civil sunrise. 
4.  Electronic message center signs shall not cause direct glare, nor become a distraction due to excessive brightness. 
5.  The lamp wattage and luminance level in candles per square meter (Nits) shall be provided at the time of permit application. 
6.  There shall be no electronic message center signs within 50 feet of a street intersection (as measured from intersecting right-of-way lines) or within 125 feet of a residential district, except where lighting for such sign is indirect or diffused and in no way constitutes a traffic hazard. 
7.  Flashing, special effects or animated scenes on electronic message center shall be prohibited. 
8.  Electronic message center sign display use for signs within 500 feet of single-family residential homes shall be limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 377, § 143, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 409, § 7, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 409, § 7, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 468, §§ 4, 5, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 482, § 3, 8-10-09) 
Sec. 20-1303. - Highway, general business districts and central business districts. 
    The following signs shall be allowed by permit in any "BH", "BG" or "CBD" District: 
    The following table lists the standards for freestanding and ground low profile signs in the BH, BG or CBD zone. 
Principal
Structure Pylon Ground Low Profile Height 
(feet) Sign Size 
(square feet) Height 
(feet) Sign Size 
(square feet) 50,000 sq. ft. or greater 20 80 10 80 Less than 50,000 sq. ft. 16 64 8 64  
(1)  Pylon business sign. Pylon signs are permitted on parcels that abut state highway corridors only. One pylon identification sign shall be permitted. This sign may identify the name of the center or the major tenants. The height and square footage of the sign shall be based on the square footage of the principal structure as shown in the table. Such signs shall be located at least ten feet from any property line. 
(2)  Ground low profile business signs. One ground low profile business sign shall be permitted per each outlot or separate building pad that has street frontage. The height and square footage of the sign shall be based on the table above. Such signs shall be located at least 300 feet from any other pylon or ground sign on the parcel and at least ten feet from any property line. 
(3)  Wall business signs. 
a.  One wall business sign shall be permitted on the street frontage for each business occupant within a building. In buildings where individual entrances do not front on a public street, a wall sign may be permitted on the entrance facade consistent with the approved comprehensive sign plan. 
b.  The sign may contain the name, logo, company symbols, display messages, pictorial presentations, illustrations, or decorations of the business only and shall have a sign display area that is in compliance with the district standards. Wall business signs shall not be mounted upon the wall of any building which faces any adjoining residential district without an intervening building or street. 
c.  The total of all wall mounted sign display areas for each business shall not exceed the square footage established in the following table: 
Maximum Percentage
of Wall Area Wall Area in Square Feet 15%  0-600 13%  601-1,200 11%  1,201-1,800 9% 1,801-2,400 7% 2,401-3,200 5% 3,201-4,500 3% 
not to exceed 275 square feet 4,500+  
(4)  Menu board. One menu board sign per restaurant drive-through aisle is permitted with a drive-through facility. Such sign shall not exceed 45 square feet in size, nor greater than eight feet in height. Such sign is permitted in addition to any other sign permitted in the zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 314, § 2, 3-26-01; Ord. No. 377, §§ 144, 145, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 409, § 8, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 468, § 4, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 628, § 49, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 20-1304. - Industrial office park signs. 
    The following signs shall be allowed by permit in any IOP district: 
(1)  Pylon business signs. Pylon signs are permitted on parcels that abut state highway corridors only. One pylon or one ground low profile industrial office park identification sign shall be permitted. A pylon sign shall not exceed 80 square feet on a state highway in sign area and shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Such sign shall be located at least ten feet from any property line. 
(2)  Ground low profile business signs. One ground low profile business sign shall be permitted per site for each street frontage. Such sign shall not exceed 64 square feet, except on a state highway, in display area nor be greater than eight feet in height. Such sign shall be located at least ten feet from any property line. A ground low profile on a state highway may not exceed 80 square feet and eight feet in height. Such sign shall be located at least ten feet from any property line. 
(3)  Wall business signs. 
a.  One wall business sign shall be permitted on the street frontage for each business occupant within a building. In buildings where individual entrances do not front on a public street, a wall sign may be permitted on the entrance facade consistent with the approved comprehensive sign plan. 
b.  The sign may contain the name, logo, company symbols, display messages, pictorial presentations, illustrations, or decorations of the business only and shall have a sign display area that is in compliance with the district standards. Wall business signs shall not be mounted upon the wall of any building which faces any adjoining residential district without an intervening building or street. 
c.  The total of all wall mounted sign display areas for each business shall not exceed the square footage established in the following table: 
Maximum Percentage
of Wall Area Wall Area in Square Feet 15%  0-600 13%  601-1,200 11%  1,201-1,800 9% 1,801-2,400 7% 2,401-3,200 5% 3,201-4,500 3% 
not to exceed 275 square feet 4,500+  
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 314, § 3, 3-26-01; Ord. No. 377, §§ 146, 147, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 409, § 9, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 452, § 4, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 459, § 2, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 468, § 4, 8-11-08) 
Secs. 20-1305-20-1350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVII. - MINERAL EXTRACTION[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 169 repealed §§ 20-1352-20-1367, 20-1376-20-1384, which were contained in Divs. 1 and 2, pertaining to mineral extraction generally and permits, respectively, and which derived from Ord. No. 80, adopted Dec. 15, 1986, and Ord. No. 120, adopted Feb. 12, 1990. 

Sec. 20-1351. - Mining as allowed use; compliance generally. 
    Mineral extraction, if the sand, gravel, black dirt, clay, and other materials are to be sold, are only allowed in zoning districts where such use is delineated as an allowed use. All other earth work is allowed in all zoning districts subject to the requirements of chapter 7, article III of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 2, 5-14-90; Ord. No. 169, § 1, 5-18-92) 
Secs. 20-1352-20-1399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVIII. - BLUFF PROTECTION 

Sec. 20-1400. - Statement of intent. 
    Development, excavation, clearcutting and other activities within the bluff impact zone may result in increased dangers of erosion, increased visibility to surrounding properties and thereby endanger the natural character of the land and jeopardize the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. To preserve the character of the bluff impact zone within the city, alteration to land or vegetation within the bluff impact zone will not be permitted except as regulated by the ordinance codified in this article, and by the regulations of the underlying zoning district where the property is located. 
(Ord. No. 152, § 2, 10-14-91; Ord. No. 249, § 2, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 486, § 1, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 20-1401. - Structure setbacks. 
(a)  Structures, including, but not limited to, principal buildings, decks and accessory buildings, except stairways and landings, are prohibited on the bluff and must be set back from the top of the bluff, the toe of the bluff, and the side of a bluff at least 30 feet. 
(b)  On parcels of land on which a building has already been constructed on June 1, 1991, the setback from the top of the bluff is five feet or existing setback, whichever is more, for additions to an existing building. Any new buildings will have to meet the 30-foot setback. 
(Ord. No. 152, § 2, 10-14-91; Ord. No. 249, § 3, 4-8-96) 
Sec. 20-1402. - Stairways, lifts and landings. 
    Stairways, paths and lifts may be permitted in suitable sites where construction will not redirect water flow direction and/or increase drainage velocity. Major topographic alterations are prohibited. Stairways, paths and lifts must receive an earth work permit and must meet the following design requirements: 
(1)  Stairways, paths and lifts may not exceed four feet in width on residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public open space recreational properties and planned unit developments. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts or landings. 
(4)  Stairways, paths, lifts and landings may be either constructed above the ground on posts or placed into the ground, provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion. 
(5)  Stairways, paths, lifts and landings must be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots. 
(6)  Facilities such as ramps, lifts or mobility paths for physically handicapped persons are also allowed, provided that the dimensional and performance standards complied with of subsections (1) through (5). 
(Ord. No. 152, § 2, 10-14-91; Ord. No. 218, § 1, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 377, § 148, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-1403. - Removal or alteration of vegetation. 
(a)  Removal or alteration of vegetation within a bluff impact zone is prohibited except for limited pruning and trimming of trees and shrubs to provide a view from the principal dwelling site. To accommodate the placement of stairways and landings and access paths, limited clearing of trees and shrubs shall be permitted with prior city approval provided it complies with section 20-1402. Alterations that reduce the rate of runoff or minimize erosion may be exempt from the tree removal or alteration of vegetation requirement. Property located within the shoreland management district shall comply with section 20-482. 
(b)  Removal or alteration of vegetation must receive prior approval of the community development director or designee. An on-site review will be made to determine if the removal or alteration of vegetation will require new ground cover. In no case shall clearcutting be permitted. City staff will work with the property owner to develop a means of creating a view while minimizing disturbance to the bluff impact zone. 
(Ord. No. 152, § 2, 10-14-91; Ord. No. 377, § 149, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 486, § 2, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 20-1404. - Topographic alterations/grading and filling. 
(a)  An earthwork permit will be required for the movement of any material within bluff impact zones. The permit may be granted only if the proposed alteration does not adversely affect the bluff impact zone or other property. Permits may be granted if the proposed alteration complies with section 20-1402, and the following conditions are not present: 
(1)  A moderate to severe erosion hazard classification as defined and mapped by the natural resources conservation service; 
(2)  Existing gullies and/or escarpments are present on the subject property or in an area which the subject property is tributary to. 
(b)  Topographic alterations/grading and filling within the bluff impact zone shall not be permitted to increase the rate of drainage and no concentrated flow conditions shall result from the alteration. The drainage from property within the bluff impact zone may not be redirected without a permit from the city. Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in bluff impact zones. 
(Ord. No. 152, § 2, 10-14-91; Ord. No. 486, § 3, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 20-1405. - Roads, driveways and parking areas. 
    Roads, driveways and parking areas must meet structure setbacks and must not be placed within bluff impact zones when other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exists. If no alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas, and must be designed to not cause adverse impacts. 
(Ord. No. 152, § 2, 10-14-91) 
Sec. 20-1406. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 218, adopted Aug. 22, 1994, deleted former § 20-406, pertaining to the official bluff impact zone map, derived from Ord. No. 152, adopted Oct. 14, 1991. 
Sec. 20-1407. - Reconstruction of lawful nonconforming structures. 
    Lawful nonconforming structures that have been damaged or destroyed may be reconstructed provided that it is reconstructed within one year following its damage or destruction and provided the nonconformity is not materially increased. 
(Ord. No. 152, § 2, 10-14-91) 
Sec. 20-1408. - Lot coverage. 
    Lot coverage, impervious surfaces and pervious pavement, within the bluff setback may contribute to bluff instability due to increased runoff and/or erosion. Lot coverage is prohibited within the bluff setback unless specifically authorized within this article. 
(Ord. No. 445, § 5, 2-12-07; Ord. No. 628, § 50, 12-11-17) 
Secs. 20-1409-20-1449. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIX. - HIGHWAY CORRIDOR DISTRICTS[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 377, § 150, adopted May 24, 2004, repealed §§ 20-1450-20-1461, and 10-1463, and 1464, which pertained to HC-1 and HC-2 districts and derived from Ord. No. 212, § 8, adopted July 11, 1994. 

Secs. 20-1450-20-1461. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-1462. - Building and parking orientation. 
(a)  On building lots within the HC-2 district that abut Highway 5 directly, the minimum building setback from the highway right-of-way shall be 70 feet. The maximum building setback from the highway right-of-way for all buildings except single-family residences shall be 150 feet. No maximum building setback shall apply to single-family residences. 
(b)  On building lots within the HC-2 district that abut either of the access boulevards parallel to Highway 5, the minimum building setback from the boulevard right-of-way shall be 50 feet. The maximum building setback from the boulevard right-of-way shall be 100 feet. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 8, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 377, § 151, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 451, § 12, 5-29-07) 
Secs. 20-1463-20-1499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXX. - TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 

Sec. 20-1500. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to accommodate and provide a reasonable opportunity for the establishment of wireless telecommunications in the city. The city finds it necessary to adopt standards and regulations that promote the public health, safety and general welfare, while minimizing the possible adverse effects of towers and antennas on nearby property. The council finds that these regulations are necessary to: 
(1)  Establish standards which permit a reasonable and equitable opportunity for the establishment of wireless telecommunication services in the city; 
(2)  Ensure that towers and antennas are designed, constructed, installed and maintained in a manner that does not adversely impact public safety; 
(3)  Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community; and 
(4)  Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and siting standards which attempt to screen and/or camouflage towers and antennas from adjacent public and private property. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1501. - Findings. 
    The city finds it necessary for the promotion and preservation of the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the community that the construction, location, size and maintenance of wireless telecommunication facilities be controlled. Further, the city finds [that]: 
(1)  Towers and antennas have a direct impact on, and a relationship to, the image of the community; 
(2)  The manner of installation, location and maintenance of towers and antennas affects the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the community; 
(3)  A reasonable opportunity for the establishment of wireless telecommunication must be provided to serve residential and business needs; and 
(4)  Uncontrolled and unlimited towers and antennas adversely impact the image and aesthetics of the community and thereby undermine economic value and growth. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1502. - Building permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, replace, re-erect or repair any tower without first making application for and securing a building permit as provided in this article. 
(b)  The applicant shall provide, at the time of application for a building permit, sufficient information to indicate that construction, installation and maintenance of the antenna and tower will be in compliance with applicable building code requirements. 
(c)  Permits are not required for: 
(1)  Adjustment or replacement of the elements of an antenna array affixed to a tower or antenna, provided that replacement does not reduce the safety factor. 
(2)  Antennas and/or towers erected temporarily for test purposes, for emergency communication, or for broadcast remote pickup operations, provided that the antennas or towers are not located on public rights-of-way, and towers are protected against unauthorized climbing. Temporary antennas used for test purposes or broadcast remote pickup operations shall be removed within 72 hours following installation. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 522, § 8, 5-23-11) 
Sec. 20-1503. - Height restrictions-Determination; maximum height. 
(a)  Height determination. The height of towers shall be determined by measuring the vertical distance from the tower's point of contact with the ground to the highest point of the tower, including all antennas or other attachments. 
(b)  Maximum height. Except as provided in the following section, maximum heights for towers shall be as follows: 
(1)  In all residential zoned property the maximum height of any tower, including all antennas and other attachments, shall be 80 feet. 
(2)  In all nonresidential zoning districts the maximum height of any tower, including all antennas and other attachments, shall not exceed a height of 150 feet. The city council may allow towers up to 200 feet high if the applicant can demonstrate that, based upon the topography of the site and surrounding areas, antenna design, surrounding tree cover and structures and/or through the use of screening, off-site views of the tower will be minimized. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 152, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-1504. - Same-Exceptions. 
    The following are exceptions to the maximum height restrictions for towers: 
(1)  Multiuse towers designed to accommodate more than one user may exceed the height limitations of section 20-1503, by up to 25 feet. 
(2)  Antenna devices over 80 feet in height which are attached to an existing structure and not freestanding may be located in residential zoned districts under the following conditions: 
a.  Antennas are located upon existing or proposed structures allowed as principal or conditional uses in the underlying zoning district and/or upon public structures. 
b.  Antennas are limited to a height of 15 feet projecting above the structure. The city council may permit antenna heights of up to 25 feet above the structure if the applicant can demonstrate that, by a combination of antenna design, positioning of the structure and/or by screening erected or already in place on the property, off-site views of the antenna are minimized to acceptable levels. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1505. - Setbacks. 
    Towers shall conform with each of the following minimum setback requirements: 
(1)  Tower shall meet the setbacks of the underlying zoning district with the exception of industrial and business zoned districts, where the tower may encroach into the rear setback area, provided that the rear property line abuts another industrial or business zoned district and the tower does not encroach upon any easements. 
(2)  Towers shall maintain a minimum setback of ten feet from all property lines. 
(3)  For sites that are adjacent to parcels developed, guided, or zoned for residential use, setbacks shall be equal to the height of the tower. 
(4)  Towers shall be set back from all planned public rights-of-way by a minimum distance equal to one-half of the height of the tower, including all antennas and attachments. 
(5)  Towers shall not be located between a principal structure and a public street. 
(6)  A tower's setback may be reduced, or its location in relation to a public street varied, at the sole discretion of the city council, to allow the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure, such as a church steeple, light pole, power line support device, or similar structure. 
(7)  No tower, antenna or accessory structure shall be located in a wetland or within the wetland setback. 
(8)  In a residential district, the required setback from a property line for antennas and towers not rigidly attached to a building or structure shall be equal to the height of the antenna and tower. Those antennas and towers rigidly attached to a building or structure, and whose base is on the ground, may reduce the required setback by the amount equal to the distance from the point of attachment to the ground. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 153, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-1506. - Towers in residentially zoned districts. 
    Towers to be located in residentially zoned areas are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Towers supporting amateur radio antennas shall conform to all applicable provisions of section 20-915 of the City Code. 
(2)  Towers supporting commercial antennas and conforming to all applicable provisions of this Code shall be allowed in residential zoned districts in the following locations: 
a.  Church sites, when camouflaged as an architectural feature such as steeples or bell towers; 
b.  Park sites, when compatible with the nature of the park; and 
c.  Government, school, utility and institutional sites. 
(3)  Only one tower shall exist at any one time on any one residential parcel with the exception of towers designed to replicate an existing structure. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1507. - Multiple principal uses and structures on single lot. 
    For the purposes of this article, one tower and multiple antennas shall be permitted on the same lot as another principal use or structure subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1508. - Construction requirements. 
    All antennas and towers erected, constructed or located within the city shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All applicable provisions of this Code. 
(2)  Towers and their antennas shall be certified by a qualified and licensed professional engineer to conform to the latest structural standards and wind loading requirements of the Uniform Building Code and the electronics industry association and all other applicable reviewing agencies. 
(3)  With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service and connection lines approved by the city, no part of any antenna or tower, nor any lines, cable, equipment or wires or braces in connection with either shall at any time extend across or over any part of the right-of-way, public street, highway, sidewalk or property line. 
(4)  Towers and their antennas shall be designed to conform with accepted electrical engineering methods and practices and to comply with the provisions of the National Electrical Code. 
(5)  All towers shall be constructed to conform with the requirements of the occupational safety and health administration. 
(6)  All towers shall be protected against unauthorized climbing. 
(7)  Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive-resistant material. 
(8)  The applicant is responsible for receiving approvals from the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission, and any appropriate state review authority, stating that the proposed tower complies with regulations administered by that agency or that the tower is exempt from those regulations. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 377, § 154, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-1509. - Tower and antenna design. 
    Proposed or modified towers and antennas shall meet the following design requirements: 
(1)  Towers and antennas, including supporting cables and structures shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color, camouflaging and architectural treatments. Communication towers not requiring FAA or FCC painting/marking shall have either a galvanized finish or be painted a noncontrasting color consistent with the surrounding area, such as blue, gray, brown or black finish. 
(2)  Commercial wireless telecommunication service towers shall be of a monopole design, unless the city council determines that an alternative design would better blend into the surrounding environment. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1510. - Co-location requirements. 
    All personal wireless communication towers erected, constructed, or located within the city shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  A proposal for a new commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall not be approved unless the city council finds that the telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or building within a one-mile search radius (one-half-mile search radius for towers under 120 feet in height; towers under 80 feet are exempt from this requirement) of the proposed tower due to one or more of the following reasons: 
a.  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost. 
b.  The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building, as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost. 
c.  Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer. 
d.  Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building. 
e.  Existing or approved towers or buildings are not in the service area, or do not meet the needs of the user. Documentation shall be provided at the time of application clearly demonstrating why existing structures do not meet the needs of the user. 
(2)  The applicant must demonstrate that a good faith effort to co-locate on existing towers and structures was made, but an agreement could not be reached. 
(3)  Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least one additional user. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1511. - Lighting. 
    Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other federal or state authority for a particular tower. When incorporated into the approved design of the tower for camouflage purposes, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be attached to the tower. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1512. - Signs and advertising. 
    No signage, advertising or identification of any kind intended to be visible from the ground or other structures is permitted, except applicable warning and equipment information signage required by the manufacturer or by federal, state or local authorities. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1513. - Accessory utility buildings. 
    Telecommunication equipment accessory to a tower shall be located within a building if such equipment is within 150 feet of the closest point of a residential building. All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower may not exceed one story in height and 400 square feet in size, and shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and meet the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. The use of compatible materials, such as wood, brick or stucco, is required for associated support buildings. Equipment located on the roof of an existing building shall be screened from the public view with building materials identical to or compatible to [with] existing materials. In no case shall wooden fencing be used as a rooftop equipment screen. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 451, § 13, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 20-1514. - Landscaping. 
    Ground-mounted equipment shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of nonvegetative screening better reflects and compliments the architectural character of the surrounding area. Removal of existing shrubs and trees shall be minimized through careful site selection and design. Landscaping shall comply with the standards provided in chapter 20, article XXV of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1515. - Antennas mounted on roofs, walls and existing towers. 
    The placement of wireless communication antennas on roofs, walls and existing towers may be administratively approved by the city, provided that the antenna meets the requirements of this Code and the following: 
(1)  The maximum height of an antenna shall not exceed 15 feet above the roof and shall be set back at least ten feet from the roof edge. Antennas exceeding 15 feet above the roof must be approved through the interim use permit (IUP) process. 
(2)  Wall- or facade-mounted antennas may not extend five feet above the cornice line and shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color, camouflaging and architectural treatments. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 461, § 1, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 20-1516. - Permit application for mounting antennas on existing structures. 
    In addition to the submittal requirements required elsewhere in this Code, an application for a building permit for antennas to be mounted on an existing structure shall be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  A site plan showing the location of the proposed antennas on the structure and documenting that the request meets the requirement of this Code; 
(2)  A building plan showing the construction of the antennas, the proposed method of attaching them to the existing structure, and documenting that the request meets the requirements of this Code; 
(3)  A report prepared by a qualified and licensed professional engineer indicating the existing structure or tower's ability to support the antennas; and 
(4)  Compliance with FCC regulations is required to ensure there will be no interference with existing tenants or public safety telecommunication providers. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1517. - Appeals. 
    An applicant may appeal an administrative decision under this section to the city council. Following review and recommendation by the planning commission, the city council shall make a final determination on the application. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1518. - Existing antennas and towers. 
    Antennas and towers in residential districts and in existence as of November 21, 1996, which do not conform to or comply with this article are subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Towers may continue in use for the purpose now used and as now existing, but may not be replaced or structurally altered without complying in all respects with this article. 
(2)  If such towers are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause whatsoever, the tower may be repaired and restored to its former use, location and physical dimensions upon obtaining a building permit therefor, but without otherwise complying with this ordinance; provided, however, that if the cost of repairing the tower to the former use, physical dimensions, and location would be 50 percent or more of the cost of a new tower of like kind and quality, then the tower may not be repaired or restored except in full compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1519. - Time limit on tower completion. 
    Once a tower is approved by the city, the tower must be substantially completed within one year, including any structures accompanying the tower, following the date of permit. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1520. - Abandoned or unused towers. 
    Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers and accompanying accessory facilities shall be removed as follows: 
(1)  All abandoned or unused towers and associate facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the city council. In the event that a tower is not removed within 12 months of the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the city and the costs of removal assessed against the property. 
(2)  Unused portions of towers above a manufactured connection shall be removed within two years, six months of the time of antenna relocation, if the unused portion exceeds 25 percent of the height of the tower or 30 feet, whichever is greater. The replacement of portions of a tower previously removed requires the issuance of a new conditional use permit. 
(3)  After the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an improved condition. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1520.1. - Interference with public safety telecommunications. 
    No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety telecommunications. All applications for new service shall be in compliance with FCC regulations. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1521. - Supplemental application information. 
    In addition to the information required elsewhere in this Code in an application for a building permit for towers and their antennas, applications for towers shall include the following supplemental information: 
(1)  A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer that provides the following: 
a.  Describes the tower height and design, including a cross-section and elevation; 
b.  Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas; 
c.  Describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of antennas that it can accommodate; and 
d.  Demonstrates the tower's compliance with all applicable structural and electrical standards and includes an engineer's stamp and registration number. 
(2)  For all commercial wireless telecommunication service towers, a letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use, and so long as there is no negative structural impact upon the tower, and there is no disruption to the service provided. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 20-1522. - Temporary mobile towers. 
    Personal wireless service antennas located upon a temporary mobile tower used on an interim basis until a permanent site is constructed or located shall require the processing of an administrative permit and shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  The height of the tower shall not exceed 90 feet including trailer platform. 
(2)  Temporary mobile towers shall maintain the setbacks as contained in section 20-1505. The setback shall be maintained from the trailer platform. 
(3)  Temporary mobile towers shall be prohibited in residential zoning districts. 
(4)  Temporary mobile towers shall have a minimum tower design windload of 80 miles per hour and shall comply with the requirements in section 20-1508. 
(5)  A temporary mobile tower may be permitted for up to 120 days. Towers located on a site longer than this time shall require the processing of an interim use permit subject to section 20-381. 
(6)  Temporary mobile towers shall require a building permit and comply with section 20-1516. 
(7)  Mobile units shall have the opportunity to appeal the administrative decision subject to section 20-1517. 
(8)  Mobile units shall not interfere with public safety telecommunications subject to section 20-1520. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 2, 10-13-97) 
Secs. 20-1523-20-1550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXI. - BLUFF CREEK OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-1551. - Purpose. 
    The Bluff Creek Watershed Area and the development within it have a major influence on environmental quality in the city and the region. Development within the corridor must be designed with utmost sensitivity to the environment and the development pattern must be of a quantity and quality other than what might occur in the absence of specific standards. The purpose of the district is to: 
(a)  Protect the Bluff Creek Corridor, wetlands, bluffs, and significant stands of mature trees through the use of careful site design, protective covenants, sensitive alignment and design of roadways and utilities, incorporation of natural features, landscaping, techniques outlined in the city's surface water management plan, and the practices delineated in the city's surface water management plan. 
(b)  Encourage a development pattern that allows people and nature to mix spanning multiple ecosystems. Development in the corridor should be ecologically designed and built around natural features such as trees, wetlands, and bluffs. Significant natural features should impact development rather than development impacting significant natural features. The natural qualities of the corridor should be preserved to ensure sufficient habitat area for wildlife. 
(c)  Promote innovative development techniques such as cluster development and open space subdivisions to measurably reduce the amount of impervious cover compared to traditional development practices resulting in significant portions of a site being retained as permanent, protected open space. 
(d)  Foster the creation of a greenway connecting Lake Minnewashta Regional Park and the Minnesota River Valley. The greenway will serve as an uninterrupted pedestrian trail, bikeway system, and wildlife corridor affording opportunities for recreation, education, physical fitness and nonmotorized transportation. 
(e)  Encourage cost effective site development. Open space design practices can reduce infrastructure engineering and construction costs because of lot configurations, shortened streets, and reduced utility runs. Long term cost savings can also be realized by the City of Chanhassen associated with infrastructure maintenance costs. 
(f)  Implement the policies and recommendations found in the Bluff Creek Watershed Natural Resources Management Plan. The terms, definitions and appendices found in the management plan are incorporated herein. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 445, § 6, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 20-1552. - Intent. 
    The city intends that all development within the district including commercial, industrial and residential uses should blend into the natural environment while protecting Bluff Creek and sensitive land areas abutting and in the vicinity of the watercourse and its tributaries. The criteria by which new development in the district shall be judged are as follows: 
(a)  Consistency with all provisions of the Comprehensive Plan which includes the Bluff Creek Watershed Natural Resources Management Plan, as amended from time to time; the surface water management plan; all provisions of the zoning ordinance and subdivision ordinance not specifically overridden by the provisions of this district; and all other applicable land use regulations. 
(b)  Preservation of the natural conditions found in the primary zone and to the greatest extent possible, preserving significant resources and minimizing impacts in the secondary zone through cluster development and other practices which minimize the removal of vegetation, minimize site grading, and application of practices found in the city's surface water management plan. 
(c)  Creation of a suitable balance between the amount and arrangement of open space, landscaping, view protection, bluff protection, and vegetation protection and the design and function of manmade features. 
(d)  Creation of an interconnected open space network that preserves migratory patterns for wildlife. 
(e)  Creation of an interconnected open space network that provides recreational and educational opportunities for people. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 445, § 7, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 20-1553. - District application. 
    The BCO District shall be applied or superimposed (overlaid) upon all zoning districts as contained herein as existing or amended by the text and map attached to this ordinance. The regulations and requirements imposed by the BCO District shall be in addition to those established for districts which jointly apply. Under the joint application of the districts, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 20-1554. - Conditional use permits. 
(a)  A conditional use permit shall be issued by the city for all subdivisions, site plans, and prior the erection or alteration of any building or land within the BCO. 
(b)  All lots of record in existence and parcels of land located within the Bluff Creek Overlay District on which a principal structure has been constructed prior to December 14, 1998, are exempt from requiring a conditional use permit. Further subdivision of the property will require a conditional use permit and shall comply with the Bluff Creek Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 364, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 20-1555. - Boundary delineation. 
(a)  Generally. Primary and secondary zones shall be subject to the requirements established herein, as well as restrictions and requirements established by other applicable city ordinances and regulations. The Bluff Creek Overlay District regulations shall not be construed to allow anything otherwise prohibited in the zoning district where the overlay district applies. 
(b)  Boundaries; maps. The primary and secondary zones include land that is generally defined in this ordinance and in the Bluff Creek Watershed Natural Resources Management Plan. Boundaries as established by officially adopted city maps shall be prima facie evidence of the location and type of watershed zone. The official maps shall be developed and maintained by the planning department. The applicant shall provide appropriate technical information, including but not limited to a topographical survey, flora and fauna survey and soil data deemed necessary for the city to determine the exact watershed zone boundary. The community development director shall make a determination to maintain the officially designated watershed zone boundary or if the boundaries need to be corrected on city plans and maps based upon the data that is supplied. Data for watershed zone delineation shall be generated and provided by a qualified professional specializing in watershed management, environmental science or other related profession. The applicant may appeal the community development director's determination of the watershed zone boundary and type to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 377, § 155, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-1556. - Impervious surface, lot coverage and slopes. 
(a)  To the greatest extent possible, all development shall minimize the amount of lot coverage by clustering development, using common access drives and utility corridors and minimizing building footprint size. Roads, walkways, bike trails, and parking areas must be designed parallel to natural contours with consideration to maintaining consolidated areas of natural topography and vegetation. Management of surface runoff caused by impervious surfaces shall be designed using practices delineated in the city's surface water management plan. 
(b)  Within the secondary zone of the BCO district, areas with average slopes exceeding 25 percent shall be preserved in their natural state and maintained as permanent open space. Areas with average slopes less than 25 percent but greater than ten percent shall not exceed 25 percent lot coverage. Lot coverage for areas where average slopes are less than ten percent shall be governed by the underlying zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 445, § 8, 2-12-07; Ord. No. 628, § 51, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 20-1557. - Bluffs. 
    Bluffs shall be preserved as provided for under article XXVIII. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 20-1558. - Site views. 
    Through environmentally sensitive design such as "terrain adaptive architecture" (see Figure 1), landscaping and site planning, site views both to and from the BCO district shall be preserved and enhanced to the greatest extent possible so as to maintain views that reflect and protect the natural beauty of the BCO district. Special attention should be given to views that are highly accessible to the public such as scenic overlooks, ridges and trails. Clustering of development away from natural overlooks is encouraged. 


Figure 1. "Published in APA PAS Report #466" 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 377, § 156, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-1559. - Density clustering. 
    Density clustering shall be allowed as a tool to facilitate cluster development within the Bluff Creek Overlay District. Density clustering may be used in areas where portions of the site are unsuitable for development because of the location of the primary zone. Density clustering shall not be allowed for areas that are otherwise considered unbuildable due to wetlands, lakes and other areas not suitable for building purposes. 
    In areas where density clustering is applicable, density may be transferred to unconstrained parts of the site within land included in the secondary zone, subject to the restrictions of this ordinance, and within land lying outside of identified zone areas. Additionally, the following conditions may qualify for density clustering: 
(a)  Land slopes in the secondary zone that exceed 25 percent on average. 
(b)  Land in the secondary zone containing stands of native trees. 
(c)  Land with suitable natural habitat to endangered or threatened species or a fragile ecosystem. 


Traditional Development Pattern 


Cluster Development 


Industrial Cluster Development 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 377, § 157, 5-24-04) 
Sec. 20-1560. - Standards and guidelines for single-family attached or cluster-home PUDs. 
    Single-family attached, cluster, zero lot line, and similar dwelling types shall only be allowed on sites designed for low, medium or high density residential uses by the City of Chanhassen Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 20-1561. - Natural habitat preservation. 
(a)  Natural habitat areas within the primary zone shall be preserved as permanent open space. Any development that occurs shall be directly related to the development of a continuous greenway along the creek from the Minnesota River to Lake Minnewashta as outlined in the Bluff Creek Watershed Natural Resources Management Plan. 
(b)  Where possible, any disturbances of natural habitat areas within the secondary zone shall be avoided. Any alterations to the natural habitat within the secondary zone shall adhere to the practices delineated in the city's surface water management plan. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 377, § 158, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 445, § 9, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 20-1562. - Natural habitat restoration plan. 
    If natural habitat areas located within the secondary zone will be disturbed during any stage of development, the applicant shall submit a detailed plan identifying the resources that will be disturbed and a corresponding restoration and/or mitigation plan. Such restoration might include wetland mitigation and replanting of habitat significant to endangered and threatened species. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 20-1563. - Open space requirements. 
    Open space shall comprise 100 percent of the area located within the primary zone. The city will establish the boundary for the primary zone using data provided by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 20-1564. - Structure setbacks. 
(a)  All structures shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet from the primary zone, except as specified below. No disturbances of the site shall occur within the first 20 feet of such setback from the primary zone boundary. 
(b)  On parcels of land located within the Bluff Creek Overlay District on which a principal structure has been constructed prior to December 14, 1998: 
(1)  The minimum setback from the primary zone shall be the existing principal structure setback, if less than 40 feet. 
(2)  If the existing principal building or structure setback is less than 40 feet and greater than or equal to 20 feet, then the first 50 percent of the established primary zone setback shall remain undisturbed. 
(3)  If the existing principal building or structure setback is less than 20 feet there shall be no grading or alterations beyond the existing setback. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 364, § 2, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 377, § 159, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 4-25-05) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This is chronological listing of the ordinances of the City used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this Code. 
Adoption 
Date Ordinance 
Number Section Section 
this Code 7-24-67 4 1-6 12-7 1-15-68 17 1 14-16 14-17, 14-18 2 14-18, 14-19 2-5-68 22 1 13-1 2-5 13-2 6 13-3 7, 8 13-4 9 13-5 4-29-68 27 1-4 17-17 5 17-18 6 17-17 7 17-19 9 17-16 10 17-20-17-23 7-1-68 29 1-7 2-32 8-18-69 37 1 1-9 10-1-70 29A 1 2-32 1-11-71 44 1 12-31 2.01-2.05 12-34 3.01-3.04 12-33 3.08-3.10 12-33 5 12-32 7 12-35 8 12-36 9.01, 9.02 12-37 10.01 12-38 5-15-72 48 2.01 13-21 3.01 13-23 4.01 13-23 10 13-22 8-14-72 51 1 16-1 2 16-2 3.09 16-21 4 16-31 5.01 16-33 5.03 16-35 5.04, 5.05 16-33 5.06 16-32 5.07 16-2 5.08 16-34 6-18-73 53 1 19-98 2.03 19-96 3 19-97 4-6 19-98-19-100 2-17-75 56 2 5-86 5-101, 5-102 3-7 5-102-5-106 9, 10 5-87, 5-88 11 5-104 6-17-75 57 5.02 11-6, 14-61 5.04 11-5 7-21-75 59 1 14-56 3 14-57 4 14-60 12 14-62 14 14-63 16 14-64 23 14-65 26 14-66 30 14-66 31 14-58, 14-59 32 14-67 7-12-76 24-C 1 5-16 2 5-51-5-54 3 5-53 4 5-55 5 5-56 5-71 6 5-73 7, 8 5-74 9 5-55 10 5-75 11 5-72 12 5-19 14 5-17 15 5-55 16 5-53 5-55 18 5-37 19 5-16 20.01, 20.02 5-18 21 5-20 22 5-21 24 5-36 26 5-38 27.01, 27.02 5-39, 5-40 9-20-76 57A 1 11-4, 11-5 14-61 2-18-77 63 1 2-19 5-16-77 14-A 1 14-31 2.01-2.04 14-33 4.03 14-32 4.05, 4.06 14-34, 14-35 4.08, 4.09 14-36, 14-37 8-1-77 3-H 11.01 9-1 3H 1.01, 1.02 12-1, 12-2 2.01 12-5 4 12-6 5 12-18 6 12-4 7.01, 7.02 12-9 8 12-10 9, 10 12-11, 12-12 11.01, 11.02 12-14, 12-15 11.04 12-13 11.05 12-16 13 12-3 8-6-79 14-B 1 14-31 2 14-37 10-8-79 22A 1 13-2 2 13-5 1-7-80 14-C 1 14-37 2-23-81 23-B 4, 5 7-17, 7-18 6.01, 6.02 7-19, 7-20 7 7-16 4-20-81 69 2.01 2-31 3.01 2-31 7-23-81 23-B 1-3 7-16 7 7-16 8-3-81 9B 1.02 11-3 1-9 11-2 7 11-3 3-1-82 71 3.01 15-2 3.03-3.05 15-2 3-15-82 28-A 1 15-16 15-19 2.01, 2.02 15-17 3.01, 3.02 15-18 4 15-19 11 15-19 4-19-82 2H 3 10-17 4 10-96 5.01 10-96 5.02-5.04 10-98-10-100 5.06 10-101 5.08 10-102 6.01-6.05 10-107 7.02 10-112 7.03 10-79 7.04 10-111 7.05, 7.06 10-80, 10-81 7.4 10-87 7.10 10-84 7.11 10-78 7.13 10-76 7.14 10-82 7.15 10-85 7.18 10-77 7.19 11-4, 14-61 8.01-8.09 10-103 8.10 10-109 8.11 10-103 9.01 10-97 9.02, 9.03 10-104, 10-105 9.06, 9.07 10-104 9.08 10-110 10.01, 10.22 10-108 10.04 10-111 10.05 10-86 11 10-105 8-2-82 24-D 1 5-16 2 5-74 10-4-82 3-I 1 12-16 2-14-83 2-I 1 10-100 2-6 10-102-10-106 5, 7 10-105 9.04-9.06 10-61 34-E 1 10-17 2.07 10-16 3.01-3.03 10-51 3.02 10-55 4.01, 4.02 10-52, 10-53 5.01, 5.02 10-56, 10-57 5.03, 5.04 10-56 6.01 10-54 6.02, 6.03 10-58 6.04 10-36 6.05 10-59 8.01 10-55 9.01 10-62 9.04-9.06 10-61 9.07 10-31 9.09 10-32 9.11 10-33 10.2(3), (4) 10-34 12.01 10-60 13.01 10-53 5-16-83 23-C 1-3 7-16 7-11-83 73 2.01 6-1 2.03-2.12 6-1 2.14 6-1 2.16-2.19 6-1 2.21-2.28 6-1 3.01 6-24 3.02, 3.03 6-26 3.04, 3.05 6-27 3.06 6-28 3.07 6-25 3.09 6-26 6-28 3.10 6-26 3.11, 3.12 6-29, 6-30 3.13 6-21 5.01, 5.02 6-46, 6-47 5.05-5.12 6-48-6-55 6 6-4 8, 9 6-22, 6-23 13, 14 6-2, 6-3 10-17-83 52-C 1 2-1 11-7-83 12-A 1-4 9-16-9-19 5.01-5.07 9-20 6-10 9-21-9-25 12 9-26 75 2-56 12-19-83 43-A 1-6 11-1 5-3-84 72 3 3-1 4 3-4 4.02-4.06 3-5-3-9 5 3-10 6.01, 6.02 3-11, 3-12 6.03 3-3 7.01 3-2 7.03, 7.04 3-2 7-23-84 3-J 1 9-1 12-14 62-A 2 9-42-9-44 3 9-43 4, 5 9-45, 9-46 6 9-41 10-1-84 70-B 1.01 2-66, 2-67 3.02 2-68 4.02 2-69 5.01 2-70 6.01 2-71 1-21-85 78 1.01-1.03 2-16-2-18 2-25-85 33-D 2 18-2 3 18-1 4.1 18-38, 18-39 18-41 4.2 18-37 4.3 18-36 5 18-40 6.1-6.8 18-56-18-63 6.9 18-56 7-9 18-76-18-78 9.2(7) 18-40 10 18-42 11 18-22 12 18-4 14 18-21 15 18-3 3-11-85 5 1.02-1.04 19-42 1.05 19-44 2.01 19-43 19-48 2.02 19-43 19-49 2.03 19-50 3.01 19-49 4 19-51 5, 6 19-45, 19-46 7.02 19-47 8 19-41 6 1.01 19-19 2.01 19-22, 19-23 2.02 19-23 19-26 2.03 19-27 3.01-3.03 19-24 3.04 19-17 3.05 19-25 4.01 19-28 5.01 19-26 6 19-29 7 19-20 8.01 19-21 9.01 19-16 10.01 19-18 4-15-85 22B 1, 2 13-2 4-24-85 79 1, 2 8-16 6 8-19 9-14 8-20-8-25 15 8-18 16 8-26 18 8-17 5-20-85 9C 1 11-3 6-6-85 1 19-127 1-13-86 5A 1.02 19-126 2.01(a) 19-128 2.01(b) 19-129 2.02-2.05 19-130-19-133 3.01, 3.02 19-134, 19-135 2-10-86 24-E 5-74 5-19-86 2-K 1 10-87 12-15-86 33E 1 18-40, 18-78 Art. I, § 3(1-3-1) 20-3 Art. I, § 3(1-3-2) 20-4 Art. II, § 1 20-1 Art. III, § 1 20-28 Art. III, § 1(3-1-3(1)) 20-56, 20-57 Art. III, § 1(3-1-3(2)) 20-58 Art. III, § 1(3-1-3(3)) 20-59 Art. III, § 1(3-1-4(1)) 20-29 Art. III, § 1(3-1-4) 20-91 Art. III, § 1(3-1-4(6)) 20-60 Art. III, § 1(3-1-4(7)) 20-29 Art. III, § 1(3-3-1) 20-41 Art. III, § 1(3-3-2) 20-42 Art. III, § 2(3-2-1) 20-221 Art. III, §§ 2(3-2-2)-2(3-2-6) 20-231-20-235 Art. III, § 2(3-2-7) 20-237 Art. III, § 2(3-2-8) 20-236 Art. III, §§ 3(3-3-3)-3(3-3-5) 20-43-20-45 Art. III, §§ 4(3-4-2)-4(3-4-4) 20-92-20-94 Art. III, §§ 5(3-5-1)-5(3-5-9) 20-71-20-78 Art. III, §§ 6(3-6-1), 6(3-6-2) 20-106 Art. III, § 6(3-6-3) 20-107 Art. III, § 6(3-6-4) 20-108 Art. IV, §§ 1-3 20-201-20-203 Art. V, § 1 20-204 Art. V, §§ 2(5-2-1)-2(5-2-6) 20-551-20-556 Art. V, §§ 3(5-3-1)-3(5-3-5) 20-571-20-575 Art. V, §§ 4(5-4-1)-4(5-4-5) 20-591-20-595 Art. V, §§ 5(5-5-1)-5(5-5-5) 20-611-20-615 Art. V, §§ 6(5-6-1)-6(5-6-5) 20-631-20-635 Art. V, §§ 7(5-7-1)-7(5-7-5) 20-651-20-653 Art. V, §§ 8(5-8-1)-8(5-8-5) 20-671-20-675 Art. V, § 9(5-9-1) 20-251 Art. V, §§ 9(5-9-1(1))-9(5-9-1(6)) 20-252-20-257 Art. V, § 9(5-9-1(7)) 20-258, 20-259 Art. V, §§ 9(5-9-1(8))-9(5-9-1(11)) 20-260-20-263 Art. V, § 9(5-9-1(13)) 20-264 Art. V, §§ 10(5-10-1)-10(5-10-5) 20-691-20-695 Art. V, §§ 11(5-11-1)-11(5-11-5) 20-711-20-715 Art. V, §§ 12(5-12-1)-12(5-12-5) 20-731-20-735 Art. V, §§ 13(5-13-1)-13(5-13-5) 20-751-20-755 Art. V, § 14(5-14-1) 20-771 Art. V, § 14(5-14-2) 20-773 Art. V, § 14(5-14-3) 20-772 Art. V, § 14(5-14-4) 20-774 Art. V, §§ 15(5-15-1)-15(5-15-5) 20-791-20-795 Art. V, §§ 16(5-16-1)-16(5-16-5) 20-811-20-815 Art. V, § 17(5-17-1) 20-281 Art. V, § 17(5-17-1(1)) 20-282 Art. V, § 17(5-17-1(3)) 20-283, 20-284 Art. V, §§ 17(5-17-1(4))-17(5-17-1(7)) 20-285-20-289 Art. V, §§ 17(5-17-1(9))-17(5-17-1(10)) 20-290, 20-291 Art. V, § 18(5-18-1) 20-501 Art. V, § 18(5-18-2) 20-502 Art. V, § 18(5-18-3) 20-504 Art. V, § 18(5-18-4) 20-503 Art. V, § 18(5-18-5) 20-505 Art. V, § 18(5-18-6) 20-516 Art. V, §§ 18(5-18-6(2))-18(5-18-6(4)) 20-517-20-519 Art. V, § 19(5-19-1) 20-326 Art. V, § 19(5-19-3) 20-327 Art. V, § 19(5-19-4) 20-329 Art. V, § 19(5-19-5) 20-331 Art. V, § 19(5-19-6) 20-328 Art. V, § 19(5-19-7) 20-330 Art. V, § 19(5-19-9) 20-332 Art. V, § 19(5-19-18) 20-333 Art. V, § 20(5-20-1) 20-366 Art. V, § 20(5-20-2) 20-367 Art. V, § 21(5-21-1) 20-377 Art. V, § 21(5-21-2) 20-377.1 Art. V, §§ 21(5-21-3(1))-21(5-21-3(3)) 20-378-20-380 Art. V, § 22(5-22-1) 20-348 Art. V, § 22(5-22-2) 20-347 Art. V, § 22(5-22-3(1)) 20-349 Art. V, § 22(5-22-3(2)) 20-350 Art. V, § 22(5-22-4(1), (2)) 20-351 Art. V, § 22(5-22-4(3)) 20-352 Art. V, § 22(5-22-4(4)) 20-353 Art. V, §§ 23(5-23-1)-23(5-23-3) 20-476-20-478 Art. V, § 24(5-24-1) 20-401 Art. V, § 24(5-24-2) 20-402, 20-405 Art. V, § 24(5-24-3) 20-404 Art. V, § 24(5-24-5) 20-407 Art. V, § 24(5-24-6) 20-408 Art. V, § 24(5-24-7) 20-421 Art. V, § 24(5-24-8) 20-436 Art. V, §§ 24(5-24-8(1))-24(5-24-8(4)) 20-437-20-440 Art. V, § 24(5-24-9) 20-422 Art. V, § 24(5-24-10) 20-424 Art. V, § 24(5-24-11) 20-423 Art. V, § 24(5-24-12) 20-403 Art. V, § 24(5-24-13) 20-409 Art. VI, § 1 20-908 Art. VI, §§ 1(6-1-1)-1(6-1-9) 20-951-20-959 Art. VI, §§ 2-7 20-901-20-906 Art. VI, § 8 20-976 Art. VI, §§ 8(6-8-1)-8(6-8-8) 20-977-20-984 Art. VI, § 10 20-907 Art. VI, §§ 13-18 20-909-20-914 Art. VI, § 12(6-12-1) 20-1016 Art. VI, § 12(6-12-2) 20-1017 Art. VI, § 12(6-12-3) 20-1019 Art. VI, § 12(6-12-4) 20-1017 Art. VI, §§ 12(6-12-6)-12(6-12-9) 20-1020-20-1023 Art. VI, § 12(6-12-10) 20-18 80 Art. VI, §§ 19(6-19-1)-19(6-19-3) 17-41-17-43 Art. VI, § 19(6-19-4) 17-31 Art. VI, § 19(6-19-5) 17-44 Art. VI, § 20(6-20-1) 20-1041 Art. VI, §§ 20(6-20-2)-20(6-20-4) 20-1043-20-1045 Art. VI, §§ 20(6-20-5), 20(6-20-6) 20-1048 Art. VI, § 20(6-20-7(1)) 20-1049 Art. VI, § 20(6-20-7(2)) 20-1050 Art. VI, §§ 20(6-20-7(3))-20(6-20-7(5)) 20-1051 Art. VI, §§ 20(6-20-7(6))-20(6-20-7(12)) 20-1052-20-1058 Art. VI, § 20(6-20-8) 20-1042 Art. VI, § 20(6-20-9) 20-1046 Art. VI, § 20(6-20-10) 20-1047 Art. VI, §§ 21-24 20-915-20-918 Art. VI, § 25 20-5 Art. VI, § 26 20-919 Art. VI, § 6-9-2 20-1002 Art. VII, §§ 1(7-1-1), 1(7-1-2) 20-1117 Art. VII, §§ 1(7-1-3)-1(7-1-6) 20-1118-20-1121 Art. VII, § 1(7-1-8) 20-1122, 20-1123 Art. VII, § 1(7-1-9) 20-1124 Art. VII, § 1(7-1-10) 20-1125 Art. VII, §§ 2(7-2-1)-2(7-2-6) 20-1142-20-1147 Art. VII, § 3 20-1101 Art. VII, § 4 20-1102 Art. VIII, § 1 20-1176 Art. VIII, §§ 2(8-2-1)-2(8-2-4) 20-1191-20-1194 Art. VIII, § 3 20-1211 Art. VIII, §§ 3(8-3-1)-3(8-3-3) 20-1212-20-1214 Art. VIII, § 4 20-1178 Art. VIII, § 5(8-5-1) 20-1231 Art. VIII, §§ 5(8-5-4)-5(8-5-6) 20-1232-20-1234 Art. VIII, § 6 20-1177 Art. VIII, § 7 20-1179 Art. IX, § 1(9-1-1) 20-1251 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-1) 20-1262 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-2) 20-1263 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-3) 20-1268 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-4) 20-1269 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-5) 20-1266 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-6) 20-1270 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-7) 20-1274 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-8) 20-1256 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-9) 20-1272 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-10) 20-1273 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-11) 20-1255 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-12) 20-1257 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-13) 20-1274 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-14) 20-1275 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-15) 20-1265 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-16) 20-1264 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-17) 20-1265 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-18) 20-1276 Art. IX, § 2(9-2-19) 20-1267 Art. IX, § 3(9-3-1) 20-1255 Art. IX, § 3(9-3-2) 20-1259 Art. IX, § 4 20-1260 Art. IX, § 5-9 20-1301-20-1305 Art. IX, § 10 20-1261 Art. IX, §§ 12(9-12-1)-12(9-12-3) 20-1254 Art. IX, § 12(9-12-4) 20-1252 Art. IX, § 12(9-12-5) 20-1253 Art. X, §§ 1(10-1-1), 1(10-1-2) 20-1376 Art. X, § 1(10-1-2(8)) 20-1353 Art. X, § 1(10-1-3) 20-1377 Art. X, § 1(10-1-5) 20-1379 Art. X, §§ 1(10-1-6(1))-1(10-1-6(4)) 20-1354-20-1357 Art. X, § 1(10-1-6(5)) 20-1352, 20-1358-20-1366 Art. X, § 1(10-1-6(b)) 20-1367 Art. X, § 1(10-1-7) 20-1378, 20-1380 Art. X, §§ 1(10-1-8)-1(10-1-11) 20-1381-20-1384 Art. XI, § 1(11-1-2(2)) 20-27  1-26-87 10-B 1.02 19-67 1.03 19-66 1.04 19-68 19-81 1.05, 1.06 19-74, 19-75 2.01, 2.02 19-78 2.03 19-79 3.01-3.05 19-80 3.06 19-73 4 19-83 5.01-5.03 19-82 6 19-84 7.01-7.06 19-76 7.07-7.10 19-77 8.01, 8.02 19-72 8.03 19-73 8.04, 8.05 19-76 8.06, 8.07 19-70 9.01 19-83 9.03-9.05 19-69 10 19-71  6-15-87 1 20-1, 20-219 20-264 80-A 1 20-1 80-B 1 20-919 10- 5-87 80-C 20-409(3) 81 1 5-76-5-79 82 1 7-16(d)(5) 11-16-87 80-E 1 20-574(10) 2 20-265  1-11-88 80-D 1 20-773(6) 80-G 1 20-714(5) 2 20-1  3-14-88 84 1 7-16(d)(5) 2 7-18(b) 3 18-57(n) 85 1       Rpld 14-33-14-37, 18-77(b) 2 18-79 90 1 20-615(3) 2 20-635(3) 3 20-1018 4 20-1024 5       Rpld 20-903 6 20-1277 8 20-915  5- 9-88 89 1.01-5.01 12-17  6-13-88 87 1 20-263(6)  6-27-88 91 1 2-714(6)  7-11-88 92 1 20-1255(2)a. 2 20-1255(2)c.  7-25-88 93 1 20-813(4) 94 1 20-695(6), 20-715(6), 20-755(5), 20-774(5), 20-795(5), 20-815(5) 2 20-695(8) 3 20-6715(8) 4 20-755(7) 5 20-774(7) 6 20-795(7) 7 20-815(7)  8-22-88 95 1 2-20  9-26-88 96 1 20-574(11)-(13) 10-24-88 97 1 20-814(13), (14) 2 20-292 11-28-88 98 1 20-1 2 20-421(11)  3-27-89 100 1 2-2  4-24-89 102 I 9-1  5-22-89 103 1       Rpld 20-255, 20-574(6), 20-773(6) 104 1 15-20-15-29  7-24-89 105 1 15-30  8-14-89 106 1 20-237  8-28-89 110 1 20-441 2 20-1021  9-11-89 108 1 20-3  9-29-89 109 1 6-28(a) 2 6-30 11-20-89 112 1 10-127 12- 4-89 113 1 16-1 2 16-31 3 16-33 4, 5 16-35, 16-36 6 16-32 7 16-38 114 1 15-31 12-18-89 115 1 10-101(5)  1- 8-90 117 1 20-1116-20-1124  1-22-90 116 1, 2 20-1 3 20-282 4 20-288(6)-(8) 5       Rpld 20-694(2) 6       Rpld 20-712(3), (11)       Added 20-712(11) 20-714(7), (8) 8 20-752(3)       Rpld 20-752(27) 20-754(6), (7) 9 20-773(1)  1-22-90 118 1 7-21  2-12-90 119 20-106-20-121 120 1 20-1 2 20-381-20-384 3 20-557, 20-576, 20-597, 20-616, 20-637, 20-676, 20-696, 20-716, 20-736, 20-756, 20-775, 20-816 4       Rpld 20-554(1), (3), 20-574(1)-(3), (5), (8), (10), 20-594(5), 20-614(2), (4), 20-634(2), (3), 20-674(3), (6), 20-694(4), 20-714(1), 20-734(1), (3), 20-754(1), 20-773(4), 20-814(1), 20-903 5 20-1376(a)  1-26-90 121 20-263, (7), (13)  2-26-90 122 1 20-712(21)  3-12-90 123 1 20-680-20-684, 20-201 124 1 20-1124(2)f.2(c)  3-26-90 125 1 18-57(n)-(p) 126 1 16-33(7), (8) 2 16-35 127 1 20-1 2 20-595(2), (6)-(8) 3 20-615  5-14-90 128 1 7-30-7-47 2 20-1351  6- 4-90 129 1 20-30 2 20-903  7- 9-90 130 1 20-92(c) 131 1 20-28(b)(2) 2 20-29 catchline 3 20-31 4 20-56 5 20-58  9-24-90 132 1 19-140-19-148 11- 5-90 133 1 20-409(6), (7) 11-11-90 134 1 14-61 12-10-90 135 1 18-57(b) 2 18-57(n)  1-28-91 136 1A 20-695(6)e., 20-715(6)e., 20-755(5)e., 20-774(5)e., 20-815(5)e. 1B 20-695(8)e., 20-715(8)e., 20-755(7)e., 20-774(7)e., 20-815(7)e. 1C 20-504(e)  2-11-91 137 1 20-293 2 20-714(9) 138 1-3 9-42-9-44 4-6 9-47-9-49  3-11-91 139 1 20-41 140 1       Rpld 20-576(3) 141 1 20-406 143 1 20-29(d)  4- 8-91 144 1 20-1 2 20-908(5)e. 145 1 20-904 2 20-615(7)b. 3 20-1  5- 6-91 146 1 20-263(2) 2 20-263(16)  5-20-91 147 1 19-142  6-10-91 148 1 20-1 150 1 14-68  6-24-91 149 1 20-501-20-507  8-26-91 151 1 20-1 2 20-252(4) 10-14-91 152 2 20-1 2 20-1400-20-1407 155 1 10-128 10-28-91 156 1 10-150-10-154 11- 4-91 153 1 20-1176-20-1184 2 18-61 3 20-117, 20-119 11-18-91 158 1 10-97 159 1 13-2(c)(22)  1-13-92 161 1 20-122  1-27-92 162 1 12-50, 12-51 160 1, 2 6-27b), (c) 3 20-263(17)  2-10-92 165 1 20-1 2 20-71-20-73  2-24-92 163 1 20-79 164 2 20-775(3) 2 20-294  4-27-92 166 1 2-68(a), (b) 2 2-69 3       Rpld 2-71  4-27-92 167 1 7-16(b), (c) 2, 3 7-17(b), (c) 4 7-18(c) 5 7-19 168 1       Rpld 19-16 2 19-18 3, 4 19-22, 19-23 5 19-27(a) 6-9 19-41-19-44 10 19-78 11       Rpld 19-79(b), (o)-(r) 12 19-79(s) 13 19-82(d) 14 19-82(a)  5-18-92 169 1 20-1351 2       Rpld 20-1352-20-1367 20-1376-20-1384  6- 8-92 170 1 20-575(1)-(6) 2 20-595(1)-(6) 3 20-906(b)(8)  7-27-92 173 1       Rpld 20-712(20) 10-12-92 175 1 10-100 176 1 7-22 10-26-92 178 1 18-62(d) 2 20-94(f) 11-23-92 179 1 20-506 2 20-508 3 20-505(m) 12-14-92 180 1 20-401-20-418 2, 3 20-1  3- 8-93 181 1 20-1019 2 20-1023 182 1 18-79(a), (j), (l) 2 18-79(t)  3-22-93 183 1 5-73(b)  4-26-93 184 1 6-1, 20-1 2 6-22(c)  5-24-93 185 1 12-16 186 1 10-141-10-149.2 10-11-93 193 1 10-160-10-180 194 1 20-575 2 20-593 3 20-906 11-11-93 195 1, 2 20-1180, 20-1181 3, 4 20-1182(c), 20-1183(a)(3) 196 1 20-57  2-14-94 198 1 18-79(p) 2       Rpld 14-31, 14-32  4-11-94 200 1 16-33(2) 201 1 10-98(d), (e)  4-25-94 202 1 20-401 2, 3 20-404, 20-405(1) 4, 5 20-407, 20-408 6, 7 20-412(a), (c) 8 20-413 9-11 20-416-20-418  5- 9-94 203 1 18-40(4)m. 2 20-109(o) 204 1, 2 18-61(a)(1), (d) 3 20-1 4 20-1178(c) 205 1 19-44  6-13-94 207 1 11-2 2       Rpld 11-3  6-27-94 209 1 18-57(n), (o) 2 20-1101(1) 3 20-1103 210 1 19-28  7-11-94 212 1 20-1 2 20-201 3 20-106(6) 4 20-109(6) 5 20-110(7) 6 20-116(e) 7 20-118 8 20-1450-20-1464 213 1-5 7.5-21-7.5-25 214 1 20-732(32)  8- 8-94 215 1 20-904(c)  8-22-94 217 1       Rpld 20-476-20-478 2, 3 20-1 4 20-476-20-486 218 1       Rpld 20-1402(2) 2       Rpld 20-1406  9-12-94 219 1 20-1181(b)(4) 220 1 20-771, 20-771.1 2 20-773  9-26-94 222 1 13-24-13-26 10-24-94 225 1 18-63 226 1 10-60 227 1 20-960 228 1 2-1 11-28-94 229 1 13-27-13-37  1- 9-95 230 1 20-263 231 1 20-1 20-1251-20-1256 20-1258-20-1260 20-1265-20-1268 20-1270, 20-1275 20-1301-29-1304  2-13-95 232 1 20-94 243 1 20-1 2 20-290 3       Added 20-693(4) 4       Dltd 20-696(2) 5       Added 20-713(3) 6       Dltd 20-716(2) 7       Added 20-733(3) 8       Dltd 20-736(2) 9       Added 20-753(3) 10       Dltd 20-756(2) 11       Added 20-772(3) 12       Dltd 20-775(2) 13       Added 20-793(3)  2-27-95 233 1 14-65 234 1 1-2 2 1-4 235 1 10-80  3-27-95 236 1 19-20(b) 2 19-45(b), (c)  4-10-95 237 1 7-16(c)(2) 2 7-21 3, 4 7-19(9), (11) 5       Added 7-23  7-24-95 240 1 18-37(a) 2 18-39(f)(7)b., c. 3 18-40(2)f., (4)c. 4 18-41(e) 5       Added 18-57(g) 6 18-58 7 18-60(a)       Added 18-60(i) 18-61(a)(1) 8 20-1 9 20-5 10       Added 20-266 11 20-405(2) 12 20-406(a) 13 20-480(a)(2) 14 20-505(c)(4) 15 20-508(b) 16       Added 20-574(14) 17       Dltd 20-576(1) 18 20-615 20-615(6)c. 19 20-651 20       Dtld 20-693(2) 21 20-812(4) 22 20-905(2)c., d. 23 20-906 24 20-978 25 20-1023 26 20-1183(Tables I, II) 241 1-3 5-86-5-88 4       Added 5-89 5-8 5-103-5-106 9       Added 5-107 11-13-95 245 1 2-32  3-11-96 247 1       Added 20-773(6), (7) 2 20-1 3       Added 20-295 4 5-16 5       Added 5-18.1 248 1 20-1 2 20-257  4- 8-96 249 1 20-1 2 20-1400 3 20-1401(a) 250 1 18-61(a)(5) 2, 3 20-1176(b), (f) 251 1 20-482 252 1 20-1255(9)a. 2 20-1301(2) 3 20-1  6-24-96 254 1       Added 14-69  7-22-96 255 1 18-61(a)(5) 2 20-1018 3       Added 20-1019(c)  8-26-96 256 1 10-128(c)  9- 9-96 257 1 9-16 2 9-18 3 9-20 4 9-23 5 9-25 11-12-96 259 1       Added 20-1500-20-1521 2 20-1 3 20-256 4 20-287 5       Dltd 20-574(7) 6       Dltd 20-814(2) 7 20-572(9) 8 20-574(15) 9 20-592(8) 10 20-594(5) 11 20-612(7) 12 20-614(4) 13 20-632(8) 14 20-634(5) 15 20-652(5) 16 20-654(6) 17 20-672(4) 18 20-674(8) 19 20-681(4) 20 20-683(7) 21 20-712(22) 22 20-714(10) 23 20-771.1(5) 24 20-733(8) 25 20-792(15) 26 20-794(2) 27 20-812(13) 28 20-814(15)  1-27-97 260 1       Added 20-407(c), (d) 261 1 19-20(b), (c) 2 19-21(a) 3 19-45(b) 4 19-46(a)  3-24-97 263 1 20-415(c) 2       Dltd 20-415(d)  5-12-97 267 1 20-407(c), (d) 268 1 2-68(a)  9- 8-97 273 1       Added 18-41(f)  9-22-97 274 1 20-908 10-13-97 275 1 20-1 2       Added 20-1522  1-26-98 277 1       Added 20-694(7)  3- 9-98 278 1 19-21 2 19-23 3 19-27 4 19-43 5 19-46 6 19-49 7 19-50  4-13-98 279 1 10-107(e)  5-26-98 280 1.1-1.37       Added 7.5-11-7.5-47  6-22-98 282 1       Added 20-796  8-24-98 283 1 9-42 2 9-43 3       Rpld 9-44 4 9-48 5 9-49  7-13-98 285 1       Added 20-265(6) 12-14-98 286 1 18-40(2) 2       Added 18-63(c) 3 20-1 4 20-201 5       Added 20-106(7) 6       Added 20-109(7) 7       Added 20-110(8) 8       Added 20-1551-20-1564  2-18-99 288 1 8-21(d)  2- 8-99 289 1       Rpld 19-66-19-84 1       Added 19-66-19-76  2-22-99 290 1 20-1 2 20-913(c)  4-12-99 291 1       Rpld 10-126-10-128  4-26-99 292 1 20-28 2 20-29 3       Rpld 20-31  8-23-99 294 1 20-265(6)  9-13-99 295 1 10-55(b)  2-14-00 296 1       Added 20-296 2       Added 20-714(11) 3 20-1124(2)b. 4 20-1  2-14-00 297 1       Added 2-3  2-14-00 298 1 2-16(6) 2 2-20, 2-70 9-18, 9-20 9-71, 10-143 10-153, 13-2 19-28  3-13-00 299 1       Rpld 10-16-10-62 10-76-10-87 10-96-10-112       Added 10-16-10-53  5- 8-00 302 1 20-1 2 20-976-20-985  5- 8-00 303 1 20-1 2 20-908(5)f.  6-26-00 304 1 5-16  7-10-00 305 1 5-22 2 14-65  7-24-00 306 1 20-1 2 20-267 3 20-576(9)  7-24-00 307 1 20-906(1)  7-24-00 308 1 13-2(24)  8-14-00 309 1 20-1176(f)(2)c., (3), (6), (7) 10-23-00 311 1 13-38-13-42  3-26-01 314 1 20-1301(3)> 2 20-1303(1) 3 20-1304(2), (3)  3-26-01 315 1 20-109 2 20-505(f) 3 20-508(b)  4-23-01 317 1 7-16(c)(1) 2 7-17(a), (b) 3 7-19 4       Rpld 7-21  4-23-01 318 1 18-62(a) 2 20-94  5-29-01 319 1 20-1  5-29-01 320 1 20-406(a)  5-29-01 321 1 20-1124(1)f. 2 20-1118  6-25-01 322 1 20-481(a)  6-25-01 323 1, 2 12-52, 12-53  7- 9-01 324 1 1-2 2 7-19(11) 3 7-20 4 7-33(3), (4) 5 7-45(9) 6 7.5-12 7 13-2(23) 8 12-7(a) 9 12-31 10 18-1 11 18-37(a), (b) 12 18-40(3) 13 18-41(a) 14 18-57(b) 15 18-57(o) 16 18-57(q) 17 18-57(r) 18 18-60 19 18-61(d)(2) 20 18-63(b) 21 18-78(b)(1)-(3) 22 20-1 23 20-615(3), (6) 24 20-1103  9-24-01 327 1 20-1060-20-1073 10- 8-01 328 1 20-41 10- 2-01 329 1 18-37(a) 2 18-37(c) 11-13-01 330 1 20-1122 12-10-01 332 1 20-575(1) 2 20-595(1)  1-14-02 333 1 2-1  3- 3-02 334A 1 19-24(e)  5-22-02 337 1 10-76-10-82  7-22-02 338>       Added 10-200 10-14-02 340> 1       Added 7-50-7-89 10-14-02 341 1 10-216-10-230  4-14-03 342> l       Added 18-41(g)  6-14-03 344 1       Added 11-6  9- 8-03 345 1       Added 11-2(b)(9) 2 14-63 10-27-03 347 1 2-31 2 2-32 11-10-03 348 1       Added 4-1-4-30 11-24-03 349 1 1-4 2 1-6 3 1-9 4 1-10 5       Added 1-10.5 11-24-03 350 1       Rpld 5-16 2 5-18(b) 3 5-39(a) 4 5-53 5 5-54 6 5-55(a) 7 5-78 8 5-104 9       Rpld 5-107 11-24-03 351 1-3 7-16-7-18 4 7-19(12) 5 7-22 6       Added 7-24 7 7-30 8 7-32 9 7-33(5) 10       Added 7-33(8) 11 7-51(a) 12 7-51(b) 13 7-51(g) 14 7-52 15 7-55(c) 16 7-56(a) 17       Added 7-56(b)(6) 18 7-56(d) 19 7-59(c) 20       Rpld 7-60 21 7-61(b) 22 7-62(g) 23 7-62(h) 24 7-62(i) 25 7-63(n) 26       Added 7-63(r) 27       Rnbd 7-65-7-89       as 7-66-7-90 28       Added 7-65 29 7-66(f) 30 7-68 31 7-70(a) 32 7-72 33 7-74(b) 34 7-76(d) 35 7-79 36 7-80(d) 37 7-81(b) 38 7-82(a) 39 7-86 40 7-87 41 7-88(b) 42 7-90 11-24-03 352 1 7.5-29 2 7.5-61(d) 3 7.5-63(a) 11-24-03 353 1 8-19 2 8-21(f) 3 8-23 4 8-24 5       Added 8-27 11-24-03 354 1       Rpld 15-16-15-19 2 15-20 3       Rpld 15-29 11- 8-03 355 1 1-2 12- 8-03 356 1       Rpld 6-1 2 6-22(c) 3       Added 6-26(g) 4 6-27(b) 5 6-46 6 6-48 7 6-49 8 6-50(1) 9 6-55 10       Rpld 6-56 12- 8-03 357 1       Rpld 9-1 2 Ch. 9, Art. II, title 3 9-19 4 9-20 5-7 9-24-9-26 8-10 9-41-9-43 11       Rpld 9-45 12 9-46 13       Rpld 9-47 14 9-48 15       Rpld 9-49 16       Rpld 9-71 12- 8-03 358 1 10-218 2 10-221 3 10-222 12- 8-03 359 1 12-7(a) 2 12-7(b)(7) 3 12-7(d) 4 12-9(a) 5-7 12-10-12-12 8 12-15 9 12-16 10       Rpld 12-17(a) 11 12-31 12 12-32 13 12-33(7) 14 12-38 15 12-50(a) 16 12-51(a) 12- 8-03 360 1       Rpld 14-16-14-19 2       Rpld 14-56 3 14-58 4       Rpld 14-59 5 14-61 6 14-63 7 14-65(a) 12- 8-03 361 1 17-17 2 17-22(a) 3 17-23 4 17-31 5 17-41 6 17-42 7       Rpld 17-43 8 17-44 9       Added 17-50 12- 8-03 362 1 19-18(b) 2-7 19-20-19-26 8 19-28 9 19-42 10 19-43 11 19-44(b) 12 19-44(c) 13-17 19-45-19-49 18       Added 19-52 19 19-66(c) 20-25 19-67-19-73 26 19-74(a)(1) 27 19-75(2) 28       Added 19-76(4) 29 19-98(a) 30       Rpld 19-126 31 19-30(a)(7)  1-12-04 363 1 2-3 2 2-16 3 2-20 4       Added 2-46.01 5       Added 2-46.03 6       Added 2-46.05 7       Added 2-46.07 8       Added 2-46.09 9       Added 2-46.11 10       Added 2-46.15 11       Added 2-46.17 12 2-56 13       Rpld 2-66-2-71  1-12-04 364 1       Added 20-1554(b) 2       Added 20-1564(b)  1-12-04 365 1 4-30(c)3  1-12-04 366 1  4-30(c)4  1-12-04 367 1 4-30(b)21  1-26-04 368 1 4-30(c)(5) 2       Added 4-45  2-23-04 369 1       Rpld 18-1 2       Rpld 18-37(a) 3 18-37(b) 4 18-39(a) 5 18-39(c) 6 18-39(f)(7)c. 7 18-40(2)f. 8 18-40(4)c. 9 18-41 10 18-56 11 18-57(b) 12 18-78(b)(5) 13 18-79(f)  4-12-04 371 1 10-19(c) 2 10-19(f) 3 10-19(j) 4 10-23 5 10-28 6 10-39 7 10-47(e) 8 10-49(c) 9       Rpld 10-141 10 10-142 11 10-143 12 10-144 13 10-147 14 10-148(e) 15 10-149.2(b) 16 10-151 17 10-152(a) 18 10-228 19 10-219 20       Rpld 10-220  4-12-04 372 1 11-1(a), (b) 2 11-1(g) 3       Rpld 11-2(a) 4 11-2(b) 5 11-2(c) 6 11-2(d) 7 11-2(e) 8 11-4(c) 9       Rpld 11-2(f)  4-12-04 373 1 13-2(a)(1) 2 13-2(c)(1) 3 13-2(c)(22) 4 13-2(c)(23) 5       Rpld 13-28 6       Added 13-50-13-54  4-26-04 374 1 5-18 5-18.1 2       Added 5-18.2  5-10-04 375 1 10-160-10-180  5-10-04 376 1       Rpld 16-1 2 16-2(a) 3 16-33  5-24-04 377 1       Rpld 20-1 2 20-5 3 20-26 4 20-28 5 20-29 6 20-43(b) 7 20-56 8 20-58 9 20-60 10 20-72(b) 11 20-72(d) 12 20-73(b) 13 20-91-20-94 14 20-108 15 20-109 16 20-111 17 20-113 18 20-114 19 20-116(a) 20       Rpld 20-118 21 20-201 22 20-203 23 20-232(7) 24 20-233(a) 25 20-236 26 20-251-20-267 27 20-281-20-312 28       Added 20-320-20-323 29 20-326 30 Ch. 20, Art. V., Div. 2 
title 31 20-346 32 20-367(4) 33 20-377.1(3) 34       Rpld 20-381-20-384 35-44 20-401-20-410 45       Rpld 20-411 46 20-412 47 20-413 48 20-416 49 20-417 50 20-418(a) 51 20-476(a) 52 20-477 53 20-479 54 20-480(a)(3) 55 20-481(a), (b) 56 20-481(e)(1)b. 57 20-481(e)(3) 58 20-482 59 20-483 60 20-486(3) 61 20-501(9) 62 20-502 63 20-503(a)(3) 64 20-504(b), (c) 65 20-505(c) 66 20-505(d) 67 20-505(i) 68 20-505(j) 69 20-506(b) 70 20-508(g)(1) 71 20-508(e)(1) 72 20-517(a) 73       Rpld 20-551-20-570 74 20-572 75 20-575(6) 76 20-576(4) 77 20-592 78 20-594 79 20-595(6) 80 20-612 81 20-615 82 20-631 83 20-635(6) 84 20-637 85       Added 20-640-20-645 86 20-651-20-655 87 20-654 88 20-655(6) 89 20-674 90 20-675(6) 91 20-676 92 20-683 93 20-684(5) 94 20-692 95 20-693 96 20-694 97 20-712 98 20-713 99 20-714 100 20-732 101 20-733 102 20-752, 20-753 103 20-771.1 104 20-772 105 20-773 106 20-775 107 20-792 108 20-793 109 20-812 110 20-813 111 20-814 112 20-904(a)(3) 113 20-905 114 20-908(5)(e) 115 20-908(6) 116 20-909(6) 117 20-909(8) 118 20-913(d), (e) 119 20-919 120       Added 20-962 121 20-978 122 20-1017 123 20-1019 124       Added 20-1025 125 20-1048(a) 126 20-1055 127 20-1065 128 20-1068 129       Added 20-1080 130 20-1101(2) 131 20-1118(a) 132 20-1124(2)(f) 133 20-1124(2)(n) 134 20-1176(f)(2)b. 135 20-1181(b)(6) 136 20-1183(a)(3) 137       Rpld 20-1183, Table I 138 20-1252 139 20-1255(8) 140       Added 20-1255(11) 141 20-1270 142 20-1301 143 20-1302(2) 144 20-1303(2) 145 20-1304(3) 146 20-1304(2) 147 20-1304(3) 148 20-1402 149 20-1403 150       Rpld 20-1450-20-1461       Rpld 20-1461-20-1463 151 20-1462 152 20-1503(b) 153 20-1505 154 20-1508(1) 155 20-1555 156 20-1558 157 20-1559 158 20-1561 159 20-1564  5-24-04 378 1 18-61  6-28-04 380 1       Added 4-15(j) 2       Added 4-15(a)4 11- 8-04 385 1       Added 20-1085-20-1092 12-13-04 386 1       Added 2-4 12-13-04 387 1 4-30(c)(3) 4-30(c)(4) 4-30(c)(5)  1-10-05 388 1 4-45  1-10-05 389 1 18-63  3-14-05 390 1 1-2 2 20-257 3       Added 20-313 4 20-574(9) 5       Added 20-814(14)  3-28-05 391 1 14-61 2 14-68  4-11-05 392 1       Added 18-41(g)  4-25-05 394 1 20-1564  5- 9-05 395 1, 2 1-2 3 10-228(10) 4 13-21 5 13-29 6 18-61(d)(2)a. 7 18-67(a)(9)a.  6-27-05 396 1 10-145 2 10-147 10-148(d) 10-149.2(a)(4)  9-29-05 400 1       Added 2-72-2-78  9-29-05 401 1 6-53  9-29-05 402 1       Added 18-78(b)(14) 10-10-05 404 1 10-19(b) 12-12-05 405 1 1-2 12-12-05 406 1       Added 7-22(m) 12-12-05 407 1 13-52(c) 12-12-05 408 1 4-15(a)1. 2 4-30(b)5. 3 4-30(b)8. 4 4-30(c)3. 5 4-30(c)4. 6 4-30(c)5. 7 4-45  1- 9-06 409 1 20-91 2 20-479(c)(1) 3 20-517(c)(4) 4 20-615(2) 5       Added 20-908(7) 6 20-1122 a. 7 20-1302(2) 8 20-1303(3) 9 20-1304(3)  1-23-06 410 1 18-40(2)g. 2 18-40(4)d. 3 18-41(a)(5) 4 18-57(k) 5       Added 18-57(t) 6 18-57(p)(8) 7       Added 18-60(j) 8 18-61(d)(2) 9 18-79(i) 10 18-79(p)  1-23-06 411 1       Added 4-50 2 19-142  2-13-06 412 1 18-79(d)  2-13-06 413 1 1-2 2 9-44  5- 8-06 418 1 6-49  5-22-06 419 1       Added 6-49(3)(b) 1       Added 6-49(4)  6-26-06 421 10-80(2)  6-12-06 422 1 18-40(4) 2       Added 18-78(b)(14)  6-12-06 423 1 20-58(1) 2 20-72 3 20-73 4 20-645(5)(a)3) 5       Added 20-905(6) 6 20-909(6) 7       Added 20-1019(e) 8 20-1124(2)f.2.(b) 9 20-1255(6) 10       Added 20-1255(9)h. 11 20-1267  7-24-06 424 1 20-1259(2)  9-25-06 427 1-3 1-2  9-25-06 428 1 4-30(c)(2)  9-25-06 429 1       Added 7-27  9-25-06 430 1 13-52  9-25-06 431 1 20-641 2       Rpld 20-1255(2)d. 3       Added 20-1259(2)(h) 4 20-1265(a) 5 20-1265(c)  9-25-06 432 1 18-39(a) 2 18-39(c) 3 18-40(4)d.(1)f) 4 18-39(c) 5 18-57 6 18-61(d) 7 18-78(c) 10-23-06 433 1 13-52 12-11-06 436 1 4-30(c)3. 12-11-06 437 1 18-41(a) 2 4-30(c)5. 3, 4 4-45, 4-50  2-12-07 440 1 1-2  2-12-07 441 1       Added 7-19(20) 2 7-22 3       Added 7-34(4) 4 7-35(b)(12)  2-12-07 442 1 13-2(a)(15)  2-12-07 443 1, 2 18-62(a), (d) 3, 4 18-63(a), (b)  2-12-07 444 1       Added 19-101, 19-102 2       Rpld 19-140-19-148 3       Added 19-140-19-146 4       Added 19-200-19-208  2-12-07 445 1 20-1060(2) 2 20-1061(2) 3 20-1072(a) 4 20-1085(3) 5       Added 20-1408 6, 7 20-1551(a), 20-1552(b) 8 20-1556 9 20-1561(b)  4- 9-07 447 1 10-19(d)  5-14-07 448 1, 2 1-2  5-14-07 449 1       Rpld 20-401-20-418 2       Added 20-401-20-421  5-29-07 451 1 20-5 2 20-258(7) 3 20-695(6)a. 4 20-715(6)a. 5 20-755(5)a. 6 20-774(5)a. 7 20-795(5)a. 8 20-815(5)a. 9 20-904(a)(1) 10 20-1024 11 20-1265(g) 12 20-1462(a), (b) 13 20-1513  7- 9-07 452 1 20-91(a) 2 20-1068 3 20-1122 4 20-1304(1), (2)  7- 9-07 453 1 4-45  7- 9-07 454 1, 2 7-18(a), (b)  8- 2-07 455 1 4-30(c)5.  9-24-07 457 1 7-24  9-24-07 458 1, 2 18-61(a)(1) 3 18-61(d)(2)b.  9-24-07 459 1       Add 20-1255(12) 2 20-1304(2) 12-10-07 461 1 20-1515 12-10-07 462 1 4-30(c)3. 2 4-30(c)5. 3 4-45 4 4-50 6-9-08 464 1 13-24 2 13-26(a) 7-28-08 465 1 11-2 7-28-08 466 1       Added 4-15(j), (k) 7-28-08 467 1 19-28 8-11-08 468 1 20-1255(1) 2 20-1256(1) 3 20-1267 4 20-1302(2) 20-1303(3) 20-1304(3) 5       Added 20-1302(4) 8-25-08 469 1, 2 5-19, 5-20 8-25-08 470 1 7-24 8-25-08 471 1 18-40(4) 2 18-79 8-25-08 472 1 19-144(a)(1)e. 10-13-08 474 1, 2 20-56, 20-57 3 20-109 4 20-231 5       Dltd 20-292 6 20-321 7, 8 20-505(f), (m) 9, 10 20-695(7), (8)e. 11 20-715(8)e. 12 20-755(7)e. 13 20-774(7)e. 14, 15 20-815(7)d., e. 16       Added 20-904(d) 17       Added 20-963 12-8-08 475 1 4-30(a) 2 4-30(c)5. 3 4-45 4 4-50 1-26-09 477 1       Added 20-233(c) 2       Added 20-323(4) 6-22-09 478 1 20-908(5)a. 2 20-908(6) 6-22-09 479 1 20-913(c)(1) 6-22-09 480 1 1-2 2 20-1001(2)-(4)       Dltd 20-1001(7) 8-10-09 481 1 1-2 8-10-09 482 1 20-1259(2) 2       Added 20-1276 3 20-1302(4)c.7., 8. 8-10-09 483 1       Dltd 6-21-6-30 2       Added 20-920 10-12-09 485 1 20-1256 2 20-1267 10-12-09 486 1 20-1400 2, 3 20-1403, 20-1404 11-23-09 487 1       Added 20-741-20-745 11-23-09 488 1       Added 20-502(3) 2 20-503 3       Added 20-509 12-14-09 489 1 4-15(a)3. 2 4-30(c)3. 3 4-30(c)5. 4 4-30(d)1. 5 4-45 6 4-50 6-28-10 506 1, 2 1-2 6-28-10 507 1 20-5 2 20-1119 3 20-1122 4 20-1255(2)b. 5       Added 20-1255(13) 6 20-1267 8-9-10 508 1 10-23 8-9-10 509 1 4-30(c)5. 9-13-10 510 1 20-1255(1)e. 10-11-10 511 1       Dltd 20-312       Added 20-964 11-22-10 512 1 1-2 2       Rpld 20-287(9) 11-22-10 513 1 16-33(2) 11-22-10 514 1, 2 20-732, 20-733 12-13-10 515 1 19-29(b), (c) 2 19-51(b), (c) 3 19-205 12-13-10 516 1 4-45 1-10-11 517 1 4-15(e) 2       Dltd 5-51-5-56       Added 5-51, 5-52 3 5-74(a) 1-10-11 518 1       Dltd 5-76-5-79       Added 5-76-5-85.2 1-10-11 519 1 4-30(c)5. 1-24-11 520 1 4-30(d)2. 5-23-11 522 1 18-57(b) 2, 3 18-57(o), (p) 4, 5 18-57(r), (s) 6 20-407 7 20-505(e) 8 20-1502(b) 5-23-11 523 1       Dltd 19-66-19-76       Added 19-66, 19-67 6-27-11 524 1 7-22 2 18-62 3 19-145 6-27-11 525 1 20-58 7-11-11 526 1       Added 7-100-7-104 8-22-11 527 1 11-2(b) 2       Added 20-298.5 3 20-744 4 20-814 12-12-11 528 1       Rpld 10-216-10-230 12-12-11 529 1 4-30(c)3. 2 4-30(c)5. 3 4-45 4 4-50 5-29-12 533 20-910(7) 20-913(c)(2) 6-25-12 542 1 20-506(b) 2 20-516 3 20-517(c)(3), (4) 4 20-518(a) 6-25-12 543 1 20-73(c) 2       Added 20-490 6-25-12 544 1 20-1267(a)(2) 6-25-12 545 1       Added 20-1256(5)-(8) 10-22-12 574 1 1-2 2 20-652 3       Added 20-965 4 4-30(c)4. 12-10-12 576 1 4-30(c)3. 2 4-30(c)5. 3 4-45 4 4-50 12-10-12 577 1 20-5 3-11-13 578 1       Dltd 9-16-9-26 4-8-13 580 1 5-74 4-8-13 581 1 2-46.11(b) 4-22-13 582 1 2-46.05(b) 5-13-13 583 1       Added 19-68 11-25-13 584 1       Added 10-216-10-223 12-9-13 588 1 4-15(f) 2 4-30(c)3. 3 4-30(c)5. 4 4-45 5 4-50 12-9-13 589 1 19-20(c) 2 19-21(d) 3 19-45(c) 4 19-46(d) 12-9-13 591 1       Rpld Ch. 7.5, §§ 7.5-1-7.5-65  5-12-14 595 1, 2 1-2 3 18-61(a)(1) 4 18-61(d)(2)e. 5 18-61(d)(9) 6 20-904 7 20-908(5) 8 20-909(6)a. 9 20-960  5-27-14 596 1       Rpld 10-145 2, 3 10-146, 10-147 4 10-149 5 10-149.2  7-14-14 598       Rpld 5-75-5-85.2 12- 8-14 600 1       Added 4-16 2       Added 4-30(a)7. 3, 4 4-30(c)(3), (5) 5 4-45 6 4-50 12- 8-14 601 1 2-1  2-23-15 603 1 20-258(7)  6- 8-15 605 1 10-19(f) 12-14-15 610 1 4-15(a)3. 2 4-30(a)3. 3, 4 4-30(c)3., 5. 5 4-45 6 4-50 12-14-15 611 1 1-2 2 7-18(a) 12-14-15 612 1 18-78(b)(11) 2 20-28(b)(2) 3 20-91(a) 4 20-122 5 20-616(1) 6 20-1001(3) 7, 8 20-1117(3), (4) 9 20-1122(2) 10, 11 20-1124(2)r., v.  3-14-16 613 1 7-18(a)  8-22-16 614 1       Added 20-904(f) 10-10-16 615 1 10-19(c) 12-12-16 617 1 4-15(a)3. 2 4-30(a)1. 3, 4 4-30(c)3, 5. 5 4-30(d)1. 6 4-45 7 4-50  1-23-17 618 1 10-19(c) 2       Rpld 10-26(b) 3       Rpld 10-32(f)  2-27-17 619 1 1-2 2 4-30(b)12. 3 18-57(k) 4       Added 18-57(r)(4) 5 20-5 6 20-201 7 20-615(5) 8 20-693(4) 9 20-713(3) 10 20-743 11 20-753(3) 12 20-772(3) 13 20-793(3) 14       Added 20-813(5) 15 20-902 16 20-917 17 20-964 18 20-1122(6)  3-13-17 620 1 4-15(a)3.  5- 8-17 621 1 1-2 2 5-86 3 5-89(a)(3) 4 5-104 5       Added 5-107 6 20-616  7-24-17 626 1 2-20 12-11-17 627 1, 2 4-30(c)(3), (5) 3 4-45 4 4-50 12-11-17 628 1 1-2 2 6-3       Dltd 6-4 3 7-19(12) 4       Added 7-19(21) 5 13-27 13-29-13-35 6 13-52 7       Added 14-70 8 18-40(2)k.2 9 18-57(h) 10, 11 18-57(p)(7), (8) 12       Added 18-57(p)(10) 13 18-57(r)(4) 14 18-60(j) 15 20-109(4)h.4 16 20-109(7)b 17 20-254(a)(4) 18       Added 20-292 19 20-296 20 20-485 21 20-490(a)(3) 22 20-490(b)(3) 23 20-505(e) 24 20-506(e) 25 20-508(c) 26 20-641 27       Added 20-652(7) 28       Added 20-672(5) 29       Added 20-681(5) 30       Added 20-692(15) 31 20-694 32, 33 20-712 34 20-714 35 20-734 36 20-744 37, 38 20-752 39 20-754 40       Added 20-812(14) 41 20-905(6) 42       Added 20-963 43       Added 20-966 44 20-1103 45 20-1072(h) 46 20-1122(6) 47 20-1181(a) 48       Added 20-1124(2)y 49 20-1303(4) 50 20-1408 51 20-1556 12-11-17 629 1       Rpld 17-16-17-23       Added 17-71-17-101  6-11-18 632 1 1-2 2 4-15(a)2 3 10-19(h) 4       Added 10-19(k)-(n) 5 10-53 6       Added 20-314 7 20-712 8 20-714 9 20-732 10 20-734 11 20-752 12 20-754 13 20-793 14 20-812 15 20-814 16       Added 20-967-20-969 17       Added 20-1124(2)z 18       Added 20-1255(14)  6-25-18 633 1 7-19(21) 2 20-109(4)h.4 3 20-615(5) 4       Added 20-921  6-25-18 634 1       Added 4-30(b)22 2       Added 5-120-5-125 3 20-1001 12-10-18 636 1 1-2 2       Dltd 20-326-20-380       Added 20-326-20-390 12-10-18 637 1, 2 4-15(c), (d) 3       Added 4-15(l) 4 4-30(c)3 5 4-30(c)5 6 4-45 7 4-50 8 5-102  3-11-19 639 1       Added 4-30(b)23 2       Added 5-130-5-135 3 20-652(6) 4       Added 20-672(6) 5       Added 20-681(6) 6 20-741-20-745 7 20-912 8 20-1001 9 20-1270  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Minnesota Statutes Annotated. 
M.S. 
section Section  
this Code 10A.14 10-19 14.57-14.69 10-39 16-35 15.73, subd. 3 17-72 16B.59 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. II 16B.59-16B.75 7-18 16B.62, subd. 1       7-17 16B.65, subd. 1       7-16 ch. 18 13-27 18.44-18.61 18-61 18.76-18.88 20-412 18G.01 13-29 18G.04 13-30 18H.02 18-61 ch. 43A.17 2-1 84.81 12-31 84.81 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. II 84.81-84.88 12-32 84.87, 
subd. 1a 12-38 84.87, 
subd. 3 Ch. 12, Art. II ch. 86B 6-46 20-920 86B.201 Ch. 6 86B.313 6-55 86B.315 6-53 86B.501 6-55 ch. 87A 20-298.5 ch. 89 13-27 97.81 11-2 97B.015, 
subd. 1 1-2 ch. 103F 20-326 20-476 103F.221 20-486 103F.612 et seq. 1-2 20-401 20-403 ch. 103G 20-367 103G.005 1-2 103G.245 20-351 20-385 ch. 103H 20-417 115.01, 
subd. 5 1-2 115.01, subd. 22       19-145 115.07 1-2 115.55 20-490 115A.01 et seq. Ch. 16 144.50 1-2 144.56 1-2 144.411 et seq. 10-19 ch. 144A 1-2 144D.025 1-2 ch. 146B 20-732 ch. 152 1-2 152.021 et seq. 1-2 ch. 157 1-2 161.242 1-2 2-72 13-21 168.10 1-2 2-72 13-21 168.011 13-21 ch. 168B 2-75 168B.01 et seq. Ch. 13, Art. II 168B.04, subd. 2 2-72 ch. 169 12-1 12-3 169.01 1-2 12-2 169.04(a)(1) 12-13, 12-14 12-16 169.04(a)(4), (5)       12-10 169.19, 
subd. 1(f) 12-9 169.20, subd. 3       12-10 169.42 11-5 Ch. 16 169.68 13-51 169.69 1-2 13-51 169.87 12-11 169.022 12-3 169.073 20-913 169.693 1-2 13-51 171.02, 
171.03 12-5 211B.045 20-1255 216B.02 17-72 216B.02, subds. 4, 6 17-72 216C.06, 
subd. 14 20-58 ch. 216D 17-74 17-85 216D.01-216D.09 17-79 17-85 17-94 216D.04m subd. 3 17-72 221.81 Ch. 17, Art. III 237.16 17-71 237.47 Ch. 3 237.79 17-71 237.81 17-71 237.162 17-71, 17-72 17-87 237.162, subd. 4 17-72 237.163 17-71, 17-72 17-87 237.163, subd. 6 17-99 ch. 238 17-72 238.086 17-71 ch. 245B 1-2 299F.011 Ch. 9, Art. III 299F.011, subd. 5 9-46 299F.011, subd. 5b 9-46 307.08 1-2 ch. 308A 17-72 326B.37 7-104 ch. 329 10-142 329.095 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. IV ch. 340A 1-2 10-16-10-18 340A.22 1-2 340A.22, subd. 2 10-19 340A.22, subd. 4 10-19 340A.24 10-19 340A.24, subd. 2 1-2 340A.26 10-19 340A.26, subd. 5 10-19 340A.28 1-2 10-19 340A.101 11-4 340A.285 1-2 10-19 340A.301, subd. 6(c) 10-19 340A.301, subd. 6(i), (j) 10-19 340A.404, 
subd. 1 10-19 340A.408 10-21 340A.408, subd. 5       10-22 340A.409 10-19 340A.409, subd. 1       10-23 340A.409, subds. 1-3a 10-19 340A.409, 
subd. 4 10-23 340A.414 10-19 340A.503, subd. 6       10-47 340A.504, 
subd. 3(d) 10-19 340A.801, subd. 1       10-23 ch. 349 10-150 10-153 349.16, subd. 2       10-151 364.03 10-32 364.03, subd. 2 10-149.2 364.03, subd. 3 10-149.2 364.06 10-27 412.151 2-19 412.221, subd. 6       Ch. 17 Ch. 19, Art. III 412.221, subd. 9       Ch. 8 412.221, 
subd. 11 Ch. 19, Art. II 412.221, 
subd. 17 Ch. 9 412.221, 
subd. 19 Ch. 10, Art. IV 412.221, 
subd. 21 Ch. 5 412.221, 
subd. 22 Ch. 19, Art. III 412.221, 
subd. 23 Ch. 13 412.221, 
subd. 31 Ch. 19, Art. II, 
Ch. 19, Art. III 19-19 19-41 412.231 1-9 412.491 Ch. 14 412.541 et seq. Ch. 2 412.601 et seq. Ch. 2 412.621(2) Ch. 2, Art. IV 412.671 Ch. 2, Art. II 412.691 Ch. 2, Art. III 412.701 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 415.11 2-1 415.021 1-1 ch. 429 13-35 17-92 429.021, subd. 1       Ch. 14 429.101 13-26 17-50 429.101, subd. 1       2-31 7-58 429.101, 
subd. 1(C) 18-57 437.02 Ch. 10, Art. IV 444.075 Ch. 19, Art. II, 
Ch. 19, Art. III 19-200 ch. 453 17-72 ch. 453A 17-72 ch. 462 1-2 17-92 20-326 20-476 462.12 et seq. Ch. 20 462.351 et seq. Ch. 15 462.351-462.364 15-20 462.354 2-46.07 462.354, 
subd. 2 20-28 462.357, 
subds. 3, 4 Ch. 20, Art. II, 
Div. 2 462.357, 
subd. 6 20-28, 20-29 462.358 Ch. 18 462.359 20-28 462.3593 20-904 462.3593, subd. 9 20-904 462.3595 Ch. 20, Art. IV 20-351 20-368 20-574 20-594 20-614 20-634 20-644 20-654 20-674 20-683 20-694 20-714 20-734 20-754 20-773 20-794 20-814 462C.01- 
462C.08 2-56 463.15 et seq. 7-57 463.251 7-57 469.003 Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 469.174, subd. 11 11-6 469.1761 11-6 471.15 et seq. Ch. 14 471.62 9-43 12-1 12-32 471.633 11-2 505.01 et seq. Ch. 18 609.034 1-9 609.321 10-163 609.322 10-163 609.322, 
subd. 1(3) 10-163 609.324 10-163 609.341, 
subd. 11(b) 10-168 609.342-609.345 10-163 609.365 10-163 617.23 10-163 617.241 10-163 617.246, 
617.247 10-163 617.293, 
617.294 10-163 624.20- 
624.25 10-76 645.13- 
645.151 1-3 645.35, 
645.36 1-8 645.44, subd. 8a       1-2 645.49 1-4 645.001 et seq. 1-2 1144.411-1144.417 20-904  
