
Columbia Heights, MN Code of Ordinances


CITY OF COLUMBIA HEIGHTS, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-15 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 1654, passed 2-25-19










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Telephone: (800) 445-5588
Internet : www.amlegal.com




CHAPTER 1:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Article



      I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



ARTICLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   1.101   Title of code



   1.102   Rules of interpretation



   1.103   Application to future ordinances



   1.104   Captions



   1.105   Definitions



   1.106   Severability



   1.107   Reference to other sections



   1.108   Reference to offices



   1.109   Errors and omissions



   1.110   Official time



   1.111   Reasonable time



   1.112   Ordinances repealed



   1.113   Ordinances unaffected



   1.114   Effective date of ordinances



   1.115   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   1.116   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   1.117   Section histories; statutory references



   1.118   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   1.119   Copies of code



 



   1.999   General penalty



§ 1.101  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Columbia Heights
shall be designated as the Code of Columbia Heights, Minnesota, and may be so
cited.



§ 1.102  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Generally.  Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or
implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and
application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.



   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation.  The construction of all
ordinances of this municipality shall be by the following rules, unless such
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of
the context of the same ordinance:



      (1)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other
as if written “and/or,” whenever the context requires.



      (2)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute, code provisions or
ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as
well may do as the principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of such act by an authorized agent or deputy.



      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting
the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter
genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense
shall include the future, if applicable.



      (4)   General term.  A general term following specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited.



§ 1.103  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Chapter 1 compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 1.104  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the chapter,
article, and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and
shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 1.105  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. The definitions of CITY CLERK, CLERK and TREASURER shall
apply to all sections of the code that reference City Clerk-Treasurer.



      CHARTER.  The Charter of the City of Columbia Heights.



      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY.  The City of
Columbia Heights, Minnesota, and all the territory lying within its
boundaries over which it has jurisdiction.



      CITY CLERK.  The Columbia Heights City Clerk.



      CLERK. The Columbia Heights Licensing Clerk.



      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code
as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new chapters, articles,
or sections.



      COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Columbia Heights.



      COUNTY.  Anoka County, Minnesota.



      HEALTH AUTHORITY or HEALTH OFFICER.  Anoka County Health
Department.



      MANAGER.  The Columbia Heights City Manager.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MAYOR.  The Mayor of the City of Columbia Heights.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR
and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.  All terms
shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an individual
authorized by state law.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission, or department of this municipality
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons,
firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or
WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents
thereof.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



      TREASURER. The Columbia Heights Finance Director.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



(`77 Code, § 1.201)  (Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



§ 1.106  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 1.107  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 1.108  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 1.109  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and
such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of such error.



§ 1.110  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of
all municipal business.



§ 1.111  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 1.112  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 1.113  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 1.114  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body shall take effect 30 days
after the second reading of the ordinance, unless otherwise expressly
provided.



§ 1.115  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 1.116  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 1.117  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section.



   Example:   (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-70; Am.
Ord. passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.



   Example:   (M.S. § 609.034)  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord.
passed 1-1-85)



      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information.



   Example:



      § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



      Statutory reference:
         For provisions concerning the inspection of public records,
see M.S. §§ 138.163 et seq.



§ 1.118  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.  The liabilities, proceedings and  rights are continued; punishments,
penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had
not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway right-of-ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted,
the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of
corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 1.119  COPIES OF CODE.



   Copies of this code shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk for
public inspection and sale for a reasonable charge.



(Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



§ 1.999  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or both.  In either case, the costs of
prosecution may be added.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (B)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is
specifically provided for such failure.



(Am. Ord. 1461, passed 10-13-03)



Statutory reference:
   Ordinance violations and penalties, see M.S. §§ 412.231 and 609.034



CHAPTER 2:  LEGISLATIVE PROCESS



   Article



      I.   ELECTED OFFICIALS



      II.   ORDINANCE ENACTMENTS



      III.   COUNCIL RULES AND PROCEDURES



ARTICLE I:  ELECTED OFFICIALS



Section



   2.101   Elections



   2.102   Salaries



§ 2.101  ELECTIONS.



   (A)   The municipal election day for the city shall be the first
Tuesday after the first Monday in November of every even-numbered year.



   (B)   Persons who are elected to municipal offices on that date
shall assume the duties at the time of the first regularly scheduled Council
meeting in January following a regular municipal election.



   (C)   The four-year term of office for Council members shall be
staggered so that the offices of no more than two Council members will be on
the ballot for each municipal election.  Provided, however, that if a
vacancy exists on the Council, the city shall forthwith appoint an eligible
person to fill the same until the next regular municipal election, when the
office shall be filled for the unexpired term, and that such office may be on
the ballot in addition to the two offices provided for herein.



   (D)   The primary election date shall be held on the date
established by Minnesota state law.



   (E)   Elected officials shall be considered “employees” for
worker's compensation purposes.



(`77 Code, § 2.101)  (Am. Ord. 1214, passed 12-26-90; Am. Ord. 1260, passed
3-8-93; Am. Ord. 1580, passed 4-26-10)



§ 2.102  SALARIES.



   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of M.S. § 415.11, as it may be
amended from time to time, effective January 1, 2009, the salary of each
Council member shall be $7,800 per year, payable at the rate of $650 per
month, and the salary of the Mayor shall be $13,800 per year, payable at the
rate of $1,150 per month.



   (B)   Each Council member and the Mayor shall have such option as is
allowed by state law to become members of and participate in the Public
Employees Retirement Association (PERA).  Upon a Council member or Mayor
exercising such option to become a member, the city shall pay the employer's
share as required by law, and the Council member or Mayor so electing
membership shall have deducted from his salary the employee's share as is
provided by law.  Upon becoming eligible to do so under state law, each
Council member or the Mayor shall have the option to purchase such prior
service credit as is allowable by statute by paying the employee's share as
provided by state law.  Upon such payment to purchase prior service credit
by a Council member or Mayor, the city shall pay to the Association a
matching amount as provided by state law.



(`77 Code, § 2.102)  (Am. Ord. 980, passed 9-29-81; Am. Ord. 1155, passed
9-28-87; Am. Ord. 1268, passed 6-28-93; Am. Ord. 1545, passed 5-27-08)



ARTICLE II:  ORDINANCE ENACTMENTS



Section



   2.201   Index of ordinances



§ 2.201  INDEX OF ORDINANCES.



   An index of all ordinances hereafter adopted by the Council shall be
maintained by the City Clerk.  The index shall include the ordinance number,
whether the ordinance is general or special, and where applicable, the
provision of this code that is modified, deleted, or added to by said
ordinances.



(`77 Code, § 2.202) (Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



ARTICLE III:  COUNCIL RULES AND PROCEDURES



Section



   2.301   Regular meetings



§ 2.301  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   (A)   The first regular meeting of a newly elected Council following
a regular municipal election shall be on the second Monday in January. 
Regular meetings shall be held the second and fourth Mondays of each month,
which are not holidays.  Regular meetings shall be adjourned from time to
time.  Any regular meeting which would fall on a legal holiday shall be held
on the Tuesday following such legal holiday.  The Council may vary this
meeting schedule by resolution and may set such special meetings in the form
and manner prescribed by Charter.



   (B)   At the first regular meeting of the Council in January,
following a regular municipal election, the Council shall choose from amongst
their number, a Council President, who shall be their chairperson in the
absence of the Mayor.  At such meeting, the Council shall appoint from
amongst their number the liaisons to the various boards and commissions as
provided by this code.



(`77 Code, § 2.301)



CHAPTER 3:  ADMINISTRATIVE CODE



   Article



      I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      II.   ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS AND OFFICES



      III.   APPOINTED COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS



      IV.   PERSONNEL POLICIES



      V.   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES



ARTICLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   3.101   City organization



   3.102   City Manager



   3.103   Employee responsibilities



   3.104   Organization of commissions and boards



§ 3.101  CITY ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The city government shall consist of the elective offices
established by Charter, the administrative service, and citizen commissions
and boards as are hereinafter established by the Council.



   (B)   The administrative service of the city shall be divided into
divisions, departments, and offices as are hereinafter established by the
Council.  The City Manager shall have overall control and responsibility for
the administration of all divisions and departments of the administrative
service, except as is otherwise provided by the Charter and ordinances of the
city.



   (C)   (1)   The appointive citizens' commissions and boards shall
serve as a liaison between the Council and the administrative service to
provide advice and guidance concerning government operations.



      (2)   Where prescribed by the laws of the State of Minnesota,
or by an ordinance of the city, a commission or board shall have the
authority to conduct public hearings and make findings and recommendations
thereon, and to conduct such further activities as are determined appropriate.



(`77 Code, § 3.101)



§ 3.102  CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   For effective management of administrative functions and
operations, the Manager shall:



      (1)   Prescribe administrative rules and regulations essential
to the accomplishment of the services desired by the Council;



      (2)   Maintain the efficiency and economy of city operations
entrusted to the administrative service, and determine the methods, means,
and personnel by which such operations are to be conducted;



      (3)   Exercise discretion in the operation of the
administrative service, the budget, administrative organization, assignment
of personnel, and the technology of work performance, as may be allowed by
law;



      (4)   Take all necessary action to carry out the objectives of
the Council in an emergency situation, as may be allowed by law.



   (B)   The Manager shall hire, promote, transfer, assign or retain
employees, and may suspend, demote, dismiss or take other disciplinary action
against employees, subject to the provisions of division (C) of this
section.  He may relieve employees of duties because of a lack of work or
lack of funds.



   (C)   The Manager shall not exercise any of his powers under this
section in a manner that is inconsistent with M.S. Chapters 197, 419 or 420,
as they may be amended from time to time, or contrary to the provisions of
the Charter, ordinances, resolutions, or personnel policies of the city.



   (D)   The Manager shall prepare and supervise the operation of the
budget according to the provisions of the Charter.  He shall act as chief
purchasing agent for the city as provided by Charter and M.S. § 471.345
(Uniform Municipal Contracting Law), as it may be amended from time to
time.  The Manager shall act as chief purchasing agent of the city and make
all purchases and contracts subject to the approval of the Council as may be
prescribed by City Charter.  The Manager shall manage the capital assets of
the city.



   (E)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting
division heads or department heads from establishing additional work rules
and procedures, consistent with enactments of the Council and rules
promulgated by the Manager.



   (F)   The City Manager is authorized to issue a citation in lieu of
arrest or continued detention to persons violating the following sections of
this code, to wit:



      (1)   Chapter 5, Commercial Licensing.



      (2)   Chapter 8, Article II, Public Nuisances.



      (3)   Chapter 5A, Housing Maintenance Code.



      (4)   Chapter 8, Article III, Garbage and Rubbish.



      (5)   Chapter 8, Article V, Public Safety.



      (6)   Section10.204, Depositing of Snow, Leaves or Grass in
Traveled Areas.



      (7)   Chapter 9, Article I, Zoning Code.



(`77 Code, § 3.102)  (Am. Ord. 1193, passed 11-27-89; Am. Ord. 1195, passed
11-27-89; Am. Ord. 1196, passed 11-27-89)



§ 3.103  EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   Division heads and other officers shall be responsible to the
Manager for the effective administration of their respective divisions or
departments, and for performance of all tasks delegated to them by the
Manager.  Division heads and other officers shall submit reports of
departmental activities and plans as required by the Manager.  Division
heads shall establish and maintain a system of records in sufficient detail
to furnish all information necessary for proper administrative and budgetary
control of departmental activities.



   (B)   Division heads and other officers whose functions include
recommending, preparing plans for, or constructing public works shall, at
least three months before the end of each fiscal year, submit to the Planning
and Zoning Commission a list of the proposed public works projects
recommended by such officer or department head for planning, initiation or
construction during the ensuing fiscal year.



   (C)   Division heads, officers, and employees of the city shall be
responsible for the performance of all duties and functions assigned or
delegated to their office or employment position, including appropriate
enforcement of the laws of the State of Minnesota and ordinances of the city.



(`77 Code, § 3.103)



§ 3.104  ORGANIZATION OF COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS.



   (A)   Members of advisory commissions and boards shall be appointed
by majority vote of the Council and serve without compensation, except as
otherwise provided.



      (1)   All commission and board members serving in office at
the time of enactment of this code shall continue for their full term of
office pursuant to the provisions of the previous enactments of the Council
establishing said terms.  Subsequent terms of office shall commence in
April, except where otherwise provided.



      (2)   Any vacancy arising because of disqualification,
resignation, or other reason, prior to the expiration of a term of office,
shall be filled by appointment of the Council for the remainder of the
unexpired term.



      (3)   All commission and board members shall serve for the
prescribed terms of office at the pleasure of the Council.  Should a
member's term expire without the Council having appointed a successor, such
member may remain in office until such time as a successor is appointed.



   (B)   Each commission or board shall annually elect a Chairperson
from among the appointed members.  A secretary and such additional officers
may be designated as are appropriate.  Rules and procedures for the conduct
of meetings shall be formulated.



      (1)   A simple majority shall constitute a quorum.  Ex
officio members shall not be considered in determining whether a quorum
exists, and shall not be entitled to vote.



      (2)   Minutes and records of meetings and public hearings
shall be made and copies forwarded to the Council, Mayor and the Manager.



   (C)   The Manager may, and upon direction of the Council shall,
designate a member of the administrative service to serve as an
administrative advisor to any commission or board.



(`77 Code, § 3.104)  (Am. Ord. 987, passed 1-25-82)



ARTICLE II:  ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS AND OFFICES



Section



   3.201   Public Works Department



   3.202   Fire Department



   3.203   Police Department



   3.204   Finance Department



   3.205   City Attorney



   3.206   Community Development Department



   3.207   Library Director



   3.208   City Clerk



§ 3.201  PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   The Department of Public Works is hereby created.  The
Department shall consist of the office of Director of Public Works, Assistant
City Engineer, Public Works Superintendent, and such other internal
administrative positions as are necessary and appropriate.



   (B)   The Director of Public Works shall administer the Department
and supervise all officers and employees thereof.



   (C)   The Director of Public Works shall have advisory control and
responsibility for construction or extension of any public way, street,
sidewalk, or alley and the gutters and drains attached thereto; watermain,
storm or sanitary sewer, and appurtenances thereto; the street lighting
system; the traffic control system; or any other capital improvement project
designated by the Council.



   (D)   The Director of Public Works shall have charge of and be
responsible for the care, maintenance and operation of the city water
distribution system, sanitary sewer system and disposal plant, the street
lighting system, public streets and sidewalks, curbs, gutters and storm
sewers, the traffic control system, the snow removal program, and the tree
inspection, trimming and disposal program.



   (E)   The Director of Public Works shall supervise all real and
personal property of the city not otherwise assigned to the control of
another department or officer.



   (F)   The Public Works Superintendent shall act as ex-officio City
Forester and coordinate a city program for the control and prevention of tree
diseases with the State Commissioner of Agriculture.



      (1)   The City Forester shall recommend to the Council the
details of a tree disease program in compliance with the provisions of state
law and regulations of the State Commissioner of Agriculture.



      (2)   The City Forester shall supervise the tree inspectors to
ensure that the objectives of the city program and the requirements of state
law are carried out.



      (3)   The City Forester and certified tree inspectors shall
have the authority provided by law to inspect all premises and places within
the city as often as required or necessary to determine the condition of
trees located on such property.



      (4)   The City Forester or the certified tree inspectors shall
take such remedial action as is provided by regulations of the State
Commissioner of Agriculture or by the Council whenever a diseased tree is
identified, as provided in this code.



   (G)   The Public Works Director is authorized to issue a citation in
lieu of arrest or continued detention to persons violating the following
sections of this code, to wit:



      (1)   Section 6.301, Right-of-Way Management.



      (2)   Section 8.204, Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and
Safety



(`77 Code, § 3.201)  (Ord. 1160, passed 3-28-88)



§ 3.202  FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   The Fire Department is hereby created.  The Fire Chief shall
administer the Fire Department, which shall include such other members as are
appointed in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Minnesota, and
the Charter and ordinances of the city.



   (B)   The function and duty of the Fire Department and every member
thereof, shall be to extinguish accidental or destructive fires and to
prevent the occurrence or spread of such fires and to provide emergency
medical service.  The Department and its members shall perform additional
duties to protect the health and safety of any endangered person and to
prevent the loss of property, at the scene of a fire or otherwise.



   (C)   The Fire Chief shall ensure that the department responds to
such fires and other emergencies as is advisable; and upon arriving at the
scene of any emergency he shall assume full command of Fire Department
personnel.  He shall further establish a chain of command for Fire
Department personnel at the scene of a fire or other emergency.



   (D)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the proper training
and discipline of all members of the Department.  He shall conduct training
drills as are necessary to provide instruction in approved methods of fire
fighting, fire prevention and rescue techniques.



   (E)   The Fire Chief shall have control and custody of all fire
equipment and apparatus belonging to the city and shall cause all necessary
repairs to be made thereto.



   (F)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the maintenance of a
record of all fires.  Such a record shall include the date and time of
alarm, location of fire, cause of fire if known, type and use of building,
name of owner and tenants, and the estimated value of the building and its
contents.  The record shall also indicate the identity of members of the
Department responding to the alarm, and such other information as may be
appropriate or required by the proper authority.



   (G)   The Fire Chief shall enforce the laws of the State of
Minnesota, all federal and state codes, and ordinances of the city relating
to fire prevention; investigate the cause of fires and alarms, and promote
fire safety.



   (H)   A Fire Department Volunteer Force is hereby established
consisting of paid-on-call members.  Members of the Fire Department
Volunteer Force shall be subject to normal administrative supervision and
control of the Fire Chief, while exercising their duties.



   (I)   The Fire Chief shall carry out any mutual fire aid program
that is contracted by the Mayor and Manager pursuant to action of the Council.



      (1)   A mutual fire aid program shall be defined as a plan,
program or agreement providing that participating fire protection
organizations agree to come to one another's assistance in case of fire or
other disaster beyond the capabilities of the fire protection organization
that has primary geographic responsibility for handling said fire or disaster.



      (2)   A fire protection organization shall be defined as any
governmental unit providing fire protection services within its boundaries,
or other incorporated or unincorporated organization providing fire
protection services, which has the power and authority to enter into a mutual
fire aid program.



      (3)   Assistance may be rendered directly at the scene of the
fire or disaster or indirectly by providing standby equipment and personnel
to handle other emergencies that may arise.



      (4)   The terms of any mutual fire aid program shall not bind
or obligate the city to furnish fire fighting equipment or personnel for use
outside the boundaries of Columbia Heights to such a degree that in the
judgment of the Columbia Heights Fire Chief the safety and general welfare of
the persons and property situated in the city is jeopardized.



      (5)   The city shall not be obligated under the provisions of
any mutual aid program to expend funds to any participating fire protection
organization, unless otherwise authorized by enactment of the Council.



   (J)   The member of the Fire Department in command at any fire shall
have the authority to order any member of the Department to enter any
premises and remove property whenever it is necessary for the preservation of
such property from fire, to prevent the spreading of fire, or to protect
adjoining property.



   (K)   The member of the Fire Department in command at any fire shall
have the authority to demolish any building or structure under circumstances
of absolute necessity to prevent a conflagration or check the progress of the
fire.



   (L)   The Fire Chief shall oversee all aspects of the Housing
Maintenance Code and inspections pertain to same.



   (M)   The Fire Chief is authorized to issue a citation in lieu of
arrest or continued detention to persons violating the following sections of
this code, to wit:



      (1)   Chapter 8, Article IV, Fire Safety.



      (2)   Section 8.204, Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and
Safety.



      (3)   Chapter 5A, Housing Maintenance Code.



(`77 Code, § 3.202)  (Ord. 1160, passed 3-28-88)



§ 3.203  POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   A Police Department is hereby created which shall consist of
the Chief of Police and such other members as are appointed in the manner
provided by the laws of the State of Minnesota and the Charter and ordinances
of the city.



   (B)   The Police Department shall enforce the ordinances of the city
and laws of the State of Minnesota within its jurisdiction, prevent
infractions of the law, protect the life, safety, and property of the
citizens of Columbia Heights and preserve the general peace and good order of
the city.



   (C)   The Police Department shall be under the direct administrative
supervision and control of the Mayor and subject to the jurisdiction of the
Joint Police and Fire Civil Service Commission, as thereinafter established.



   (D)   (1)   The Chief of Police shall have supervision and
control of all subordinate officers and members of the Department, subject to
the authority of the Mayor.  The Chief shall be guided by rules and
regulations promulgated by the Mayor governing the administration and
operation of the Department and the conduct of all members assigned thereto.



      (2)   The Chief shall ensure that all members of the
Department are properly instructed in all relevant aspects of the law and
trained in the proper techniques and methods to carry out such duties as they
may be properly assigned.



   (E)   (1)   Every member of the Police Department shall conduct
himself in a proper and law-abiding manner at all times.  Each member shall
abide by all lawful orders and directions of superiors.



      (2)   Every police officer shall appear as a witness in a
prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any state or federal law
when so requested by the prosecuting attorney, unless excused from such duty
by the Chief of Police.  No officer appearing as a witness pursuant to this
section shall retain any witness fee for service as a witness, and any fee
shall be deposited with the City Treasurer.  The aforementioned provisions
shall in no way affect the manner of determining employee compensation and
the amount thereof payable to officers for appearances made pursuant to this
section.



      (3)   Every officer shall upon reasonable request provide his
personal identification by name, badge number, or official identification
number, unless assigned to duties that require concealment of the identity of
the officer.



   (F)   The Police Department shall have the authority to impound
vehicles under such circumstances and in the manner prescribed by Chapter 7,
Article III of this code.



   (G)   Persons hired as community service officers in the Police
Department are authorized to issue a citation in lieu of arrest or continued
detention to persons violating the following sections of this code and the
Minnesota Statutes, as they may be amended from time to time, to wit:



      (1)   Section 7.202(B), Overtime Parking in Public Parking
Areas.



      (2)   Section 7.202(C), Loading Zones.



      (3)   Section 7.202(D), Bus Stops and Taxi Stands.



      (4)   Section 7.202(E), Metered Parking Areas.



      (5)   Section 7.202(F), Boulevard Parking.



      (6)   Section 7.202(F)(3)(c), Violation of a Boulevard Parking
Permit.



      (7)   Section 7.202(I), Handicap Parking.



      (8)   Section 7.203(A), Temporary or Emergency No Parking
(parades, and the like).



      (9)   Section 7.205(A), Six-hour Maximum Parking.



      (10)   Section 7.205(B), Parking in a Traffic Lane or in an
Alley.



      (11)   Section 7.205(C), Abandoned Vehicle.



      (12)   Section 7.205(D), Fire Lanes or Other Parking
Violations on Private Property.



      (13)   Section 7.205(G), Junk Vehicles.



      (14)   Section 7.205(K), Obstruct Traffic in a Private Parking
Lot.



      (15)   Section 7.205(L), Overtime Parking in a Private Parking
Lot.



      (16)   Section 7.205(M), No Parking 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.



      (17)   Section 7.205(N), No Parking April 1 to May 1 when 3
1/2 inches or more of snow on the street.



      (18)   Section 7.401(A), Bicycle Registration.



      (19)   Section 7.402(B), Bicycle Lights and Reflectors.



      (20)   Section 7.402(C), Miscellaneous Bicycle Violations.



      (21)   Chapter 8, Article I, Animal Violations.



      (22)   Section 8.204(R), Unauthorized Signs in the public
right-of-way.



      (23)   Section 7.205(G), Junk Vehicles.



      (24)   Section 7.401(C), Bicycle Impound.



      (25)   Section 10.201(A), Parking in a Park 11:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.



      (26)   Section 10.201(L), Pets on Leash when in City Park.



      (27)   M.S. § 169.34, Miscellaneous Parking Violations.



      (28)   M.S. § 169.346, Handicap Parking.



      (29)   M.S. § 169.34, Parallel Curb Parking.



      (30)   M.S. § 169.222, Operation of Bicycles.



      (31)   M.S. § 346.57(1), Animal in Motor Vehicles, Endangered.



      (32)   M.S. § 346.57(2), Animal in Motor Vehicle May Be
Removed.



      (33)   M.S. Chapter 343, Animal Cruelty.



      (34)   M.S. § 609.675, Refrigerator, Exposure of
Unused/Unsafe.



      (35)   M.S. § 115A.916, Used Oil Land Disposal.



      (36)   M.S. § 168.03, Abandoned Motor Vehicle.



      (37)   M.S. § 168.09, Expired License Plates.



      (38)   Section 5A.207(C)(1), Park on Landscaped Area.



      (39)   M.S. § 169.35(1), Parked More than 12 Inches from Curb.



      (40)   Section 7.204(H), Parked Over Weight 15,000 lbs.



      (41)   Section 8.301(G), Garbage and Rubbish.



      (42)   Section 8.204(D), Noise and Odors.



      (43)   Section 5A.207(G), Outside Storage of Materials.



      (44)   Section 5.607(B), Too Many Animals (No Kennel License).



      (45)   M.S. § 169.041, Tow Authority.



      (46)   7.301(A)(2), Tow Authority, Abandoned.



      (47)   Section 7.301(A)(3), Tow Authority, Fire Lane or
Hydrant.



      (48)   Section 7.301(A)(1), Tow Authority, Snow.



      (49)   M.S. § 169.35, Parked Wrong Side of Street.



   (H)   (1)   The Chief of Police is authorized to administer the
disposal of property lawfully coming into the possession of the city and
remaining unclaimed by the owner after 60 days.  The property may be used by
the city for its own purposes, or, sold to the highest bidder at a public
auction, or, if determined by the Chief of Police to have not value,
destroyed.



      (2)   A notice specifying the date, time, and place of any
auction or sale shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation
throughout the city at least one week prior to such auction or sale.



      (3)   The new proceeds of the auction or sale shall be placed
in the city's General Fund, subject to the right of the former owner to
payment of the new proceeds upon application and presentation of satisfactory
proof of ownership within six months of sale.  Net proceeds means the sale
price less all costs of handling, publishing, storage or sale of the item. 
The city may, at its discretion, bill the owner for any costs that exceed the
revenues derived from the disposal.



(`77 Code, § 3.203)  (Ord. 1160, passed 3-28-88; Am. Ord. 1282, passed
2-28-94; Am. Ord. 1433, passed 7-23-01; Am. Ord. 1454, passed 3-24-03)



§ 3.204  FINANCE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   The Finance Director also serves as the Treasurer. The Finance
Department shall keep records and accounts of all money received or expended
on behalf of the city, indicating the source and disposition thereof, and he
shall ensure that all monies belonging to the city are properly deposited in
the designated depository bank.



   (B)   (1)   The Finance Department shall be the custodian of all
documents and records accessible to the public and shall maintain an
appropriate system of indexing and storing said documents and records.



      (2)   The Finance Department shall seal and attest all
contracts, licenses, permits, and such other documents of the city as require
this formality.



      (3)   The Finance Department shall perform such other duties
and functions as may be required by law, by enactment of the Council, or as
may be designated by the Manager.



      (4)   The Finance Department shall maintain financial records
in accordance with the Governmental Accounting Standards Board.



   (C)   The Finance Department shall give bond to the city as may be
required by the Charter, and provided by the Council.



   (D)   Municipal liquor store operations as authorized by § 4.501
shall be administered under the Finance Department by a liquor operations
manager.



(`77 Code, § 3.204) (Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



§ 3.205  CITY ATTORNEY.



   (A)   The position of City Attorney is herein established.  The
City Attorney shall be appointed by the Manager to render legal services to
the city as may be required by the Manager, including but not limited to the
following services:



      (1)   The City Attorney shall serve as chief legal advisor on
city affairs to the Manager.  Upon request of the Mayor, any Council member,
or the Manager, a legal opinion shall be presented in writing unless a
majority of the Council directs otherwise.



      (2)   The City Attorney shall handle all legal matters
relating to assessments and condemnation proceedings.



      (3)   The City Attorney shall supervise the drafting of
contracts, leases, and ordinances involving the city.



      (4)   The City Attorney shall see to the enforcement of
judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the city.



      (5)   The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all suits
and actions at law or equity to which the city may be a party or may be
interested and shall represent the city in all litigation except as otherwise
directed.



      (6)   The City Attorney shall serve as legal advisor to the
Police Department.



      (7)   The City Attorney shall attend all Council and Planning
and Zoning Commission meetings upon request.



   (B)   The City Attorney shall have the right to employ such
assistants as the Attorney shall designate, subject to the financial
restrictions of this code, Minnesota law, and the Charter.



   (C)   Should a conflict or potential conflict of interest occur
between representation of the interests of the city and representation of the
interests of the Mayor, any Council member, or Manager, the City Manager may
upon advice of the City Attorney employ a Special Assistant City Attorney for
any legitimate purpose relating to such conflict.



(`77 Code, § 3.205)



§ 3.206  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   The Community Development Department is hereby created.  The
Department shall consist of the office of City Building Official, City
Planner, and such other internal administrative positions as are necessary
and appropriate.



   (B)   The Community Development Director shall administer the
Department and supervise all officers and employees thereof.



   (C)   The Community Development Director shall have supervisory
control and responsibility for all building inspections within the city; the
enforcement of all applicable codes and regulations relating thereto; and the
issuance or denial of all permits relating to building within the city and
the collection of all fees relating thereto; the issuance or denial of all
licenses and permits that are authorized and approved in a manner prescribed
by ordinance; and the establishment of records of all licenses and permits
issued and payments thereon.



   (D)   The Community Development Director shall have supervisory
control and responsibility for all matters of city involvement affecting
physical growth and development within the city including planning,
development, redevelopment, and hazardous building act enforcement.



   (E)   The City Planner shall have advisory responsibility on all
matters affecting physical growth and development in the city.  The City
Planner shall also submit recommendations regarding proposed zoning
enactments and such other proposals as are referred to him for advice.  In
making his recommendations, the City Planner shall coordinate all individual
projects and programs to ensure harmonious and integrated planning for the
city.



   (F)   The Building Official shall enforce and ensure compliance with
all applicable laws of the State of Minnesota, and ordinances of the city
prescribing standards for construction and maintenance of buildings, the
zoning code, and ordinances concerning the maintenance of property in a
manner that is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of citizens of
the city.



      (1)   The Building Official shall act as ex-officio Plumbing,
Heating, Electrical, and Housing Inspector to ensure compliance with the
building and construction standards prescribed by laws of the State of
Minnesota and ordinances of the city.  The Building Official shall be
responsible for the proper issuance of all building, construction, or
occupancy permits as are required by provisions of this code.  Persons may
be employed on a fee basis to assist the Building Official in conducting
inspections pursuant to this section.



         (a)   The Building Official shall not approve any
building, construction or occupancy permit unless he has received the plans
and specifications and determined that they conform to the zoning code and
all applicable building and construction standards prescribed by law.



         (b)   The Building Official shall not issue any
building, construction, or occupancy permit without a certification from the
Zoning Administrator that all procedures for approval of plans as may be
required by the zoning code have been completed and approval has been granted
by the designated authority.



      (2)   The Building Official or his designated representative
shall have the authority to conduct lawful inspections at a reasonable hour
at any building or premises to ensure compliance with the zoning code and all
applicable building and construction standards prescribed by law, or other
related ordinances of the city.



      (3)   The Building Official shall have the power to order work
stopped on construction, alteration or repair of buildings in the city when
such work is being done in violation of any ordinance of the city governing
the manner in which such work is to be conducted; in violation of the zoning
code, or any building or construction standard prescribed by law; or when
such work is not in conformity with the plans and specifications that were
the basis for issuance of a building permit.



         (a)   An order to stop work shall be in writing and
include the reasons for making such an order and the building or construction
standard that is being violated, or the unauthorized variation from approved
plans or specifications.  The order may be presented to the work supervisor
at the construction site or may be posted in a conspicuous place if no one is
present.



         (b)   No person, firm or corporation may resume work
after the issuance of such an order without the written authorization of the
Building Official.



(`77 Code, § 3.206)



§ 3.207  LIBRARY DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The position of Library Director is hereby established under
the control and direction of the Manager.  The Library Director shall
administer the operations of the city library system, supervise all employees
assigned to duties in the library system, and perform such other duties as
the Manager shall designate.



   (B)   The Library Director shall have the authority to provide
library service to non-residents of the city through the Minnesota Statewide
Borrowers Compact, which allows service to non-residents of the city who have
a valid library card from another participating public library in the State
of Minnesota.



(`77 Code, § 3.208)



§ 3.208  CITY CLERK.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall be the custodian of all documents and
records accessible to the public and shall maintain an appropriate system of
indexing and storing said documents and records.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall seal and attest all contracts, licenses,
permits, and such other documents of the city as require this formality.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall administer and process all applications
for municipal office, and shall perform all duties required by law relating
to the conduct of elections in the city.



   (D)   The City Clerk shall serve as the secretary of the City
Council.



(Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



ARTICLE III:  APPOINTED COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS



Section



   3.301   Park and Recreation Commission



   3.302   Human Services Commission



   3.303   Merit Board



   3.304   Reserved



   3.305   Housing and Redevelopment Authority



   3.306   Planning and Zoning Commission



   3.307   Board of Appeals and Adjustments



   3.308   Traffic Commission



   3.309   Library Board



   3.310   Economic Development Authority



   3.311   Reserved



   3.312   Telecommunications Commission



   3.313   Tree Board



   3.314   Public Arts Commission



§ 3.301  PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION.



   (A)   (1)   The Park and Recreation Commission is hereby
established to supervise and control the use of public park lands,
recreation, and senior citizen programs in the city, including parks,
parkways, playgrounds; recreation fields and buildings; lakes, streams, and
beaches therein; and all public service facilities related thereto.  The
Commission shall also recommend improvements for such parks as may be
necessary and desirable, and shall have the authority to make reasonable
administrative rules and regulations, including setting fees, governing
public use of park lands and buildings, but shall at all times be subject to
the direction and authority of the Council.  All recreation programs shall
be in accordance with the policies approved by the City Council.



      (2)   The Commission shall have broad programming latitude in
the implementation of those policies, including programming ideas,
development, and functions.



      (3)   The Commission shall conduct and supervise recreation
services and programs for public recreation in its broadest sense, including
playgrounds, parks, playfields, swimming pools, beaches, camps, indoor
recreation centers, and any and all other recreation activities.



   (B)   The Park and Recreation Commission shall be composed of seven
members from among the residents of the city.  Five members shall serve a
term of five years.  Two members shall serve a term of two years.



   (C)   The Park and Recreation Commission shall have the power to
make expenditures from funds so authorized and budgeted by the Council and
approved by the City Manager; provided, however, that no single expenditure
shall be made in an amount in excess of that authorized by City Charter.



      (1)   All monies received by the Park and Recreation
Commission or its representatives in the course of administering any
properties or programs under its jurisdiction shall be turned over to the
Treasurer at intervals of not greater than once each week for placement in
the appropriate fund.  No monies placed in said fund shall be transferred to
any other fund unless authorized by a resolution of the Council and passed by
four-fifths vote of said Council.



      (2)   The Park and Recreation Commission shall keep such books
and records or account as are necessary for a proper recording of its
financial activities as determined by the City Manager.  At a time
prescribed by the City Manager, the Commission shall submit to the Council a
proposed budget showing its estimated financial requirements for the ensuing
fiscal year.



      (3)   Expenditures may be made for the purpose of making
improvements on park lands, such as planting trees, shrubs and flowers, and
ornamenting or protecting the same; administering park and recreation
programs for the citizens of the city; or in any other manner authorized and
allowed under this section and the City Charter.



      (4)   All claims and all bills incurred by the Commission
shall be presented to the Council for payment and paid in the same manner as
other claims against the city are paid.



   (D)   The Park and Recreation Commission may authorize the issuance
of permits for otherwise prohibited activities to allow the holders thereof
to:



      (1)   Remain in the parks or on the parkways, lakes or
waterways during otherwise prohibited hours;



      (2)   Post notices;



      (3)   Park vehicles in otherwise unauthorized areas;



      (4)   Aquaplane or water ski in otherwise prohibited areas;



      (5)   Distribute circulars or cards;



      (6)   Sell refreshments or other articles;



      (7)   Bring a dog into the park for the purpose of conducting
dog shows or exhibitions held under the direction of the Commission;



      (8)   Conduct shows of entertainment or exhibitions;



      (9)   Conduct public meetings or public speeches upon a
showing to the Commission that the health and safety of those in attendance
will be properly safeguarded; and



      (10)   Have fires on the ice of any lake under the
jurisdiction of the Commission upon showing of compliance with regulations
established by the Commission for the safety of said heaters.



   (E)   The Park and Recreation Commission shall have the authority to
revoke for good cause, any permit issued either by the Commission or the
designated city employee, but (except upon conviction by court) the person
whose permit is subject to be revoked shall have at least five days' notice
thereof in writing and the opportunity to appear before the Commission, or a
committee thereof, to show cause why this permit should not be revoked.



   (F)   The Commission and the Recreation Director shall have
authority to suspend any coach, referee or other person when it is for the
good of the recreation program.  Such suspension may be appealed to the full
Commission if requested in writing within five days to the City Manager.  If
not appealed within five days, the suspension shall stand.  If appealed, the
Commission shall meet to let the suspended individual be heard.  Thereafter,
the Commission shall make a finding.  Such finding is final.



   (G)   The Commission is empowered and authorized to solicit and
receive gifts, bequests, or endowments of money or property as donations or
grants from persons, firms or corporations including governmental agencies
and to administer the funds for public park and recreation purposes subject
to City Charter and city policy.



(`77 Code, § 3.301)  (Am. Ord. 1230, passed 8-26-91; Am. Ord. 1405, passed
2-14-00; Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



§ 3.302  HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Human Services Commission is hereby established under the
control and direction of the Council.  The Commission shall act in a
strictly advisory capacity to the Council and have no legislative, judicial
or quasi-judicial powers of law enforcement, except in the performance of
duties prescribed by division (D) of this section.



   (B)   The purpose of the Human Services Commission is to aid and
advise the Council in the promotion of equal opportunity in employment,
housing, public accommodations, public service, education and such other
affairs that affect the social well being of the citizens of Columbia
Heights.  In furtherance of such purpose, the Commission shall:



      (1)   Study and review programs and policies and aid the
Council in soliciting the cooperation of agencies, organizations, and
individuals in the city in an active program directed to create equal
opportunities and eliminate discriminatory practices as described in M.S.
Chapter 363, as it may be amended from time to time.



      (2)   Review all reports or complaints of discrimination in
the city and report its findings to the Council, subject to the conditions
prescribed by division (D) of this section.



      (3)   Advise and aid the Council on the implementation of such
recommendations as the Council determines appropriate to cooperate with the
State Department of Human Rights.



      (4)   Recommend to the Council from time to time such action
as may seem advisable to create better human relations in the city and
perform such other functions concerning human relations as the Council may
determine.



   (C)   The Human Services Commission shall be composed of nine
members from among the residents of the city who are at least 18 years of age.



      (1)   Members of the Commission shall serve for a term of
three years commencing and ending in the month of April.  The terms are to
be staggered so that each year no more than three Commissioners are appointed
to a full term.



      (2)   The Commission shall be composed of the widest possible
representation of the various peoples and institutions within the city and,
if possible, no more than two members shall reside in any voting precinct.



      (3)   The Council may terminate the appointment of any
Commissioner by a majority vote without cause and without a hearing.



   (D)   Upon direction of the Council, the Human Services Commission
may study and make a report to the State Human Rights Commissioner on any
matter referred to it by the State Department of Human Rights.  Upon
direction of the Council, the Human Services Commission may conduct an
investigation of such matter and make such recommendations as are necessary
and appropriate.



(`77 Code, § 3.302)  (Am. Ord. 884, passed 2-27-78; Am. Ord. 1406, passed
2-14-00)



§ 3.303  MERIT BOARD.



   (A)   The Merit Board is hereby established to investigate the
discharge or suspension of city employees.  The Board shall hold a public
hearing upon the request of any city employee authorized to utilize the
provisions of this section.  The Board shall report its findings and actions
taken to the Council and the Manager.



   (B)   The Merit Board shall be composed of five members from among
residents of the city.



      (1)   Members of the Board shall serve for a term of four
years, to be staggered so that each year one of the members shall be newly
appointed.



      (2)   Each Board member shall subscribe to and file with the
City Clerk an oath for the faithful discharge of his duties.



   (C)   Meetings shall be held on the first Monday in June of each
year, and as are necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission.



   (D)   Any suspended or discharged permanent city employee in the
employ of the city continuously for one year immediately preceding said
suspension or discharge may make a written demand for a public hearing and
investigation into the cause of said discharge or suspension.



      (1)   For purposes of this section, a PERMANENT EMPLOYEE shall
be defined as any employee who has worked in a full-time or part-time
capacity continuously for a period of one year, other than in a job position
specifically designated as seasonal or temporary.



      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
Manager, and to employees subject to a collective bargaining agreement, or
subject to the jurisdiction of the Joint Police and Fire Civil Service
Commission, as is hereinafter established.



   (E)   The demand for a hearing shall be submitted to the Secretary
of the Commission, who shall then request a written statement setting forth
the causes for such discharge or suspension from the Manager.



   (F)   The Board shall conduct a public hearing within ten days
thereafter with five days' notice to the employee of the time and place for
the hearing.  The employee shall be provided with a copy of the statement of
causes for discharge or suspension.



   (G)   Within ten days after the completion of the hearing, the Board
shall make written findings and either direct that the employee be reinstated
or confirm the discharge or suspension.  The Board in its discretion may
order that the employee be paid any portion or all of the wages lost during
the period of said suspension, or discharge.



(`77 Code, § 3.303) (Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



§ 3.304  [RESERVED]



§ 3.305  HOUSING AND REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Except as limited by this section as it may be amended from
time to time, the HRA may exercise all the powers under the HRA Act needed in
order to carry out programs and projects for low and moderate income housing
including, but not limited to, the following powers:



      (1)   To own, manage and operate all  housing facilities that
are operated by CHEDA as of the effective date of this section.



      (2)   To establish and operate housing development projects
and housing projects (as such terms are defined in the HRA Act).



      (3)   To accept control and authority over any housing program
for low and moderate income persons that the city or CHEDA delegates to the
HRA.



      (4)   To levy special benefit taxes in accordance with Section
469.033, subdivision 6 of the HRA Act in order to pay or finance the cost of
housing projects and programs for low and moderate income persons, subject to
approval by the City Council in accordance with Section 469.033, subdivision
6.



      (5)   To acquire and convey real or personal property or any
interest therein by gift, grant, purchase, exchange, lease, transfer,
bequest, devise, or otherwise, and by the exercise of the power of eminent
domain.



      (6)   To determine the level of low and moderate incomes
within its areas of operation.



      (7)   To issue bonds for any of it s corporate purposes and to
secure those bonds by mortgages upon property held or to be held by it or by
pledge of its revenues, including grants or contributions.



   (B)   The HRA may not exercise any powers under M.S. §§ 469.174 to
469.179, as they may be amended from time to time, or any other powers under
the HRA Act that relate solely to redevelopment; provided, however, that
nothing in this section will be construed to limit the HRA's powers to carry
out any housing project or housing development project that requires or
includes redevelopment or that requires or includes land uses or facilities
reasonably necessary to serve or facilitate the development of housing for
low and moderate persons.



(`77 Code, § 3.305)  (Am. Ord. 1442, passed 10-22-01)



§ 3.306  PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   (A)   A Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby established which
shall consist of seven members to be organized as follows:



      (1)   The members shall be appointed by the Council and may be
removed by a four- fifths vote of the Council.  The Community Development
Director, City Planner, Building Official and City Attorney shall serve as ex
officio members of the commission.



      (2)   The appointed members shall serve for a term of four
years to be staggered so that the term of one member shall expire each
year.  Every member shall take an oath that he/she will faithfully discharge
the duties of office.



      (3)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson, and Secretary/Treasurer  from among its membership.  Officer
positions shall be elected annually at the first meeting of the year. The
Recording Secretary need not be designated from Planning Commission
membership.



      (4)   Planning Commissioners must attend a minimum of 75% of
regularly schedule annual meetings. Failure to meet this requirement shall
result in a recommendation to the City Council for a Commissioner’s removal.



      (5)   Regular monthly meetings of the Planning Commission
shall take place at 6:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday of each month in City
Council Chambers, unless otherwise publicly noted.



   (B)   The Commission shall prepare a program of work outlining
activities to be undertaken by the Commission.  Such a program will include
an outline of data and information to be assembled as a basis for a city
plan, an outline of subjects to be covered by a city plan, and an outline of
types of procedure necessary to make the city plan effective.  The work
program may be revised from time to time.



   (C)   (1)   The Commission shall prepare, adopt and maintain a
comprehensive city plan for the physical development of the city.  Said plan
shall include proposed public buildings, street arrangements and
improvements, public utility services, parks, playgrounds, and other similar
developments, and the projected use of property, density of population, and
other matters relating to the physical development of the city.  Such a plan
may be prepared in sections, each of which shall relate to a major subject of
the plan, as outlined in the Commission's program of work.



      (2)   The Commission may from time to time recommend to the
Council changes or additions to the city plan or any section thereof whenever
changed conditions or further studies by the Commission indicate that such
amendment or addition is necessary or desirable.



   (D)   (1)   The Commission shall certify and submit to the
Council an attested copy of the city plan or of any section, amendment, or
addition to the city plan and recommend and advise to the Council reasonable
and practicable means for putting into effect the plan, or amendments or
additions thereto, so that the plan will serve as a pattern and guide for the
orderly physical development of the city and as a basis for the efficient
expenditure of city funds relating to the subjects of the city plan.



      (2)   Such means shall consist of a zoning plan, the control
of subdivision plats, a plan of future streets and street extensions,
coordination of the normal public improvements of the city, a long term
program of capital expenditures and such other matters as will accomplish the
purposes of this section.



   (E)   The Commission shall study and make recommendations for
changes to the official plat map within 40 days after any proposed plat, plat
subdivision, or change to the plat map has been referred to the Commission
for study.



      (1)   The Commission may recommend to the Council that the
proposal be approved; be disapproved, for specific reasons as are indicated;
or proposal be approved after specified changes or revisions are made
therein, deferral back to the Commission for review of said revisions or
changes may be requested.



      (2)   Upon the advice of the City Engineer, the Commission may
recommend that the proposed future extension or widening of city streets be
indicated on the plat map.



   (F)   The Commission shall have such duties and functions as are
prescribed by the zoning code and shall comply with all procedures provided
therein.  The Commission shall study and make recommendations on proposed
changes to the zoning code and report thereon to the Council.



   (G)   Prior to adoption of any amendment or change to the city plan
or the zoning code, the Commission shall hold at least one public hearing
with ten days' notice of the time and place of such hearing to be published
in the official city newspaper.



   (H)   The Commission shall list and classify all local public works
permanent improvements proposed in the city budget for the ensuing fiscal
year that have been referred to the Commission.  The Commission shall
prepare and recommend a coordinated program of proposed public works for the
ensuing fiscal year to the Council and to such other officer, department,
board, or governmental bodies as have jurisdiction over the accomplishment of
such public work projects.



   (I)   The Commission shall submit to the Council a report of its
work during the preceding year on or before January 1 of each year.  Said
report shall include a copy of the recommended programs of public works
projects, as provided by division (H) of this section.



   (J)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall perform all duties
and functions of the Housing Advisory and Appeals Board, as established by §
6.202(B).



(`77 Code, § 3.306)  (Am. Ord. 1407, passed 2-14-00; Am. Ord. 1645, passed
2-12-18)



§ 3.307  BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS.



   The Board of Appeals and Adjustments is hereby established pursuant to
M.S. Chapter 462, as it may be amended from time to time.  The Board shall
have authority, functions and duties prescribed by the zoning code, and shall
consist of such members as provided therein.



(`77 Code, § 3.307)



§ 3.308  TRAFFIC COMMISSION.



   (A)   A Traffic Commission is hereby established which shall consist
of five members.  The members shall be appointed by the Council and may be
removed by four-fifths vote of the Council.  The Public Works Director, or a
person designated by the Public Works Director, and the Chief of Police, or a
person designated by the Police Chief, shall serve as ex officio members of
the Commission.  The members shall serve for a term of four years to be
staggered so that the term of one member shall expire each year.  The
Commission shall elect a chairperson from among its membership.  The
Secretary need not be designated from the Commission membership.



   (B)   The Commission shall serve as an advisory body to the Council
and the administrative service of the city.  The Commission shall study and
investigate all matters pertaining to the regulation of traffic upon the
streets and ways within the city on its own initiative, or as are referred to
the Commission by the Council or the administrative service of the city. 
The Commission shall conduct public hearings as are necessary to give full
consideration to such matters.  Written recommendations shall be forwarded
to the Council and to the Manager.



   (C)   The Manager shall direct the administrative service to act on
said recommendations upon the expiration of 30 days of receipt thereof, when
authorized to do so by Chapter 7 of this code, except as otherwise provided
below.



   (D)   Administrative action on the recommendations of the Traffic
Commission shall be subject to a right of appeal to the Council by any
interested person, and the right of the Council to direct that the Commission
recommendations be modified or not pursued.  Upon receipt of notice of
appeal or Council intervention, the Manager shall suspend further
administrative action until directed by Council action.



   (E)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (C) of this
section, recommendations and findings pertaining to the regulation of traffic
on a State Trunk Highway or other roads not within the exclusive jurisdiction
of the city shall be submitted exclusively to the Council for further
action.  Where required by the laws of the State of Minnesota, consent of
the State Commissioner of Highways shall be obtained prior to formal Council
action on the Commission's recommendations.



   (F)   The Commission shall establish a monthly meeting date and
direct the Secretary to prepare an agenda for each meeting.  Said agenda
shall be sent to the Commission members for their consideration at least two
days prior to the meeting date.



(`77 Code, § 3.308)  (Am. Ord. 986, passed 12-28-81; Am. Ord. 1206, passed
10-22-90; Am. Ord. 1408, passed 2-14-00)



§ 3.309  LIBRARY BOARD.



   (A)   A Library Board is hereby established which shall be composed
of five members to be appointed by the Council.  The Board members shall
serve three-year terms.  Members shall be residents of the city.



   (B)   The Library Board is hereby established to supervise and
control the policy, program, use and physical plant of the city library,
including all lands and equipment associated therewith and the setting of
levels of service and manpower.  The Board shall also recommend improvements
for the library as may be necessary and desirable and shall have the
authority to make reasonable administrative rules and regulations, including
the setting of fees, governing public use of the library and its facilities,
but shall at all times be subject to the direction and authority of the
Council.  All the library policies and programs shall be in accordance with
the policies approved by the City Council.



   (C)   The Library Director shall have the power to make expenditures
from funds so authorized and budgeted by the Council and approved by the
Manager; provided, however, that no single expenditure shall be made in an
amount in excess of that authorized by City Charter.



      (1)   All monies received or expended shall be accounted for
and audited in the Library Fund as though the library were a department under
the control of the City Manager or subsidiary manager as delegated.



      (2)   All claims and all bills incurred by the Board shall be
presented to the Council for payment and paid in the same manner as other
claims against the city are paid.



      (3)   Annually and in proper time, the Board shall approve and
recommend to the Council a budget for the coming year and at least
semi-annually, the Board shall approve and make a comparison by line item of
its performance against the current budget together with recommendations for
transfers of funds between line items.



(`77 Code, § 3.309)  (Am. Ord. 1263, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 1409, passed
2-14-00)



§ 3.310  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Enabling authority.



      (1)   The Columbia Heights Economic Development Authority
(CHEDA) is hereby established.



      (2)   The board of commissioners of the CHEDA shall consist of
seven members, at least two but no more than five of whom must be members of
the City Council.  The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval
of the City Council.



      (3)   Commissioners shall be appointed for initial terms of
one, two, three, four and five years respectively, and two members for six
years.  Thereafter all commissioners shall be appointed for six- year
terms.  Notwithstanding the above provisions, the term of any commissioner
who is a member of the City Council shall coincide with that member's term of
office as a City Council member.



      (4)    A vacancy is created in the membership of the CHEDA
when a City Council member of the board of commissioners ends Council
membership.  A vacancy for this or any other reason must be filled for a new
term or the balance of the expired term, as the case may be, in the manner in
which the original appointment was made.



      (5)    The following limits apply to the CHEDA and it
operation:



         (a)   The sale of bonds or other obligations of the
CHEDA must be approved by the City Council.



         (b)   The CHEDA must follow the budget process for city
departments in accordance with city policies, ordinances and resolutions and
the City Charter.



         (c)   Development and redevelopment actions of the CHEDA
must be in conformance with the city comprehensive plan and official controls
implementing the comprehensive plan.



         (d)   The CHEDA must submit its plans for development
and redevelopment to the City Council for approval in accordance with city
planning procedures and laws.



         (e)   The CHEDA shall not hire permanent or temporary
employees without prior approval by the City Council.



         (f)   The administrative structure and management
practices and policies of the CHEDA must be approved by the City Council.



      (6)   As provided in the Act it is the intention of the City
Council that nothing in this section nor  any activities of the CHEDA are to
be construed to impair the obligations of the city or the Housing and
Redevelopment Authority in and for the city under any of their contracts or
to affect in any detrimental manner the rights and privileges of a holder of
a bond or other obligation heretofore issued by the city or the HRA.



   (B)   Implementation.



      (1)   The City Council will from time to time and at the
appropriate time adopt such ordinances and resolutions as are required and
permitted by the Act to give full effect to this section.



      (2)   The Mayor, the Manger and other appropriate city
officials are authorized and directed to take the actions and execute and
deliver the documents necessary to give full effect to this section.



      (3)   Nothing in this section is intended to prevent the city
from modifying this section to impose new or different limitations on the
CHEDA as authorized by the Act.



   (C)   EDA powers.



      (1)   Except as limited by this section or the enabling
resolution, as either may be amended from time to time, the EDA may exercise
all the powers under the EDA Act, including, but not limited to, the
following:



         (a)   All powers under the HRA Act other than those
allocated to the HRA under this section.



         (b)   All powers of a city under M.S. §§ 469.124 to
469.134, as they may be amended from time to time.



         (c)   All powers and duties of a redevelopment agency
under M.S. §§ 469.152 to 469.165, as they may be amended from time to time,
for a purpose in the HRA Act or the EDA Act, and all powers and duties in the
HRA Act and EDA Act for a purpose in M.S. §§ 469.152 to 469.165, as they
may be amended from time to time.



         (d)   The authority to acquire property, exercise the
right of eminent domain; make contracts for the purpose of redevelopment and
economic development; serve as a limited partner in a partnership whose
purpose is consistent with the CHEDA's purpose; buy supplies and materials
needed to carry out development within the EDA Act; and operate and maintain
public parking facilities.



         (e)   The authority to issue bonds in accordance with
the EDA Act and the HRA Act.



         (f)   The authority to levy special benefit taxes in
accordance with Section 469.033, subdivision 6 of the HRA Act in order to pay
or finance public redevelopment costs (as defined in the HRA Act), subject to
approval by the City Council in accordance with Section 469.033, subdivision
6.



         (g)   All powers under M.S. §§ 469.174 to 469.179, as
they may be amended from time to time, including without limitation the power
to establish a housing district as defined in M.S. § 469.174, subd. 11, as
it may be amended from time to time.



      (2)   CHEDA may not exercise powers under the HRA Act that are
allocated to the HRA under this section; provided, however, that nothing in
this section will be construed to limit CHEDA's powers to carry out any
redevelopment project that includes housing for low and moderate income
persons that is owned and operated by non-governmental parties.



(Res. 96-01, passed 1-8-96; Am. Ord. 1442, passed 10-22-01)



§ 3.311  [RESERVED]



§ 3.312  TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION.



   (A)   A Telecommunications Commission is hereby established which
shall consist of seven members to be organized as follows:



      (1)   Seven members shall be appointed by the City Council.
The members appointed by the City Council shall be residents of the city.  A
majority of Commission members shall constitute a quorum.



      (2)   Each member of the Commission shall serve a term of two
years.



      (3)   The Assistant to the City Manager, or a person designed
by him, shall be an ex officio member of the Commission.



      (4)   If a seat on the Commission becomes vacant before the
term of the seat has expired, it shall be filled by appointment by the City
Council.



      (5)   The Commission shall elect a chairperson from among its
membership.  The secretary need not be designated from the Commission
membership.



      (6)   The Commissions shall establish a monthly meeting date
and conduct business of the Commission as prescribed hereinafter.  A meeting
agenda shall be sent to Commission members at least two days prior to the
meeting date.



   (B)   The Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the
Council and the administrative service of the city.  The duties and
responsibilities of the Commission shall be as follows:



      (1)   Study, investigate and make written recommendations to
the City Council on all matters pertaining to the provision of
telecommunication services within the city on its own initiative or as
referred to the Commission by the Council or administrative service of the
city.  This shall include, but not be limited to, the following matters:



         (a)   Additional services which could be furnished by
the telecommunication service providers.



         (b)   Rate adjustments.



         (c)   Actions of a provider which may be grounds for
revocation of its franchise, permit, license, or other right to do business
in the city.



         (d)   Provider's performance regarding subscriber
complaints and interruption of service.



         (e)   Operation and use of access channels.



         (f)   Renewal or extension of the franchise, permit,
license, or other right to do business in the city.



         (g)   Channel, spectrum, or capacity allocation and
programming.



         (h)   Compliance of provider with terms and conditions
of the franchise, permit, license, or right to do business in the city.



         (i)   Possible sanctions against the provider.



      (2)   Prepare and submit an annual report to the city
assessing the grantee's performance according to the terms of the cable
television franchise and make written recommendations to the city.



      (3)   Three months prior to the fifth year of operation and
every five years thereafter, the Commission shall submit a report to the
city, which report shall include a written appraisal of the performance of
the grantee over the entire length of the cable franchise with regard to the
provisions of the cable franchise.  The report shall include recommendations
for revised or additional provisions of the franchise, considering at least
the following items:  channel capacity, channels for access, cable casting;
facilities and staff assistance available for access cable casting; two-way
capability, and the need for further service to be extended within the
franchise area based upon a reassessment of the communications needs of the
city in relation to the services generally offered by the cable industry.



(`77 Code, § 3.315)  (Am. Ord. 1002, passed 7-14-82; Am. Ord. 1307, passed
9-11-95; Am. Ord. 1325, passed 6-10-96; Am. Ord. 1410, passed 2-14-00)



§ 3.313  TREE BOARD.



   (A)   There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for
the City of Columbia Heights, which shall be composed of the members of the
Park and Recreation Commission.



   (B)   Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study,
investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually, and administer a
written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting,
removal or disposition of public trees.  Such plan will be presented
annually to the City Council and upon their acceptance and approval shall
constitute the official comprehensive City Tree Plan for the City of Columbia
Heights, Minnesota.  The Board, when requested by the City Council, shall
consider, investigate, make findings, reports and recommendations upon any
special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, it shall be the
responsibility of the City Forester to determine if a tree is hazardous to
public safety.



   (D)   The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules
and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings.  A majority of the
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.



   (E)   The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct,
acts and decisions of the City Tree Board.  Any person may appeal from any
ruling or order of the City Tree Board to the City Council who may hear the
matter and make final decision.



(Ord. 1246, passed 6-22-92)



§ 3.314  PUBLIC ARTS COMMISSION.



   (A)   Establishment.  A Public Arts Commission is hereby
established.



   (B)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PUBLIC ART.



         (a)   Within commercial zoning districts, physical
artwork which is viewable by the general public, whether on public or private
land or buildings, whether owned by an individual or legal business entity of
the city.



         (b)   Physical artwork which is viewable by the general
public installed on land owned by the city.



   (C)   Statement of purpose.  The purpose of this section is to
encourage the display of public art in the city and to provide a mechanism
for the inclusion of public art and memorial structures throughout the city
primarily in parks and open spaces.  Public art can play a vital role in
transforming the community.



      (1)   Generating economic impact:



         (a)   Attracting new audiences;



         (b)   Supporting marketing efforts;



         (c)   Attracting media attention;



         (d)   Returning dollars to local economy for fabrication
and installation; and



         (e)   Enhancing cultural tourism in our area.



      (2)   Establishing unique identity:



         (a)   Giving character to a setting;



         (b)   Representing the history and importance of a place;



         (c)   Creating an iconic image for future generations;
and



         (d)   Physically represent our values or aesthetic.



      (3)   Building community, creating civic pride:



         (a)   Engaging local stakeholders in planning, design,
and execution;



         (b)   Encouraging community to participate in creating
their own public spaces;



         (c)   Demonstrating the strengths of a community; and



         (d)   Empowering the individuals who don’t usually
have a role in decision-making.



      (4)   Supporting great art:



         (a)   Setting the bar for cultural developments;



         (b)   Demonstrating aesthetic sophistication; and



         (c)   Attracting artists/activity to our neighborhoods.



   (D)   Purpose, values, and goals.  The mission of Columbia
Height’s Public Arts Commission (PAC) is to help enrich the lives of the
citizens of, and visitors to, Columbia Heights by strategically integrating
public art into city planning, services, design and infrastructure.  The
following values and goals shall guide the city in making decisions regarding
public art.  City departments, project committees, panels, the Public Arts
Commission, and other interpreters of these goals and values should apply
them as appropriate to each project, artists and affected neighborhoods. 
Review criteria for all policy areas of public art shall be based on these
values and goals.



      (1)   Encourage excellence in the city’s visual design and
public arts:



         (a)   Enhance the aesthetic environment of public places
within the city through engaging, unique, and high quality public artworks;



         (b)   Insure consideration of aesthetic issues in local
decision making; and



         (c)   Recruitment of qualified artists.



      (2)   Strengthen community identity, place, and assets:



         (a)   Build awareness of community history, cultures,
landscape and the “Minnesota hometown” image;



         (b)   Develop artworks that are integrated into city
building and streetscape/development projects and are compatible with their
settings;



         (c)   Encourage building architecture to be consistent
with the character of the area and history of the city; and



         (d)   Build Columbia Heights to be recognized as a
regional cultural center.



      (3)   Contribute to Columbia Height’s health and vitality:



         (a)   Promote Columbia Heights as a community that
provides its citizens with a high quality of life;



         (b)   Invite visitors to Columbia Heights as a popular
art destination;



         (c)   Develop mechanisms for encouraging partnerships
with and among the city’s neighborhoods, commercial areas, and city’s
cultural/heritage organizations;



         (d)   Provide places for art (lakes, parks, gardens,
architecture, facilities, streetscapes, trails, roadways, and art-related
enterprises);



         (e)   Promote working space for artists; and



         (f)   Develop and maintain safe artworks.



      (4)   Involve a broad range of people and communities:



         (a)   Enable opportunities for all citizens,
neighborhoods, and organizations to participate in the planning, creation,
and equal access to the cultural experiences and artworks;



         (b)   Preserve and celebrate the city’s diversities of
neighborhoods, ethnicity, race, age, religion, and gender; and



         (c)   Provide pedestrian-friendly neighborhoods.



      (5)   Value artists and artistic processes:



         (a)   Provide a range of creative opportunities for
artists with varying degrees of experience;



         (b)   Ensure the ongoing integrity of artworks and
respect the creative rights of artists; and



         (c)   Involve artists directly in the concept, design,
and creation of artworks.



      (6)   Use resources wisely:



         (a)   Develop and manage projects in a cost-effective
manner;



         (b)   Use city funds to leverage private investment in
public art and use public art to leverage private investment in other city
ventures; and



         (c)   Secure and utilize the various funding sources
available for public art programs.



   (E)   Responsibility and authority.



      (1)   The Commission serves as an advisory to the City Council.



      (2)   The Commission does not require its own by-laws.



      (3)   The Mayor appoints and the Council ratifies.



      (4)   The PAC shall be comprised of five to seven members
serving on terms of three to six years with no more than two consecutive. 
It is recommended to stagger member terms.



      (5)   Commission officers include: Chair, Vice-Chair, and
Secretary.



      (6)   Residency is not required to serve on the Commission.



      (7)   The majority of the Commission members must be residents
of Columbia Heights in any given year.



      (8)   Non-residents serving on the Commission should be
individuals that have connections to the city by either working or owning a
business within the city limits, have gone to school in Columbia Heights or
have family members still living in Columbia Heights.



(Ord. 1613, passed 10-28-13)



ARTICLE IV:  PERSONNEL POLICIES



Section



   3.401   Personnel policies adopted by reference



   3.402   Background checks



§ 3.401  PERSONNEL POLICIES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The personnel policies of the city, as may be revised from time to
time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be treated as if set forth in
full herein.  Any subsequent amendments or modifications thereto, shall be
authorized by resolution.



§ 3.402  BACKGROUND CHECKS.



   (A)   At the direction of the City Manager, or his designee, the
Police Department is authorized to conduct criminal history background
investigations on applicants for positions with the city as provided by this
section.  This section applies only to applicants who are finalists for paid
or volunteer positions with the city, where the City Manager, or his
designee, has determined that conviction of a crime may relate directly to
the position sought.  The Police Department may not perform a background
investigation unless the applicant consents in writing to the investigation
and to the release of the investigation information to the City Manager and
other city staff as may be appropriate.  An applicant's failure to provide
consent may disqualify the applicant for the position sought.



   (B)   If the applicant's application is rejected due solely or in
part to the applicant's prior conviction of a crime, subject to the exception
set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as it may be amended from time to time, the City
Manager or his designee, must notify the applicant in writing of the
following:



      (1)   The grounds and reasons for the rejection.



      (2)   The applicable complaint and grievance procedure set
forth in M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time.



      (3)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for
employment.



      (4)   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be
considered upon reapplication.



   (C)   At the direction of the City Manager, or his designee, the
Police Department is authorized to conduct criminal history background
investigations on applicants for city licenses.



   (D)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen license applicants, the Police Department is authorized to
access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions
Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA
policy.  Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the
Police Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement
official or his or her designee.  A summary of the results of the
Computerized Criminal History data may be released by the Police Department
to the licensing authority, including the City Council, the City Manager, or
other city staff involved in the license approval process. 



(Ord. 1338, passed 12-2-96; Am. Ord. 1602, passed 10-24-11)



ARTICLE V:  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES



Section



   3.501   Definitions



   3.502   Notice



   3.503   Payment



   3.504   Failure to pay



   3.505   Disposition of penalties



   3.506   Powers and duties of Finance Director



   3.507   Scheduled penalties



§ 3.501  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSE.  A violation of any section of this code when
one performs an act prohibited or fails to act when such failure is thereby
prohibited and is subject to the penalties set forth in this code and
schedule (see exhibit A attached to Ordinance 1358).



(Ord. 1358, passed 10-13-97)



§ 3.502  NOTICE.



   Any member of the Police Department and/or any other person employed by
the city with authority to enforce this code shall, upon determining that
there has been a violation, notify the violator, or person responsible for
the violation, or in the case of a vehicular violation by attaching to said
vehicle notice of the violation, said notice setting forth the nature, date,
time of the violation, the name of the official issuing the notice and the
amount of the scheduled initial penalty, and where applicable, any charges
relating thereto.



(Ord. 1358, passed 10-13-97)



§ 3.503  PAYMENT.



   Once such notice is given, the person responsible for the violation
shall, within seven days of the time of issuance of the notice, pay full
satisfaction of the stated violation scheduled to the City Finance
Department.  The penalty may be paid in person or by mail and payment shall
be admission of the violation.



(Ord. 1358, passed 10-13-97)



§ 3.504  FAILURE TO PAY.



   If a violator fails to pay the penalty imposed by this article, the
matter may be processed as a code violation through the Anoka County Court
System.



(Ord. 1358, passed 10-13-97)



§ 3.505  DISPOSITION OF PENALTIES.



   All penalties collected shall be paid over to the City Finance
Department.  The Finance Director or his designee may receive negotiable
instruments in payment of penalties as a conditional payment and shall not be
held accountable therefor.  Receipt shall be issued for cash payment.



(Ord. 1358, passed 10-13-97)



§ 3.506  POWERS AND DUTIES OF FINANCE DIRECTOR.



   In addition to all other duties set forth in the code, the Finance
Director may delegate and supervise the work of city employees implementing
and administering this article.  The Finance Director shall make and have
custody of all records necessary and shall keep proper accounts of the
proceeds received.



(Ord. 1358, passed 10-13-97)



§ 3.507  SCHEDULED PENALTIES.



   Penalties shall be imposed for violation of the scheduled
administrative offenses according to a schedule duly established and adopted
from time to time by resolution of the City Council.  Any person violating a
section of this code shall be subject to the scheduled penalty, not to exceed
$100 for each offense.



(Ord. 1358, passed 10-13-97)



CHAPTER 4:  MUNICIPAL SERVICES



   Article



      I.   SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



      II.   TREE AND WEED SERVICES



      III.   WATER SERVICE



      IV.   SANITARY SEWER SERVICE



      V.   LIQUOR OPERATIONS



      VI.   STORM WATER UTILITY



      VII.   GARBAGE AND RECYCLING SERVICES



ARTICLE I:  SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



Section



   4.101   General provisions



   4.102   Authorization for improvements



   4.103   Assessments procedure



   4.104   Midblock lighting



   4.105   Tree removal



   4.106   Weed removal



§ 4.101  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The Council shall follow the procedures prescribed herein for
making local improvements which result in service charges that may be totally
or partially financed by the use of special assessments against benefitted
properties; provided that when the Council makes those local improvements
specifically designated in the City Charter, the Council shall follow the
procedures prescribed therein.



   (B)   The Council may by resolution authorize any improvement
designated in M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time, and
may make assessments therefor against the property benefitted thereby; all
improvements including abatement of public nuisances authorized therein may
be made by the Council in accordance with this chapter.  Those improvements
which the Council may provide under this chapter shall include the collection
of unpaid special charges for all or any part of the cost of snow, ice, or
rubbish removal from sidewalks, weed elimination from streets or private
property, removal or elimination of public health or safety hazards from
private property (excluding any structure included under the provisions of
M.S. §§ 463.15 to 463.26, as they may be amended from time to time),
installation or repair of water service lines, street sprinkling or other
dust treatment of streets, the trimming and care of trees and removal of
unsound trees from any street, the treatment and removal of insect infested
or diseased trees on private property, the repair of sidewalks or alleys, and
the operation of a street lighting system as special assessments against the
property benefitted.



   (C)   The Council may, at its option, issue directives placing the
primary responsibility upon the property owner to do and complete the local
improvements designated in this chapter (except in the case of street
sprinkling or other dust treatment, alley repair, tree trimming, care and
removal or operation of a street lighting service) upon notice before the
work is undertaken.



   (D)   The Council shall provide for the assessment of the unpaid
charges for the improvements authorized herein as outlined in this chapter
and as is permitted by the Minnesota Statutes and it may assess accordingly
for such projects as diseased tree abatement, weed removal, and midblock
lighting.  Whenever an assessment procedure for any specific local
improvement shall hereafter be designated by a separate section in this code,
that specific section shall apply to the authorization and/or assessment of
that item; when no particular reference to the authorization and assessment
procedure for a specific item is included herein, the general authorization
and assessment procedures prescribed by this chapter shall apply.



(`77 Code, § 4.101)



§ 4.102  AUTHORIZATION FOR IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The Council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed
improvement under this chapter, prior to authorization of such improvement,
following publication in the newspaper of a notice stating the time and place
of the hearing, the general nature of the improvement, the estimated cost of
operation of the same, and the area proposed to be assessed.  The hearing
shall not be less than 3 days nor more than 60 days after such publication.



   (B)   Not less than ten days before said hearing, notice thereof
shall also be mailed to the owner of each parcel within the area proposed to
be assessed, but failure to give mailed notice or any defects in the notice
shall not invalidate the proceedings.



      (1)   For the purpose of giving mailed notice, owners shall be
those shown to be such on the records of the County Auditor or County
Treasurer; but other appropriate records may be used for this purpose.



      (2)   The owners of property which is tax exempt or subject to
taxation on a gross earnings basis and is not listed on the records of the
County Auditor or the County Treasurer, shall be ascertained by any
practicable means and mailed notice shall be given to them as herein provided.



      (3)   The Council may also take such other steps prior to the
hearing as will in its judgment provide helpful information in determining
the desirability and feasibility of the improvement.



   (C)   The hearing may be adjourned from time to time and a
resolution ordering the improvement may be adopted at any time within six
months after the date of the hearing by vote of a majority of all members of
the Council when the improvement has been petitioned for by the owners of not
less than 35% of frontage of the real property abutting on the street named
in a petition as the location for the improvement.



      (1)   When there has been no such petition, the resolution may
be adopted only by a vote of four- fifths of all members of the Council.



      (2)   The resolution ordering the improvement may reduce, but
not increase the extent of the improvement as stated in the notice of hearing.



   (D)   Whenever all owners of real property abutting upon any street
or alley named as the location of any improvement shall petition the Council
to construct the improvement and to assess the entire cost against their
property, the Council may, without a public hearing, adopt a resolution
determining such fact and ordering the improvement.  The validity of such
resolution shall not be questioned by any taxpayer or property owner or the
municipality unless an action for that purpose is commenced within 30 days
after adoption of the resolution.



   (E)   Any improvement hereunder may be terminated in the same manner
as it may be authorized.



(`77 Code, § 4.102)



§ 4.103  ASSESSMENTS PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Council shall determine by resolution the amount of total
expense the municipality will pay, other than any amounts as a property
owner, and the amount to be specially assessed.



      (1)   The amount to be assessed against every assessable lot,
piece or parcel of land shall then be calculated in accordance with the
provisions of M.S. § 429.051, as it may be amended from time to time.



      (2)   The proposed assessment roll shall be filed with the
Treasurer and made available for public inspection.



   (B)   The Council may then authorize an assessment hearing under
this chapter by simple motion.  Before the hearing shall be held and the
assessment resolution adopted.



      (1)   Notice shall be published in the newspaper stating the
time and place of the hearing, the general nature of the improvement made,
and a description of the parcels or lots proposed to be assessed.  The
hearing shall not be less than 3 nor more than 60 days after the publication
of said notice.



      (2)   Not less than ten days before the hearing notice of said
hearing shall also be mailed to the owner of each parcel to be assessed. 
The identity of the said owner may be determined in the same manner as in §
4.102(B), but failure to give mailed notice or any defects in the notice
shall not invalidate the proceedings.



   (C)   The assessment hearing shall be conducted in the manner
prescribed by M.S. § 429.061, as it may be amended from time to time, and
may be adjourned from time to time.



      (1)   Assessments shall be payable in equal installments for
the period prescribed by resolution, and with interest as provided therein.



      (2)   The assessment roll shall be certified to the County
Auditor with each installment, or annually on or before October 10, in the
discretion of the Council.



   (D)   The Council may authorize the partial prepayment of
assessments prior to certification to the county, in the manner prescribed by
Council.



(`77 Code, § 4.103) (Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



§ 4.104  MIDBLOCK LIGHTING.



   (A)   The Council hereby authorizes the assessment of unpaid special
charges for midblock and alley lighting, as defined herein, pursuant to the
provisions of M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, for
the purpose of preventing crime and insuring the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the city.  For purposes of this section:



      ALLEY LIGHTING.  Traditional street lighting apparatus that has
been placed in the alleys within the city.



      MIDBLOCK LIGHTING.  One or more street lights located more than
30 feet from the end of any block, or any street intersection.



   (B)   The Treasurer shall establish a separate improvement fund for
the administration of midblock lighting and alley lighting charges. On or
before July 1 of each year, the Treasurer shall bill each property owner of
each affected lot or parcel for their portion of the charges authorized
hereunder plus the reasonable cost of administering the billings and
collection procedures.



      (1)   Such bills shall be proportioned between the benefitted
parcels on the basis of the percentage of street frontage each parcel bears
to the total frontage to be billed in the instance of midblock lighting.



      (2)   In the instance of alley lighting, each parcel shall be
billed on the basis of the proportion of alley frontage each parcel bears to
the total frontage to be billed.



   (C)   The Treasurer shall list the total unpaid charges against each
separate lot or parcel to which such charges are attributable on or before
November 1 of each year, for Council action pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.



(`77 Code, § 4.104) (Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



§ 4.105  TREE REMOVAL.



   (A)   The Council hereby authorizes the assessment of unpaid special
charges for diseased tree abatement pursuant to the provisions of M.S. §
429.101, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   The Treasurer shall establish a separate improvement fund for
the administration of tree abatement service charges.  The costs for
diseased tree abatement services shall be certified monthly by the Forester
to the Treasurer for billing, including a statement describing the land,
lots, or parcels involved and the amount chargeable to each.



   (C)   On or before October 1 of each year, the Treasurer shall bill
each property owner of each affected lot or parcel for their portion of the
charges authorized hereunder plus the reasonable cost of administering the
billings and collection procedures.



   (D)   The Treasurer shall list the total unpaid charges for each
abatement against each separate lot or parcel on or before September 1 of
each year, for Council action pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



(`77 Code, § 4.105) (Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



§ 4.106  WEED REMOVAL.



   (A)   The Council hereby authorizes the assessment of unpaid special
charges for weed eradication and control, pursuant to the provisions of M.S.
§ 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   The Treasurer shall establish a separate improvement fund for
the administration of weed eradication and control service charges.  The
costs for weed eradication and control services shall be certified monthly by
the Forester to the Treasurer for billing, including a statement describing
the land, lots, or parcels involved and the amount chargeable to each.



   (C)   On or before October 1 of each year, the Treasurer shall bill
each property owner of each affected lot or parcel for their portion of the
charges authorized hereunder plus the reasonable cost of administering the
billings and collection procedures.



   (D)   The Treasurer shall list the total unpaid charges against each
separate lot or parcel to which such charges are attributable on or before
September 1 of each year, for Council action pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.



(`77 Code, § 4.106) (Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



ARTICLE II:  TREE AND WEED SERVICES



Section



   4.201   Removal of diseased, dead or hazardous trees



   4.202   Disease control, planting and routine removal



   4.203   Weed removal



§ 4.201  REMOVAL OF DISEASED, DEAD OR HAZARDOUS TREES.



   (A)   Declaration of policy.  The health of the trees in the city
is threatened by shade tree pests, and the loss or ill health of trees
growing upon public and private property substantially depreciates the value
of property within the city and impairs the safety, good order, general
welfare and convenience of the public.  In addition to and in accordance
with M.S. §§ 89.001, 89.01, and 89.51-64, as they may be amended from time
to time, the provisions of this section are adopted as an effort to control
and prevent the spread of these shade tree pests.



   (B)   Declaration of shade tree pest.  The Council may by ordinance
declare any vertebrate or invertebrate animal, plant pathogen, or plant in
the community threatening to cause significant damage to a shade tree or
community forest, as defined by M.S. § 89.001, as it may be amended from
time to time, to be a shade tree pest and prescribe control measures to
effectively eradicate, control, or manage the shade tree pest, including
necessary timelines for action.



   (C)   Tree Inspector.  The Council may appoint a Forester and/or
Tree Inspector to coordinate the activities of the city relating to the
control and prevention of damage by shade tree pests.  The Forester and/or
Tree Inspector will recommend to the Council the details of any program for
the declaration, control, and prevention of shade tree pests.  The Forester
and/or Tree Inspector is authorized to enforce or cause to be enforced the
tasks incident to such a program adopted by the Council.  The term “Tree
Inspector” includes person designated by the Council or the Forester to
carry out the activities authorized in this section.



   (D)   Public nuisances declared. The following are public nuisances
whenever they may be found within the city.



   (E)   The Forester or his official representative has the authority
to enter onto private property for inspection purposes.  The Forester shall
inspect all premises and places, both public and private, within the city for
the presence of any of the below-described conditions:



      (1)   Living or standing elm trees or parts thereof which are
infected with the Dutch Elm disease fungus Ceratocystic Elmi (Buisman) Moreau
or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multis Triatus (Eichh)
or Hylurgopinus Rufipes (Marsh).



      (2)   Living or standing oak trees or parts thereof which are
infected with Oak Wilt Disease fungus Ceratocyrstris Fagacearum.



      (3)   Any living or dead ash (Fraxinus spp.) tree or part
thereof infected to any degree with the insect Emerald Ash Borer, Agrilus
planipennis Fairmaire (Coleoptera: Buprestidae).



      (4)   Any other living or standing tree or part thereof
infected with tree disease as determined by the Forester or any destructive
or communicable disease or insect infestations.



      (5)   Any diseased dead tree or part thereof, including limbs,
branches, stumps, firewood, or other oak, elm, ash or wooden material which
has not been removed and burned or otherwise effectively treated so as to
destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of communicable disease
or insect infestation.



      (6)   Any tree, limb or shrub that obstructs street lights,
view of intersections, traffic signs, the free passage of pedestrians or
vehicles, or a tree or any part thereof that is less than eight feet above
the surface of the street, sidewalk or alley, or a tree that poses a threat
to safety.



   (F)   It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as
defined herein on any premises owned or controlled by him within the city. 
Such nuisances shall be abated in the manner prescribed by this section.



   (G)   Inspections and application of control measures.



      (1)   The Forester or his official representative may enter
upon private premises at reasonable times and reasonable hours for the
purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned to them under this chapter.



      (2)   All premises and places within the city shall be
inspected as often as practicable to determine whether any condition declared
in this section to be a public nuisance, exists thereon.  All reported
incidents of infection by Dutch Elm fungus, the presence of elm bark beetles,
of infection by the Oak Wilt fungus or the presence of Emerald Ash Borer
shall be promptly investigated.  Diagnosis may be by the presence of
commonly recognized symptoms, by tests as may be recommended by the
commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Agriculture or the commissioner
of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, or other reliable means.



      (3)    No person, firm, or corporation shall interfere with
the Tree Inspector or with anyone acting under the Tree Inspector’s
authority while engaged in activities authorized by this section.



   (H)   Abatement of shade tree pest nuisances. In abating a nuisance,
defined by ordinance herein, the organism, condition, plant, tree, wood, or
material identified as injurious to the health of shade trees shall be
removed or effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as
possible the spread of the shade tree pest.  Such abatement procedures shall
be carried out in accordance with the control measures and areas prescribed
herein.



   (I)   Reporting discovery of shade tree pest.  Any owner or
occupier of land or any person engaged in tree trimming or removal who
becomes aware of the existence of a public nuisance caused by a shade tree
pest as defined herein, shall report the same to the city.



   (J)   Registration of tree care firms.  Any person, firm, or
corporation that provides tree care, tree trimming, or removal of trees,
limbs, branches, brush, or shrubs for hire must be registered with the
Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture under M.S. § 18G.07, as it may be
amended from time to time.



   (K)   Standard abatement procedure. Except as provided herein,
whenever a Tree Inspector determines with reasonable certainty that a public
nuisance, as described by this section is being maintained or exists on
premises in the city, the Tree Inspector is authorized to abate a public
nuisance according to the procedures in this division.



      (1)   The Forester will notify in writing the owner of record
or occupant of the premises and physically mark that a public nuisance exists
and order that the nuisance be terminated or abated.  The notice may be
given in person or by mail.  Failure of any party to receive the mail does
not invalidate the service of the notice.  A copy of the notice shall be
filed with the City Clerk.



      (2)   The notification shall require abatement of such
condition within 20 days from the date of the mailing of the notice.



      (3)    Abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance
with the current technical and expert methods and plans as may be designated
by the Commissioner of Agriculture of the State of Minnesota or by the
Commissioner of Natural Resources of the State of Minnesota.



         (a)   The notice of abatement shall state that unless
the public nuisance is abated by the owner, it will be abated by the city at
the expense of the owner.  The notice shall specify the control measures to
be taken to abate the nuisance, and provide a reasonable amount of time to
abate the nuisance.  The notice will also state that the owner has the right
to appeal the determination that a public nuisance exists by submitting a
request in writing to the City Clerk prior to the expiration of the date by
which the nuisance must be abated as set forth in the notice.



         (b)   If no timely appeal is submitted, and the control
measures prescribed in the notice of abatement are not complied with within
the time provided by the notice or any additional time granted, the Forester
or designated person shall have the authority to obtain permission or an
administrative search warrant, enter the property, and carry out abatement in
accordance with the notice of abatement.



   (L)   High-cost abatement.  If the Tree Inspector determines that
the cost of abating a nuisance will exceed $5,000 based on a reasonable, good
faith estimate, the written notice referred to in division (K) must provide
that if the nuisance is not abated within the reasonable amount of time
provided, the matter will be referred to the City Council for a hearing. 
The date, time, and location of the hearing must be provided in the notice.



   (M)   Appeal procedure.  If the City Clerk receives a written
request for a hearing on the question of whether a public nuisance exists,
prior to the expiration of the date by which the nuisance must be abated as
set forth in the notice, the City Council shall hold a hearing.  At least
three days notice of the hearing shall be given to the individual who made
the written request for the hearing.  The Council may modify the abatement
notice or extend the time by which abatement must be completed.  Each owner,
agent of the owner, occupant, and lien holder of the subject property of
properties in attendance, if any, shall be given the opportunity to present
evidence at the hearing.  After holding the hearing, the City Council may
issue an order requiring abatement of the nuisance.



   (N)   Abatement procedure in event of imminent danger.



      (1)   If the Tree Inspector determines that the danger of
infestation to other shade trees is imminent, and delay in control measures
may put public health, safety, or welfare in immediate danger, the Tree
Inspector may provide for abatement without following the procedures
described herein.  The Tree Inspector must reasonably attempt to notify the
owner or occupant of the affected property of the intended action and the
right to appeal the abatement and any cost recovery at the next regularly
scheduled City Council meeting.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without
notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition that poses an
imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.



   (O)   Recovery of cost of abatement; liability and assessment.



      (1)   The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been
abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the
abatement, including administrative costs.  As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk or other official shall
prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner.  Thereupon the amount
shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City Clerk.



      (2)   After notice and hearing, as provided in M.S. §
429.061, which may be amended from time to time, the City Clerk shall, on or
before September 1 next following abatement of the nuisance, list the total
unpaid charges as well as other charges for current services to be assessed
under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, against each
separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable. The City
Council may then certify the charges against the property to the County
Auditor for collection along with current taxes the following year or in
annual installments as the city may determine in each case.



   (P)   Penalty.



      (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation that violates any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor.  The penalty, which may be imposed for any crime that is a
misdemeanor under this section, including Minnesota Statutes specifically
adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days, or a fine
of not more than $1,000 or both.



      (2)   Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



      (3)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to
perform any official duty imposed by this section shall not subject the
officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.



      (4)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this
section, if any person, firm, or corporation fails to comply with any
provision of this section, the City Council or any official designated by it
may institute appropriate proceedings at law or equity to restrain, correct,
or abate the violation.



(`77 Code, § 4.201)  (Am. Ord. 1248, passed 7-13-92; Am. Ord. 1579, passed
4-12-10)



§ 4.202  DISEASE CONTROL, PLANTING AND ROUTINE REMOVAL.



   (A)   Whenever the Forester determines that any tree or wood within
the city is infected with disease, he may use appropriate disease control
methods on all the nearby high value trees, in accordance with methods and
procedures prescribed by the Commissioner of Agriculture of the State of
Minnesota or the Commissioner of Natural Resources of the State of
Minnesota.  Notice shall be provided under this section in the manner
prescribed for abatement.



   (B)   The Forester shall maintain trees on public streets, parks,
boulevards and other public properties to facilitate the safe passage of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



   (C)   No person shall plant, remove, cut above the ground, or
disturb any tree on any public place without first obtaining written
permission from the City Forester.  The City Forester shall consider all
requests by property owners for the planting or routine removal of public
trees in accordance with the following standards:



      (1)   No more than one tree shall be planted for each 40 feet
of property frontage.



      (2)   No trees may be planted under or within ten lateral feet
of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any
underground water line or gas line, or over or within five lateral feet of
any sewer line, transmission line or other utility.



      (3)   No trees may be planted midway between the existing curb
and sidewalk without the approval of the City Forester.  In areas where curb
and sidewalk do not exist, no tree may be planted closer than three feet from
the projected curb line.



      (4)   No tree shall be planted closer than 30 feet of any
street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs, or curb
lines.  No tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fire hydrant.



      (5)   No person, firm, or city department shall top any public
tree.  Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy
and disfigure the tree.  Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes,
or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other
pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this subdivision at
the determination of the City Forester.



      (6)   No tree stumps shall remain on any property.  All
stumps of trees shall be removed or buried to a minimum of four inches below
the surface of the ground including root extension to at least two feet from
the outer edge of the stump.  An exception may be granted for inaccessible
areas as determined by the City Forester.



   (D)   The City Forester shall locate, select and identify any trees
which qualify as “Landmark Trees.”  A tree may qualify as a Landmark
Tree if it meets one or more of the following criteria:  species rarity, old
age, association with a historical event or person, abnormality, or scenic
enhancement.



   (E)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and
remove public trees as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds and
rights-of-way.



   (F)   No person except the City Forester, his agent, or a contractor
hired by the city may plant, remove, spray or otherwise treat public trees
without first obtaining written permission from the City Forester.  The
person obtaining the written permission shall abide by the standards set
forth in this section.



   (G)   The City Tree Board shall have the power to promulgate and
enforce rules, regulations and specifications concerning the trimming,
spraying, removal, planting, pruning and protection of public trees and shall
have full power and authority over all public and private trees that
constitute a hazard or threat as described herein.



   (H)   When the development of private and/or commercial property
occurs, the Planning and Zoning Commission, City Engineer, and City Forester
shall review landscaping plans and may require trees to be planted in any of
the streets, parking lots, parks or other public places abutting lands
henceforth developed and/or subdivided.



   (I)   A person, partnership, corporation or other entity who
violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in § 1.999.  Each
day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.  If, as the
result of the violation of any provision of this section, the injury,
mutilation or death of a public tree located on city owned property is
caused, the cost of repair of replacement of such tree, shrub, or other plant
shall be borne by the party in violation.  The replacement value of trees
and shrubs shall be determined in accordance with the latest revision of “A
Guide to the Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs, and
Evergreens,” as published by the International Society of Arboriculture.



(`77 Code, § 4.202)  (Am. Ord. 1248, passed 7-13-92; Am. Ord. 1579, passed
4-12-10)



§ 4.203  WEED REMOVAL.



   (A)   The weed inspector or delegated assistant may inspect all
premises and places within the city for the presence of weeds, as defined
below:



      WEEDS.  As used in this code shall include:



         (a)   Noxious weeds enumerated by Minn. Rules, part
1505.0730, as it may be amended from time to time.



         (b)   Any other uncultivated or uncontrolled weed
growth, which have gone or are about to go to seed, such as secondary weeds
enumerated by Minn. Rules, part 1505.0740, as it may be amended from time to
time.



         (c)   Any tall weeds or grass growing upon any lot or
parcel of land in the city to a height greater than nine inches. The weed
inspector may grant exceptions for wildlife areas, areas bordering ponds,
wildflower areas, ornamental grasses and other such areas that are a part of
an orderly landscape design.



         (d)   Such other vegetation as the Council shall, from
time to time, designate by resolution.



   (B)   The weed inspector or delegated assistant shall notify the
affected property owner that weeds which are on his property, must be
eradicated, or controlled, in the manner prescribed by the inspector. Such
notice may be posted on the property, served personally, or may be served by
mail.



      (1)   The notification shall require abatement of the weeds,
or other prescribed action, within four days from the date of mailing of
notice.



      (2)   The notification shall state that the city will take
appropriate remedial action to eradicate or control the weeds upon expiration
of said four days, with a charge to the property owner/property for costs.



   (C)   For properties for which there have been one or more notices
issued within the prior 12-month period, compliance with division (B) shall
not be required. For those properties, the first notice issued within a
12-month period shall contain a general notice that the city may abate future
violations without providing additional specific notice of the violation.



   (D)   The weed inspector, delegated assistant, or other delegated
agent of the city, shall cause the removal or other prescribed action of any
weeds located on public property; or on private property, upon expiration of
the prescribed notice to the owner.



   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply.



      OWNER.  The person who is listed as the contact person on any
current rental licensing application on file with the city, if any, or if
none, the person listed as owner by the County Assessor on the homestead
record, or if none, the taxpayer as shown by the records of the County
Assessor.



(`77 Code, § 4.203)  (Ord. 1511, passed 6-12-06; Am. Ord. 1544, passed
5-12-08; Am. Ord. 1590, passed 5-9-11)



ARTICLE III:  WATER SERVICE



Section



   4.301   Compliance with provisions



   4.302   Water service connections; permit requirements



   4.303   Water service connections and disconnections; charges;
manner and costs



   4.304   Installation and construction requirements and specifications



   4.305   Restrictions on laying of pipes



   4.306   Separate service to each building



   4.307   Separate curb stop required for each building



   4.308   Two or more services on one curb stop



   4.309   Maintenance responsibility of service pipes



   4.310   Unused service pipe



   4.311   Control of water; disclaimer; liability



   4.312   Water meters



   4.313   Service rates and charges; rules and regulations



   4.314   Discontinuance of service



   4.315   Reinstatement of service



   4.316   Fire services



   4.317   Fire hydrants



   4.318   Miscellaneous provisions



   4.319   Penalty



§ 4.301  COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS.



   No person shall make, construct or install any water service
installation, or make use of any water service connected to the water system
except in the manner provided in this chapter, nor shall any person make,
construct, install or make use of any installation connected to the water
system contrary to the regulatory provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.319



§ 4.302  WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Permit required.  No person other than a city employee shall
uncover or make or use any city municipal water system except pursuant to a
permit obtained from the Inspections Department.



   (B)   Conditions of permit.  No permit to tap or connect with sewer
or water service in the city shall be granted for service to property for
which there are delinquent taxes, delinquent special assessments, or unpaid
special charges, as of the date of the permit application.



   (C)   Deposit for water used during construction.  A deposit for
the estimated amount of water to be used during construction shall be paid
when filing for a plumbing permit.



   (D)   Excavation permit.  An excavation permit pursuant to § 6.301
is required if any part of the excavation for municipal water is within the
public right-of-way.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.319



§ 4.303  WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS AND DISCONNECTIONS; CHARGES; MANNER AND
COSTS.



   (A)   Connection and disconnection charges.



      (1)   Water service for any premises, building or building
unit, shall not be commenced or restarted until a connection fee in an amount
set by resolution of the Council is paid to the Utility Billing Office,
together with any delinquent water bills from past service to said building
or building unit, and any unpaid and delinquent special assessments.



      (2)   Where separate water meters are installed to service
separate locations or units within the same building, the provisions of this
section relating to delinquent water bills shall only apply to those
locations or units for which such delinquencies exist.



      (3)   The provisions of this section shall remain in full
force and effect without regard to any private contractual agreements or
responsibilities between individuals or firms, regarding the payment of water
bills, and the providing of utility services.



      (4)   A disconnection fee as set by resolution of the Council
shall be charged upon voluntary or involuntary termination of water service
at any premises, building or building unit.



   (B)   Manner and costs.



      (1)   Taps or connections to the water mains shall be made by
the Public Works Department at no extra cost to the applicant for taps up to
and including one inch in size.



      (2)   Taps larger than one inch shall be made by applicant at
the expense of the applicant.



      (3)   All taps and connections shall be left uncovered until
inspected and tested by the Public Works Department.  All connections shall
conform with city specification.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.319



§ 4.304  INSTALLATION AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   All installations of services shall comply with the following:



   (A)   All services shall be constructed by a licensed plumber at the
owner's expense.



   (B)   Services three inches in diameter and less shall be “Type
K” copper.  All services larger than three inches in diameter, shall be
ductile iron.



   (C)   All taps two inches in diameter or smaller shall be made with
the use of a corporation stop designed for tapping under pressure.



   (D)   The maximum size corporation stop that can be tapped directly
into the main is as follows:



 

Pipe Size
 
Tap Size


Up to 6-inch ductile iron
 
¾ inches


8-inch ductile iron
 
1 inch



 



   (E)   The maximum size corporation stop that can be used with
double-strap bronze service saddle is as follows:



 

Pipe Size
 
Tap Size


6-inch ductile iron
 
1½ inches


8-inch ductile iron
 
2 inches



 



   (F)   All taps other than those allowed in the preceding division
shall be made only with the use of an approved tapping sleeve and valve.



   (G)   All corporation stops must have clear openings of the same
diameter as the pipe with which they are placed and be of a make and pattern
approved by the Public Works Department.



   (H)   All curb stops one inch and larger shall be of the Mueller
Oriseal design or approved equal.



   (I)   All services must be placed not less than seven feet below
finished grade; and each service two inches in diameter and smaller shall
have a Minneapolis pattern base curb stop fitted with a stop box set on the
property line at finished grade or proposed sidewalk.



   (J)   The stop box used shall have a Minneapolis base and be of a
design approved by the Public Works Department.  Stop boxes on curb stops
one and one-fourth inch diameter and smaller shall have an unobstructed
opening of one and one-half inch diameter.  Curb stops one and one-half inch
diameter and larger shall have an unobstructed opening of a minimum size as
the service pipe.  All stop boxes shall be fitted with a cover approved by
the Public Works Department.  Every service pipe must have a shut-off valve
placed adjacent to and on the street side of the meter which must be kept in
working order at all times so that the water may be shut off by the occupant
of the premises.  Said valve shall be no more than one foot from the inside
wall of the structure.  There shall also be a gate valve placed on the
outlet side of the water meter, not more than one foot from the meter so that
the meter can be taken out or replaced without draining the plumbing system
of the building.  All valves shall have a clear opening the size of the
inside diameter of the service.



   (K)   The minimum size water service allowed shall be one inch.



   (L)   Plumbers shall leave all new water services shut off at the
curb stop after completing the testing.  Curb stops are to remain off until
a water meter has been installed.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.319



§ 4.305  RESTRICTIONS ON LAYING OF PIPES.



   No customer shall be permitted to conduct water pipes across lots or
buildings to adjoining properties; but all service pipes shall be laid on
streets, alleys, or public ground to the properties to be served and entered
at the front or rear when practical of the building nearest the main.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.319



§ 4.306  SEPARATE SERVICE TO EACH BUILDING.



   No new service shall be constructed and no existing service shall be
changed in such manner that more than one building, and in the case of
residential property one living unit, shall be on the same service pipe,
without specific approval of the City Engineer.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.319



§ 4.307  SEPARATE CURB STOP REQUIRED FOR EACH BUILDING.



   Owners of properties having water services which do not have separate
curb stops and boxes for each building or which otherwise do not conform to
the requirements in this chapter at the time of its passage may be required
to put in such curb stop or make such other changes as are necessary to
conform to these requirements, when so instructed by the City Engineer.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.319



§ 4.308  TWO OR MORE SERVICES ON ONE CURB STOP.



   Where there are two or more services on one curb stop the water will
not be turned on for one service unless the service pipes supplying the
entire premises are metered and the water bill is paid for each service. 
The property owner shall be held responsible for the water bill and any
maintenance, repairs or replacements of the service line where more than one
unit is served by one service line.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.319



§ 4.309  MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY OF SERVICE PIPES.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to
maintain in good working order and/or replace service pipes,  including curb
stops, from the main to the meter.



   (B)   The property owner shall immediately repair any leak occurring
in his service pipe when the property owner is notified by the Public Works
Department that the leak is in their service.  Within 24 hours, the property
owner shall provide the Department the name of the contractor that will make
the repair and when the repair will be made, which repair must be completed
within two days.  If the repair has not been completed within three days
from the date the property owner was first notified of the leak, the Public
Works Department shall cause the work to be completed and the property owner
will be billed for all expenses involved.  If for some reason the work is
deemed to be a hazard for the safety and welfare of the general public, the
Public Works Department may cause the work to be completed immediately after
discovering the leak, and bill all expenses to the customer.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.319



§ 4.310  UNUSED SERVICE PIPE.



   All service pipes that become useless or abandoned, including
previously abandoned or unused services upon discovery of the same, must be
permanently closed off and capped at the watermain by the property owner and
so reported to the Public Works Department.  In the event the property owner
fails to shut off the service after being notified by certified mail, the
Public Works Department may perform the necessary work and charge all
expenses involved to the owner of the property.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.319



§ 4.311  CONTROL OF WATER; DISCLAIMER; LIABILITY.



   (A)   Right to shut off water or vary water pressure.  The Public
Works Department reserves the right, at any time when necessary and without
notice, to discontinue water supply or to vary water pressure for the purpose
of making repairs or extensions or for any other purpose deemed to be in the
best interest of the general public health and welfare.  No claim shall be
made against the City of Columbia Heights for any damage that may result from
shutting off water or from varying the water pressure.  The Public Works
Department shall give notice prior to shutting off water if conditions are
such that it is possible to do so.



   (B)   Pressure and supply not guaranteed.  The Public Works
Department does not guarantee the customer any fixed pressure or a continuous
supply.  In emergencies water may be shut off without notice.



   (C)   Disclaimer of liability.  The City of Columbia Heights shall
not be held responsible by reason of the breaking of any service pipe or
apparatus, frozen water services, shut-off, fixtures within the premises, for
failure in the supply of water, or variances in pressure.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)



§ 4.312  WATER METERS.



   (A)   Requirements and installation.



      (1)   Except for extinguishing of fire, no person or other
entity except authorized city employees shall use water from the water supply
system or permit water to be drawn there from unless the same be metered by
passing through a meter furnished by the Public Works Department at the
expense of such person or entity.



      (2)   The Public Works Department shall ensure that every
customer and user of city water is provided with a properly installed water
meter upon request therefore.  All meters shall be installed by a licensed
plumber or by the Public Works Department in accordance with the following
rules:



         (a)   Meters shall be placed on the service pipe not to
exceed one foot from the wall or floor where such pipe enters the premises;



         (b)   Valve installation requirements as set forth in §
4.304(J);



         (c)   The meter must be placed in a suitable place so as
to keep it dry and clean, protected from frost;



         (d)   All meters shall be readily accessible to the
meter reader, inspectors and Public Works Department personnel.



      (3)   For purposes of enforcing the provisions of this code,
delegated city officials upon presentation of proper identification shall
have the authority to enter any premises during reasonable hours to read,
inspect, maintain, or replace said water meter.



   (B)   Requirements of seal.



      (1)   Every water meter shall be sealed by an employee of the
city at the time of installation; and at any time thereafter where the seal
has been broken.



      (2)   No person shall break or remove said seal except an
authorized employee of the Public Works Department, provided however, that a
licensed plumber may break said seal for the purpose of making necessary
repairs after being granted specific permission by the Public Works
Department.



      (3)   Any broken seal or removed water meter shall be reported
to the city within 24 hours of such action, or as soon as discovered.



   (C)   Protection damage and repairs.  The property owner or
occupant of premises where a meter is installed shall be held responsible for
its care and protection from freezing or hot water, and from other injury or
interference from any person or persons.  Meters that are liable to become
damaged by hot water shall be protected by the installation of a reliable
check and relief valve.  In case of damage to the meter, or in case of its
stoppage or imperfect working, the property owner or occupant shall give
immediate notice to the office of the Public Works Department.  All meters
that are broken or damaged by negligence of owners or occupants of the
premises, or by freezing, hot water, or other damage, including ordinary wear
and tear, shall be repaired or replaced by the Public Works Department and
the cost of repairs or replacement shall be paid by the owner or occupant.



   (D)   Removal; replacement.  Whenever a water meter is installed on
a water service in a premise that is to be remodeled, removed, or destroyed,
or where the service is discontinued so that the water meter is no longer
needed, the owner of such premises shall give notice to the Public Works
Department to remove such meter, and free access to such meter must be
provided so that the meter may be removed.  If the meter is lost or damaged,
the owner of the premises shall be required to replace the same at the
replacement value.



   (E)   Tampering prohibited; estimation of bill.  No one shall in
any way interfere with the proper registration of a water meter.  If any
meter is found to have been tampered with, the water bill shall be estimated
for the period and the meter repaired and tested.  Upon repetition of the
offense, it will be optional with the Public Works Department to discontinue
the water service or collect the amount estimated due.  The basis of
estimating the bill shall be on the amount of the largest quarter billed in
the preceding year from the date of the tampering of the meter.



   (F)   Meter testing.  In case there is doubt as to the accuracy of
a water meter on the part of the customer, he may have the meter tested by
the Public Works Department; at which test he may be present if he so
desires.  If the meter is found to register within 2% of being correct a
charge will be made to pay for the labor of making such tests.  If the meter
is found to measure 2% or more incorrectly, no charge shall be made for
making the test.  If the meter should be found to over-register more than
2%, there shall be a proportional deduction made from the previous water
bill.  A water meter shall be considered to register satisfactorily when it
registers within 2% of accuracy.



   (G)   Remote meter registers.  When remote registers have been
installed, and there is a conflict between the inside meter reading and the
remote register reading, the inside meter reading shall prevail as the actual
reading for billing purposes.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.319



§ 4.313  SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES; RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Charges.  The Council shall by resolution fix all charges and
penalties for late payment for water and sewer service and for garbage and
rubbish hauling rates for dwellings and shall similarly fix the rates by
which such charges shall be computed.  All such utility bills may be
collected as provided for water billing by division (C) of this section.



   (B)   Owner liability for charges.  In billing water service the
rates shall be applied separately for the consumption through each meter. 
The property owner shall be liable for water supplied to the property owner's
property, whether the owner is occupying the property or not, and any charges
unpaid shall be a lien upon the property.



   (C)   Statements; delinquent bills, shut-off for non-payment;
resumption of services.



      (1)   Accounting.  The administration services of the city
shall provide for a method of periodic accounting and recording of water
consumed at each metered location throughout the city.  Bills shall then be
calculated to include connecting and disconnecting charges; minimum charges
for availability of water services, regardless of connection or usage; and
consumption charges as necessary and appropriate for revenue for the
maintenance and operation of the city water works facilities.



      (2)   Statements.  The administrative service shall mail said
water bills to the owner at the address listed for each specified meter
location or to such address as the owner of record may request in writing.



      (3)   Due date.  Water bills are due and payable on the tenth
day of the month following the date of the postmark.  Any bill not paid by
the close of business on the tenth day of the month following its mailing is
delinquent, at which time a charge established by the City Council shall be
added to the billing.  Partial payments shall be considered as payment
towards most dated amounts billed.



      (4)   Delinquent bills.  The administrative service shall
ascertain all water bills that are delinquent after the tenth day of the
month and mail notice of such delinquency to the occupant of the metered
location by the twentieth day of the same month.  If such bill remains
unpaid at the last day of the month in which the delinquency notice was sent,
the administrative service shall send a second written notice of such
delinquency.  Said notice shall include a statement that water service will
be discontinued unless full payment is received by the tenth day of the month
following the month in which the first delinquency notice was mailed. 
Before the water will be turned on, the entire account, including any current
charges must be paid along with and including the charge established by the
Council for turning the water off and on.  Water will be turned on only
during regular working hours.  If water bills are not paid, the bills may be
levied against the property owner prior to turning the water back on, and
proof of levy payment must be provided to the administrative service prior to
said service being turned back on.



      (5)   Shut-off for non-payment.  Water service may be
discontinued at any time thereafter, subject to the following exceptions: 
Service may not be discontinued in this manner for:



         (a)   Any tenant, lessee, or individual occupant of a
multiple dwelling or commercial building which does not have a separate meter
for each separate tenant, lessee, or occupant unit.



         (b)   Any person who has filed with the Finance Director
a written protest of the amount billed, either in whole or in part, together
with the reasons or basis for such protest.



         (c)   Any person who is subject to the Cold Weather
Rule, M.S. § 216B.097, as it may be amended from time to time.



      (6)   Shut-off for non-payment under subdivision (C)(5)(a).



         (a)   Water service may be discontinued under
circumstances described in subdivision (C)(5)(a) by providing 30 days'
written “Final Notice” to each individual tenant, lessee or occupant.



         (b)   Upon expiration of 25 days of said 30-day period,
additional written notice shall be provided to each individual tenant,
lessee, or occupant indicating whether the delinquent water bills remain
unpaid.



      (7)   Shut-off for non-payment under subdivision (C)(5)(b). 
Under circumstances described in subdivision (C)(5)(b), the administrative
service shall investigate the basis for the protest and issue a report of its
findings to the aggrieved party.  When so warranted by the results of the
investigation, water service may thereafter be terminated upon 24 hours'
notice.



      (8)   Certification of delinquent bills.  The Council may
certify unpaid and delinquent water bills to the County Auditor annually for
collection pursuant to the provisions of M.S. § 444.075, as it may be
amended from time to time.



   (D)   Water service bills payable at Finance Department.  All bills
for water and other services are payable at the office of the Finance
Department during regular working hours, or as otherwise provided by said
Finance Department.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)



§ 4.314  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.



   Any customer desiring to discontinue the use of water must notify the
Finance Department in writing.  The Public Works Department shall turn off
the water, subject to any fees established.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)



§ 4.315  REINSTATEMENT OF SERVICE.



   No firm, company or corporation or individuals from whose premises the
water shall have been shut off shall turn the water on without permission
from the Public Works Department.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)



§ 4.316  FIRE SERVICES.



   (A)   Construction.  The construction of fire services shall be
allowed as provided under the building code and Inspection Department. 
Detector flow meters shall be installed on any separate fire service line.



   (B)   Activation of detector flow meter.  When the detector flow
meter is activated by flow through the fire system, it shall be the duty of
the property owner or occupant to notify the Public Works Department within
24 hours thereafter.



   (C)   Limitation of size.  The Public Works Department shall
reserve the right to limit the size of fire protection services where the
street mains are of such size as to make it necessary in order to protect
public interest.



   (D)   Prohibited use.  In any case when the owner or occupant of
any premises are found to be using water from a fire service for other
purposes than fire protection, such act shall be cause for requiring metering
of the fire service with a meter specified by the Public Works Department, at
the expense of the owner.



   (E)   Requirement of meter.  The Public Works Department reserves
the right at any time to require the property owner of the premises supplied
with fire services to furnish and install, at his expense and under the
direction of the Public Works Department an approved water meter and to keep
the same in accurate operating condition, if it finds it necessary to do so
to protect the public interest.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)



§ 4.317  FIRE HYDRANTS.



   (A)   Permit requirements.  No person other than an authorized city
employee shall use a fire hydrant without first obtaining a permit therefor
from the Public Works Department.



   (B)   Flushing streets and sewers.  Hydrants used for construction
purposes or for flushing sewers and streets shall have a reducing coupling
attached to the nozzle of the hydrant with an independent throttling valve
for regulating the supply.  Backflow preventer must be available at the
hydrant or the vehicle.



   (C)   Opening hydrants.  Hydrants shall be opened only with a
numbered hydrant spanner.



   (D)   Use as temporary service by contractors.  Temporary service
from fire hydrants is available for contractors.  A meter will be obtained
from the Public Works Department and a charge shall be made for hook-up. 
The charges for such water service shall be at the same rate as other
services.  Responsibility for the safety of and security of the meter lies
with the contractor.  The contractor shall place a deposit for the
replacement value of the meter with the Public Works Department at the time
of the request for application.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.319



§ 4.318  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Water supply from two sources; private supply substituted for
city water.  On premises where water is supplied from two sources, the city
water being one of the systems, the piping system for city water must be
entirely separated from that of the other source.  If other than city water
is to be furnished on premises previously supplied with city water, the
property owner or his plumber must give notice at the office of the Public
Works Department when he will make this change and must also cut off the
water at the corporation stop and disconnect the service pipe.



   (B)   Disconnection of direct connection of two sources.  Premises
now having direct connection between the city water supply and another supply
shall forthwith disconnect the same.



   (C)   Requirements of safety devices.  Customers are required to
equip boilers, heating plants, and refrigeration machinery with safety
devices and/or backflow preventers; or provide auxiliary supplies.



   (D)   Repairs to comply with provisions.  Repairs made to existing
services shall cause such service to conform in every respect with this
chapter.



   (E)   Accuracy of information not guaranteed.  Such information as
may be obtained from the records, maps, employees, and the like, of the
Public Works Department relative to the location of water mains and service
pipes will be furnished to licensed plumbers and interested parties, but the
Public Works Department does not guarantee the accuracy of the same.



   (F)   Restriction of water use.  The Public Works Department
reserves the right to prohibit the use of water for yard sprinklers,
elevators, air conditioners, coolers, and large consumers of water when in
the judgment of the Public Works Department it shall be necessary to do so
for the protection of public interest.



   (G)   Provisions considered part of every contract.  The foregoing
rules and regulations shall be considered a part of the contract for every
person who takes water supplied by the City of Columbia Heights, and shall be
considered as having expressed his agreement to be bound thereby.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.319



§ 4.319  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in § 1.999.  Each day that a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article is
liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by
reason of such violation.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)



ARTICLE IV:  SANITARY SEWER SERVICE



Section



   4.401   Definitions



   4.402   Public sewage system



   4.403   Requirement of permits, insurance and indemnifications



   4.404   Sewer rates



   4.405   Sewer constructions; general requirements and specifications



   4.406   Regulations governing use of public sewers



   4.407   Miscellaneous sewage regulatory provisions



   4.408   Penalty



§ 4.401  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   B.O.D. (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees C, expressed in parts per
million by weight.



   BUILDING DRAIN.  That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer beginning three feet outside the inner face of the building
wall.



   BUILDING SERVICE.  That portion of the sanitary sewer from the
building up to and including the connection to the public sanitary sewer.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public
sanitary sewer.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  Any liquid wastes from industrial processes as
distinct from sanitary sewage.



   INFLOW/INFILTRATION.  That portion of the waste stream which includes
ground, surface and storm waters (clear water).



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.



   Ph.  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in
any dimension.



   PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER.  A sanitary sewer in which all owners of
abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by public authority.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted or introduced.



   SEWAGE.  A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.  Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.



   SEWAGE WORKS.  All facilities and equipment for collecting, pumping,
treating, and disposing of sewage.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage.



   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN.  A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids; and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   WATERCOURSE.  A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)



§ 4.402  PUBLIC SEWAGE SYSTEM.



   (A)   Prohibited acts.  The following acts are unlawful:



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or
permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private
property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city,
any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.



      (2)   It is unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet
within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions
of this article.



      (3)   It is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage.



   (B)   Required use.  All houses, buildings, or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the
city, shall connect with and use public sanitary sewers.  No private sewage
system is lawful within the city.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.408



§ 4.403  REQUIREMENT OF PERMITS, INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Prohibited connections.  No unauthorized person shall
uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any
public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit
from the building inspection department and otherwise complying with the
terms of this chapter.



   (B)   Permits and bonds.  Permits for building sewers and
connections shall be taken out by a master plumber, licensed with the city,
who shall furnish a bond in the amount of  $3,000, conditioned so as to
secure compliance by the principal with all of the provisions of this code
and so as to further secure performance by the principal of all jobs and
projects undertaken within the city.



   (C)   Permit charges and applications.  Metropolitan sewer
availability charges (SAC), if any, shall be paid at the time the permit is
taken out.  The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the City Building Inspection Permit Department.  The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information which the City Engineer may reasonably require.



   (D)   Permit and inspection fees.  A permit and inspection fee as
provided by City Council resolution shall be paid to the city at the time the
application is filed.



   (E)   Permit cards.  The city shall furnish a permit card with
permit number which shall be prominently displayed on property where sewer
connection is being made; said card shall be displayed for the duration of
the work.



   (F)   Insurance requirements.  Prior to the commencement of
construction work such master plumber shall take out and maintain insurance
against damages to property or injury or death to persons, which policies
shall indemnify and save harmless the city and all of its officers and
personnel against any claim, demand, damages, actions or cause of action
arising out of or by reason of the doing of the work or activities related or
incident thereto, and from any costs, disbursements, or expenses of defending
the same.  The property damage insurance coverage shall be in the amount of
$50,000 or more, and the public liability insurance for injury or death to
persons shall be in the amount of $100,000 and $300,000.  Proof of such
insurance shall be filed with the city prior to commencement of construction
work, and such policy shall provide that the city shall be notified
immediately of any termination or modification of such insurance.



   (G)   Indemnification by master plumber.  Should the insurance
coverage hereinbefore provided be inadequate in amount then such master
plumber shall himself indemnify and save harmless the city and all of its
officers and personnel in like manner.



   (H)   Indemnification by owner.  All costs and expenses incident to
the installation, connection and repair of the building sewer shall be borne
by the owner.  The owner shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or repair
of the building sewer.  The City Engineer shall establish rules and
regulations for the proper implementation of this part, which when approved
by the Council by resolution, shall govern the installation and repair of
building sewers and connections.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.408



§ 4.404  SEWER RATES.



   Sewer rates shall be established by resolution of the City Council and
billings shall be administered as delineated in § 4.313(C) of this
chapter.  Quantity of sewage for billing purposes is based upon water
metered, or required metered, in the case of a source other than the city
water system unless special meters approved by the City Engineer are
installed and maintained at the property owner's expense for the specific
purpose of metering sewage.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)



§ 4.405  SEWER CONSTRUCTIONS; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Separate building sewers.  A separate and independent
building sewer shall be provided for every building and in the case of
residential property, one living unit, unless otherwise authorized by the
City Engineer.  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the Public
Works Department, to meet all requirements of this section.



   (B)   Connection to public sewer.  The connection of the building
sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the wye branch, if such branch
is available at a suitable location.  If the public sewer is 12 inches in
diameter or less, and no properly located wye branch is available, the owner
shall at his expense install a wye branch in the public sewer at the location
specified by the City Engineer.  Where the public sewer is greater than 12
inches in diameter, and no properly located wye branch is available, a neat
hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with
entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees.  A
45-degree ell may be used to make such connection with the spigot end cut so
as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer.  The 0.8 point
of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the 0.8 point or
at a higher elevation than the public sewer.  A smooth, neat joint shall be
made, and the connection made secure and watertight by engagement in
concrete.  Special fittings may be used for the connection only when
approved by the City Engineer.  No portion of the building service shall
extend into the public sewer.



   (C)   Excavations.  All excavations required for the installation
of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by
the City Engineer.  Tunneling may be permitted but no tunnel shall exceed
six feet in length and the pipe shall be installed so as to permit inspection
of all joints.  No backfill shall be placed until work has been inspected by
the city.  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard.  Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the City Engineer.



   (D)   Inspection, connection to public sewer.  The applicant for
the building sewer permit shall notify the Public Works Department when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. 
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the City Engineer or
his representative.  Abandonment of existing sanitary storm sewer services
shall be made in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer.



   (E)   Minimum parcel size.  No building sewer or connection to the
city sanitary sewer system shall be permitted or made from any building or
structure located on a lot, piece or parcel of land or several lots, pieces
or parcels of land having a total width less than that permitted by zoning
ordinance.



   (F)   Specifications.  In addition to the specifications as
established by the City Engineer, the following requirements shall be
complied with:



      (1)   Building sewers shall be of extra heavy duty cast iron
pipe, or PVC conforming to ASTM D-3034, SDR-35.  Minimum size of building
sewer shall be 4-inch extra heavy cast iron pipe.  Change in direction of
building sewer shall be made by use of fittings approved by the plumbing
inspector and/or the Engineering Department.



      (2)   Type of joints shall comply with the following
specifications:  Cast iron shall be a push-on or mechanical type. 
Polyvinyl Chloride pipe shall be bell and spigot with an elastomeric O ring
gasket in accordance with ASTM F477.



      (3)   Ductile iron pipe may be required by the City Engineer
where the building sewer is installed in filled or unstable ground.



      (4)   Existing cesspools and septic tanks shall be removed
and/or suitably filled, as approved by the City Engineer.



      (5)   Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to
the building at an elevation below the basement floor.  No building sewer
shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which
might thereby be weakened.  The depth shall be sufficient to afford
protection from frost.  The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade
and in straight alignment insofar as possible.



      (6)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low
to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the
building sewer.



      (7)   All joints and connections shall be made gastight and
watertight.



      (8)   O ring joints shall be installed in accordance with
manufacturers' recommendations, and backfilling shall not occur until the
joints have been tested and approved by the city.



      (9)   Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by
approval of the City Engineer.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.408



§ 4.406  REGULATIONS GOVERNING USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.



   (A)   Prohibited use.  No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Storm waters and unpolluted drainage.  Storm water and all
other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designed as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the
City Engineer.  Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, upon approval of the City Engineer, to a storm sewer, or natural
outlet.



   (C)   Prohibited substances.  Except as hereinafter provided, no
person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewer:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150° F.



      (2)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts
per million by weight of fat, oil or grease.



      (3)   Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.



      (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.



      (5)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid
or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or
other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.



      (6)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.



      (7)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous
substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, which constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.



      (8)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.



      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of
creating a public nuisance.



   (D)   Requirement of interceptors.  Grease, oil, and sand
interceptors shall be provided, as determined by the City Engineer, for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or
any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units.  All such interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the City Engineer, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.  Grease and oil interceptors shall
be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes in temperature.  They shall be of substantial construction,
watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in
place shall be gastight and watertight.  Where installed, all grease, oil
and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in
continuously efficient operation at all times, and shall be subject to
inspection by the city or other governmental public health agents.



   (E)   Certain types of uses; subject to approval.  The admission
into the public sewers of any water or wastes having a five-day biochemical
oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or containing
more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or containing
any quantity of substances having characteristics described in division (C)
or (D) of this section having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the
average daily sewage flow of the city is subject to the review and approval
of the City Engineer.



   (F)   Preliminary treatment.  The owner shall provide at his
expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the
biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids
to 350 parts per million by weight; or reduce objectionable characteristics
of constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in division (C) of
this section, or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water
or wastes.  Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information
relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for
the approval of the City Engineer and of the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said
approvals are obtained in writing.



   (G)   Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities.  Where
preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation, and
records maintained concerning quality of the effluent, by the owner, at his
expense.  Such facilities and all associated records shall be subject to
inspection by the city.



   (H)   Maintenance of services.  The property owner shall be
responsible for maintenance of the building  service, including cleaning,
repair and replacement.  All other city requirements shall be met in the
maintenance of building services.



   (I)   Requirements of manholes.  The owner of any property served
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes.  Such manhole, shall be accessible and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
City Engineer.  The manhole shall be installed by the owner, at his expense,
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.  The city shall have right of access to inspect or sample effluent at
all times.



   (J)   Measurements tests and analyses.  All measurements, tests and
analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is
made in division (C) and (E) of this section shall be determined in
accordance with methods employed by the Minnesota Department of Health, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in division (I) of
this section, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole.  In
the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole
shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer
to the point at which the building sewer is connected.



   (K)   Special provisions; industrial wastes.  No provision of this
section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment
subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.408



§ 4.407  MISCELLANEOUS SEWAGE REGULATORY PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Property damage.  No unauthorized person shall maliciously,
willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper
with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the city
sewage system. Any person violating this provision or any other provision of
this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Inspections; authority and powers.  The City Engineer and
other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing, in
accordance with the provisions of this article.



   (C)   Extension across other properties.  Building sewers shall not
extend across other properties, except where proper easements have been
recorded at the county.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)  Penalty, see § 4.408



§ 4.408  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in § 1.999.  Each day that a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article is
liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by
reason of such violation.



(Ord. 1227, passed 8-26-91)



ARTICLE V:  LIQUOR OPERATIONS



Section



   4.501   General provisions



   4.502   Rules and regulations



§ 4.501  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Municipal liquor stores are hereby authorized to provide
“off-sale” and “on-sale” intoxicating liquor and beer for the city at
stores located at such suitable places in the city as the Council may
determine.



   (B)   For purposes of this code, the terms defined in this section
shall have the meaning ascribed to them:



      INTOXICATED PERSON.  A person who has lost control to any extent
of his mental or physical faculties as a result of drinking intoxicating
liquors or beer.



      INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR.  Ethyl alcohol, distilled,
fermented, spirituous, vinous, and malt beverages containing in excess of
3.2% by alcohol by weight.



      LIQUOR STORE.  An on-sale or off-sale or combination on-sale and
off-sale establishment engaged in the sale of intoxicating liquor at retail,
which as an incident thereof, may also sell cigars, cigarettes, ice, all
forms of tobacco, beer, and soft drinks at retail.  The liquor store
includes an on-sale or combination on-sale and off-sale establishment
operating a restaurant for selling food to be consumed on the premises.



      MINOR.  A person less than 21 years of age.



      OFF-SALE.  The sale of liquor or beer in original packages in
retail stores for consumption off or away from the premises where sold.



      ON-SALE.  The sale of liquor or beer by the glass for
consumption on the premises only.



      PACKAGE or ORIGINAL PACKAGE.  Any container or receptacle
holding liquor, which container or receptacle is corked or sealed.



      SALE, SELL and SOLD.  All barters for pecuniary gain, or all
manner and means of furnishing intoxicating liquor or beer in violation or
evasion of law.



      3.2% MALT LIQUOR or BEER.  Any malt beverage with an alcoholic
content of more than 0.5% by volume and not more than 3.2% by weight.



   (C)   The liquor store manager shall supervise and control employees
assigned to him and shall ensure compliance with all applicable provisions of
the law of the State of Minnesota and ordinances of the city pertaining to
liquor operations.



   (D)   The City Manager shall designate the days and hours of
operation.  However, no sale of intoxicating liquor may be made at a time
when such sale is prohibited by Minnesota Statute.



(`77 Code, § 4.401)  (Am. Ord. 1007, passed 8-23-82; Am. Ord. 1135, passed
9-22-86; Am. Ord. 1188, passed 6-26-89)  Penalty, see § 1.999



§ 4.502  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Manager shall have authority to promulgate reasonable
rules and regulations governing the operation of municipal liquor stores,
subject to the laws of the State of Minnesota, the Charter and ordinances of
the city and the conditions and restrictions as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   No intoxicating liquor or beer shall be sold or served to a
minor or an intoxicated person, directly or indirectly.  City employees
shall have the discretion to refuse to sell or serve any individual when said
employee believes in good faith that intoxicating liquor or beer will thereby
be made available to an intoxicated person or a minor.



   (C)   Liquor store personnel shall ensure that persons ineligible to
purchase or consume liquor are not permitted to remain on the municipal
liquor store premises.



   (D)   No person under the age of 19 shall be employed in any room
where intoxicating liquors are sold at retail, on-sale, except such persons
who are performing bus boy, janitorial, or dishwashing services.



(`77 Code, § 4.402)  Penalty, see § 1.999



ARTICLE VI:  STORM WATER UTILITY



Section



   4.601   General operation



   4.602   Definitions



   4.602   Storm water utility factors



   4.603   Storm water utility factors



   4.604   Credits



   4.605   Exemptions



   4.606   Payment of fee



   4.607   Appeal of fee



   4.608   Penalty for late payment



   4.609   Certification of past due fees on taxes



§ 4.601  GENERAL OPERATION.



   The city storm water system shall be operated as a public utility
(hereinafter called the “storm water utility”), pursuant to M.S. §
444.075, as amended, from which revenues will be derived subject to the
provisions of this article and Minnesota Statutes.



(Ord. 1397, passed 8-9-99)



§ 4.602  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MONTHLY STORM WATER UTILITY REVENUE.  The estimated monthly
expenditures for planning and inventories, capital expenditures, personnel
and equipment and operation of the storm water utility, in accordance with
established city policy.



   STORM WATER UTILITY FEE.  The annual charge developed for each parcel
of land.



   UTILITY FACTOR.  The ratio of runoff volume, in inches, for a
particular land use, to the runoff volume, in inches, for an average
single-family residential, assuming a two-inch rainfall and Natural Resources
Conservation Services (NRCS) “Type B” soil conditions.



(Ord. 1397, passed 8-9-99)



§ 4.602  STORM WATER UTILITY FACTORS.



   (A)   The storm water management fee shall be determined by first
determining the percentage of total runoff in the city which is attributed to
single-family residential property.  The fee per acre for single- family
residential is computed by computing the product of the runoff percentage and
the monthly storm water utility revenue, divided by the estimated total acres
of single-family residential land use in  the city.  The per acre fee, the
appropriate utility factor and the total acreage of the parcels. 
Single-family residential parcels shall be assessed on a per household basis.



   (B)   The utility factor for various land uses are shown in the
following table:



 


Classification

 

Land Use

 

CN

 

Utility Factor






1

 

Single-Family Residential District

 

72

 

1.00




2

 

Two-Family Residential District

 

75

 

1.30




3

 

Three-Family Residential District

 

80

 

1.92




4

 

Manufacturing

 

88

 

3.30




5

 

Retail Business District

 

90

 

3.74




6

 

Limited Business District

 

90

 

3.74




7

 

General Business District

 

92

 

4.23




8

 

Central Business District

 

92

 

4.23




9

 

Neighborhood Business

 

88

 

3.30




10

 

Light Industrial District

 

88

 

3.30




11

 

Heavy Industrial District

 

90

 

3.34





 



(Ord. 1397, passed 8-9-99)



§ 4.603  STORM WATER UTILITY FACTORS.



   (A)   The storm water management fee shall be determined by first
determining the percentage of total runoff in the city which is attributed to
single-family residential property.  The fee per acre for single-family
residential is computed by computing the product of the runoff percentage and
the monthly storm water utility revenue, divided by the estimated total acres
of single-family residential land use in  the city.  The per acre fee, the
appropriate utility factor and the total acreage of the parcels. 
Single-family residential parcels shall be assessed on a per household basis.



   (B)   The utility factor for various land uses are shown in the
following table:



 




Classification

 

Land Use

 

CN

 

Utility Factor




1

 
Single-Family Residential District
 

72

 

1.00




2

 
Two-Family Residential District
 

75

 

1.30




3

 
Three-Family Residential District
 

80

 

1.92




4

 
Manufacturing
 

88

 

3.30




5

 
Retail Business District
 

90

 

3.74




6

 
Limited Business District
 

90

 

3.74




7

 
General Business District
 

92

 

4.23




8

 
Central Business District
 

92

 

4.23




9

 
Neighborhood Business
 

88

 

3.30




10

 
Light Industrial District
 

88

 

3.30




11

 
Heavy Industrial District
 

90

 

3.34





 



(Ord. 1397, passed 8-9-99)



§ 4.604  CREDITS.



   The Council may adopt policies, by resolution, for adjustment of the
storm water management fees.  Information to justify a fee adjustment must
be supplied by the property owner. Such adjustments of fees shall be
retroactive.  Credits will be reviewed regularly by a staff committee.



(Ord. 1397, passed 8-9-99)



§ 4.605  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following land uses are exempt from the storm water management fee:



   (A)   Public road right-of-way;



   (B)   Lakes;



   (C)   Wetlands;



   (D)   City property.



(Ord. 1397, passed 8-9-99)



§ 4.606  PAYMENT OF FEE.



   The storm water utility fees shall be billed in accordance with the
Finance Department’s current billing cycle with water and sanitary sewer
bills.  The fee shall be due and payable the same terms as water and
sanitary sewer utility bills.  Any prepayment or overpayment of charges
shall be retained by the city and applied against subsequent fees.  All such
utility bills may be collected as provided for water billing by § 4.312(C).



(Ord. 1397, passed 8-9-99)



§ 4.607  APPEAL OF FEE.



   If a property owner or person responsible for paying the storm water
management fee believes that a particular assigned fee is incorrect, such a
person may request that the fee be re-computed.



(Ord. 1397, passed 8-9-99)



§ 4.608  PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT.



   The Council shall, by resolution, fix all charges and penalties for
late payment for storm water utility fees and shall similarly fix the rates
by which such charges shall be computed.



(Ord. 1397, passed 8-9-99)



§ 4.609  CERTIFICATION OF PAST DUE FEES ON TAXES.



   If any storm water utility fees have not been paid when due, then a
penalty as set forth in § 4.608, shall be added to that amount due.  Any
such past due fees may then be certified to the County Auditor for collection
with real estate taxes on the following year pursuant to M.S. § 444.075,
subd. 3, as amended.  In addition, the city shall also have the right to
bring a civil action or to take other legal remedies to collect unpaid fees.



(Ord. 1397, passed 8-9-99)



ARTICLE VII:  GARBAGE AND RECYCLING SERVICES



Section



   4.701   Intent



   4.702   Definitions



   4.703   General operations



   4.704   Garbage general requirements



   4.705   Recycling general requirements



   4.706   Other general requirements



   4.707   Solid waste service rates and billing



§ 4.701  INTENT.



   (A)   It is the intent of the City Council to establish a system for
the orderly and regular collection of garbage, recyclables, problem
materials, source separated organic materials and yard wastes in the city; to
insure that the disposal of the materials shall be accomplished in a sanitary
manner; to ensure the protection of public health and safety and promote city
cleanliness and livability; to minimize vehicle wear and tear on streets due
to large truck traffic; to provide high quality solid waste and recycling
services in the most cost-effective manner possible; and, to be consistent
with the requirements of the state statutes, state rules and Anoka County
ordinances, and with state and Anoka County solid waste plans.



   (B)   The City Manager or their designee shall have the authority to
develop Solid Waste Management Operating Policy (SWMOP) concerning days of
collection, use, type and location of waste containers and other matters as
they deem necessary to provide for the safe, orderly and cost-efficient
preparation, storage, collection and disposal of all waste materials covered
in this ordinance. These Operating Policies shall not be contrary to this
article. The City Council will approve the SWMOP and approve changes as
required.



(Ord. 1646, passed 2-26-18)



§ 4.702  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this article, the following words, terms, and phrases shall
have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates
otherwise.



   APPLIANCE.  White goods such as refrigerators, freezers, washers,
dryers, dishwashers and other similar large household equipment, but shall
not include electronic devices such as computers, printers, routers and
similar equipment.



   CITY.  The City of Columbia Heights, Anoka County, Minnesota.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Columbia Heights, Anoka
County, Minnesota.



   CITY-DESIGNATED SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY.  The facility
designated by the city where MSW collected in accordance with the city's
Solid Waste Services Agreement is to be deposited.



   COLLECTION.  The aggregation of MSW, recyclables, problem materials,
yard waste, and source separated organic materials from the premise at which
they are generated, and including all activities up to the time they are
delivered to a facility or end market.



   COLLECTION VEHICLE.  Any vehicle licensed and inspected for solid
waste collection as required by the city, county, and/or state.



   COMPOSTING FACILITY.  Any facility licensed to process yard waste
and/or SSOM in conformance with federal, state and local regulations.



   COUNTY.  The County of Anoka, Minnesota.



   DESIGNATED SERVICE PROVIDER or SERVICE PROVIDER.  The haulers/handlers
contracted by the city to provide collection of most solid waste generated at
premises in the city. The city reserves the discretion to add other service
locations (non-municipal) as agreed to by Council resolution.



   DUMPSTER.  A container having a minimum capacity of one cubic yard, of
an approved sanitary type, with the proper attachments for lifting onto a
collection vehicle.



   DWELLING UNIT.  A separate dwelling place with a kitchen.



   ELECTRONIC WASTE.  Electronic waste (electronic items) has the meaning
set forth in M.S. § 115A.1310, subd. 7, as a "covered electronic device" and
includes items such as television and computer monitors, computers, computer
peripheral devices, fax machines, DVD players, video cassette recorders,
other video display devices, cell phones and other small appliances with an
electric cord.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  Hazardous waste shall have the meaning set forth in
the Minnesota Statutes. Wastes are hazardous in Minnesota when they display
one or more of these characteristics: ignitable, oxidizer, corrosive,
reactive, toxic, or lethal.



   HOLIDAYS.  Holidays shall be New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of
July (Independence Day), Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.



   MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW).  Mixed municipal solid waste shall
have the meaning set forth in the Minnesota Statutes and includes refuse,
rubbish, trash, and other solid waste from residential, commercial,
industrial, and community activities, that the generator of the waste
aggregates for collection. MSW does not include auto hulks, street sweepings,
ash, construction debris, mining waste, sludges, tree and agricultural
wastes, tires, lead acid batteries, motor and vehicle fluids and filters, and
other materials collected, processed, and disposed of as separate waste
streams. MSW is also referred to as "garbage."



   MULTIPLE DWELLING PREMISES.  Any premise with more than four separate
dwelling units, including but not limited to, apartments.



   PREMISE/PREMISES.  Any dwelling unit, building, and every other place
where any person resides within the city, including properties with more than
one dwelling unit and properties with premises attached to retail or
commercial structures.



   PROBLEM MATERIALS.  Problem materials, also known as bulky waste,
shall have the meaning set forth in M.S. § 115A.952, and is a subset of
municipal solid waste. Household items and other discarded materials that,
due to their dimensions and weight, are typically not collected as part of
the regular garbage and recycling services or for which there may be a
separate fee, such as furniture, carpeting, and mattresses, are also included
in this definition.



   PROCESSING.  Processing shall have the meaning set forth in the
Minnesota Statutes and shall mean the treatment of waste after collection and
before disposal.



   RECYCLABLES.  Recyclables shall have the meaning set forth in the
Minnesota Statutes and means materials that are separated from municipal
solid waste for the purpose of recycling or composting, including paper,
glass, plastics, metals, automobile oil, batteries, and source-separated
compostable materials and all material hereafter designated as recyclable by
the city's SWMOP.



   RECYCLING.  Recycling shall have the meaning as set forth in the
Minnesota Statutes, and shall mean the process of collecting and preparing
recyclable materials and reusing the materials in their original form or
using them in manufacturing processes that do not cause the destruction of
recyclable materials in a manner that precludes further use.



   ROLL-OFF CONTAINER.  An open top dumpster characterized by a
rectangular footprint, utilizing wheels to facilitate rolling the dumpster in
place. The container is designed to be transported by special roll-off trucks.



   SOLID WASTE.  Solid waste has the meaning set forth in M.S. § 116.06,
but is further defined for purposes of this article to include MSW,
recyclables, problem materials, yard waste, SSOM and litter.



   SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC MATERIALS (SSOM).  Source Separated Organic
Materials (SSOM) shall have the meaning set forth in the Minnesota Statutes,
and shall include food waste and other compostable organic materials that are
source separated for recovery. The term "organics" does not include yard
waste for purposes of this article. Also referred to as "food waste/organics"
and "source separated organics."



   STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



   YARD WASTE.  Garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds, shrubs,
brush and tree waste, and prunings.



(Ord. 1646, passed 2-26-18)



§ 4.703  GENERAL OPERATIONS.



   (A)   Collection required. Every residential premise shall use the
collection service for MSW, recyclables, SSOM and yard waste, as is made
available by contract between the city and its designated service provider
and which complies with the SWMOP of the city.



   (B)   Unlawful accumulation. No person shall allow MSW, recyclables,
problem materials, SSOM, yard waste, hazardous waste or any other waste to
accumulate upon property owned or occupied by any such person; or fail to
dispose thereof in a manner meeting the provisions of this article and
Chapters 5A and 8 of this code.



   (C)   Burning or burying prohibited. No person shall burn or bury
any MSW, recyclables or other waste materials within the city.



   (D)   Hazardous waste. No person shall place hazardous waste in
garbage, recycling or yard waste containers. Hazardous waste shall only be
processed/disposed of in accordance with city, county, state and federal
rules and requirements.



   (E)   Ownership of solid waste. MSW, recyclables, problem materials,
SSOM or yard waste shall be owned by and be the responsibility of the
occupants of the premises until collection by the designated service
provider. Upon collection of the solid waste by the designated service
provider, the solid waste becomes the property and responsibility of the
service provider. All solid waste shall be transported to, weighed in at, and
disposed of at a solid waste facility that is approved by the city.



      (1)   Collection of solid waste. The service provider shall
collect solid waste at designated collection points as permitted by § 
8.301(E). All collection services shall be conducted Monday through Friday.
When holidays fall on a weekday, collection shall be made within the next
calendar day which is not a Sunday.



      (2)   Clean and safe collection. It shall be the duty of the
service provider and every subcontractor and person, including their agents
and employees, who is licensed to remove any solid waste or any other waste
material or who is engaged in the removal, loading or unloading of any such
substance in the city to do so efficiently, in a clean manner and with as
little danger and prejudice to life and health as possible.



      (3)   Transport of solid waste. All persons engaged in the
collection of solid waste in the city shall transport the materials in
enclosed vehicles, carts, dumpsters, bins, or other secure containers so as
to prevent any loss of these materials and to prevent litter. Care shall be
taken to ensure no blowing or escape of trash, litter, yard waste or liquids
from truck operations occurs during collection.



      (4)   Hours of collection of solid waste. No collection of
residential MSW, recyclables, problem materials, SSOM or yard waste shall be
made except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.



   (F)   Walk-up service. Residents who are elderly or physically
disabled and are unable to place their containers at the designated location
may request "walk-up" service from the provider, whereby the hauler will
service those containers from the house access that is nearest the designated
collection point.



   (G)   Collection point. The location for collection of refuse
containers as determined in SWMOP must be cleared of obstructions and hazards
such as snow and ice for the scheduled collection to occur.



   (H)   Separation of recyclables. Occupants of all premises shall
separate recyclables for pick-up. All separated recyclables must be
transported to a licensed recycling facility or delivered to an end market
for sale or reuse, or brought to an intermediate collection center for later
delivery to a licensed processing center or end market for recycling. It is
unlawful for any person to transport for disposal or to dispose of designated
recyclables in a MSW disposal facility. No separated recyclables may be
incinerated, landfilled, composted, or made into fuel pellets.



   (I)   Scavenging prohibited. No person shall scavenge or otherwise
collect MSW, recyclables, problem materials, SSOM or yard wastes from
containers or from public or private property unless licensed therefore by
the city, or unless permission of the owner of any such materials has been
given.



   (J)   Service provider limits. The city will review other service
providers and prices at the end of each contract term or following contract
extension.



(Ord. 1646, passed 2-26-18)



§ 4.704  GARBAGE GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Each premise shall have its garbage collected a minimum of
once each week, excepting those premises participating in the SSOM program
and authorized 30 gallon cart low volume service as determined by SWMOP.



   (B)   The city shall provide each premise with a garbage container
(wheeled carts with attached lids) or dumpsters. Except as otherwise set
forth herein, all containers furnished by the city shall, while in the
possession and control of the residences and multiple dwelling units, remain
the property of the city. Residences and multiple dwelling units shall use
the containers only for the purposes for which they are intended and shall
not make any alterations to the containers. Owners of premises shall be
responsible for loss or damage to the containers in excess of ordinary wear
and tear. In the event more than one container is requested or a replacement
container is requested due to theft or damage beyond ordinary wear and tear,
the city shall provide additional containers.



   (C)   The service provider shall provide each multiple dwelling
premise with at least one standard dumpster or equivalent number of large
containers and collections, to be collected a minimum of once per week.
Dumpsters remain the property of the service providers. Multiple dwelling
premises may not have extra garbage or rubbish outside of the provided
container, except for large household items such as furniture items, carpet,
padding, and mattresses. See Chapters 5A and 8 of this code.



(Ord. 1646, passed 2-26-18)



§ 4.705  RECYCLING GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Items designated for recycling shall be listed in the SWMOP to
be part of an authorized recycling program, and contamination will be dealt
with according to that policy.



   (B)   The city shall be responsible for collection of recyclable
materials from containers at residential properties in the city. Additional
authorized recyclable materials will be collected outside of the container
when bagged or boxed that meets service provider specified procedures.



   (C)   City of Columbia Heights Recycling Center. The city may, at
the city's option, add or remove recyclable items collected at the recycling
center or discontinue the program entirely as determined by the SWMOP. The
recycling center may be utilized by area businesses and residents. Rimless
tires may be delivered only by Columbia Heights residents for non-commercial
purposes. Further, rimless tires are limited to four car or light truck tires
per resident each year.



(Ord. 1646, passed 2-26-18)



§ 4.706  OTHER GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The city shall organize weekly collections and
recycling/processing of appliances at a minimum. Each property is authorized
disposal of one appliance each calendar year, at no cost, for each dwelling
unit, which shall be tracked by the service provider.



   (B)   The city shall provide problem material (bulk) collection
services a minimum of twice per week. The service provider shall conduct
scheduling, collection and processing/disposal, donation and/or recycling
services for problem materials from premises at the premise's request.
Contamination will be dealt with according to SWMOP. Problem material
recycling must include a donation stop and the recycling must meet SCORE
(Select Committee on Recycling and the Environment) creditable.



   (C)   The city shall organize monthly residential collection and
processing/disposal of household electronic waste at a minimum. The service
provider shall schedule work orders for premises and charge a flat fee as
determined by the city.



   (D)   The service provider shall insure that processing of problem
materials shall be conducted at a licensed facility in accordance with
applicable county, state and federal rules and regulations.



   (E)   The city is responsible for weekly collection of yard waste
(as defined by SWMOP) from premises during the growing season (April -
November). Yard waste collected from premises shall occur on the same
collection day as garbage and recycling. Christmas tree collection will be
conducted after the holiday season.



   (F)   Yard waste collection shall be limited to only those materials
placed in carts owned by the city or in compostable bags that meet State of
Minnesota, Anoka County, and City of Columbia Heights requirements. Other
reusable containers allowed will be determined by the service provider and
the city in the refuse operations policy.



   (G)   The city is responsible for weekly collection of organics (as
defined by SWMOP) from premises during the growing season, April - November,
plus during the winter. Organics collected from premises shall occur on the
same collection day as garbage and recycling except during the winter. Items
designated for recycling shall be listed in the solid waste operating
policies to be part of an authorized organics program and contamination will
be dealt with according to that policy. Food waste must be enclosed in
compostable bags and disposed in city authorized containers only.



   (H)   The City Council may impose an administrative fine on any
person found in violation of any applicable statute, regulation, or provision
of this article, or the city's SWMOP.



      (1)   Any proposed administrative fine shall be preceded by a
public hearing, conducted before the City Council, and preceded by at least
15 days' public notice of the hearing. The notice, in addition to setting
forth the time and place of the hearing, shall state the basis for which the
administrative fine shall be considered.



      (2)   The following are minimum penalties which shall be
imposed by the City Council for violations of any applicable statute,
regulation, provision of this article, or the city's SWMOP.



         (a)   For the first violation, at least a $100
administrative fine.



         (b)   For the second violation within any four year
period, at least a $300 administrative fine.



(Ord. 1646, passed 2-26-18)



§ 4.707  SOLID WASTE SERVICE RATES AND BILLING.



   (A)   Charges. The City Council shall by resolution fix all charges
and penalties for solid waste service rates for dwellings and shall similarly
fix the rates by which such charges shall be computed. All such utility bills
may be collected as provided for billing by division (C) of this section.
Other charges and fees for services may be included in the SWMOP.



   (B)   Owner liability for charges. In billing solid waste service
the rates shall be applied by container size and service level. The property
owner shall be liable for solid waste service to the property owner's
property, whether the owner is occupying the property or not, and any charges
unpaid shall be a lien upon the property.



   (C)   Statements; delinquent bills, stop-service for non-payment;
resumption of services.



      (1)   Accounting. The administration services of the city
shall provide for a method of periodic accounting and recording of solid
waste service levels at each location throughout the city. Bills shall then
be calculated to include penalty and extra service charges; minimum charges
for availability of solid waste services, regardless of usage; and other
charges as necessary and appropriate for revenue for the maintenance and
operation of the city solid waste budgets.



      (2)   Statements. The administrative service shall mail said
utility bills to the owner at the address listed for each specified location
or to such address as the owner of record may request in writing.



      (3)   Due date. Utility bills are due and payable on the tenth
day of the month following the date of the postmark. Any bill not paid by the
close of business on the tenth day of the month following its mailing is
delinquent, at which time a charge established by the City Council shall be
added to the billing. Partial payments shall be considered as payment towards
most dated amounts billed.



      (4)   Delinquent bills. The administrative service shall
ascertain all utility bills that are delinquent after the tenth day of the
month and mail notice of such delinquency to the occupant of the location by
the twentieth day of the same month. If such bill remains unpaid at the last
day of the month in which the delinquency notice was sent, the administrative
service shall send a second written notice of such delinquency. Said notice
shall include a statement that solid waste service will be discontinued
unless full payment is received by the tenth day of the month following the
month in which the first delinquency notice was mailed. Before the solid
waste service will be continued, the entire account, including any current
charges must be paid along with and including the charge established by the
Council for penalties. Solid waste service will only be provided during
regular working hours. If utility bills are not paid, the bills may be levied
against the property owner prior to continuing solid waste service, and proof
of levy payment must be provided to the administrative service prior to said
service being turned back on.



      (5)   Shut-off for non-payment. Solid waste service may be
discontinued at any time thereafter, subject to the following exceptions.
Service may not be discontinued in this manner for:



         (a)   Any tenant, lessee, or individual occupant of a
multiple dwelling or commercial building which does not have a separate
utility bill for each separate tenant, lessee, or occupant unit.



         (b)   Any person who has filed with the Finance Director
a written protest of the amount billed, either in whole or in part, together
with the reasons or basis for such protest.



      (6)   Shut-off for non-payment under division (C)(5)(a).



         (a)   Solid waste service may be discontinued under
circumstances described in division (C)(5)(a) by providing 30 days' written
"Final Notice" to each individual tenant, lessee or occupant.



         (b)   Upon expiration of 25 days of said 30-day period,
additional written notice shall be provided to each individual tenant,
lessee, or occupant indicating whether the delinquent utility bills remain
unpaid.



      (7)   Shut-off for non-payment under division (C)(5)(b). Under
circumstances described in division (C)(5)(b), the administrative service
shall investigate the basis for the protest and issue a report of its
findings to the aggrieved party. When so warranted by the results of the
investigation, solid waste service may thereafter be terminated upon 24
hours' notice.



      (8)   Certification of delinquent bills. The Council may
certify unpaid and delinquent solid waste bills to the County Auditor
annually for collection pursuant to the provisions of M.S. § 444.075, as it
may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 1646, passed 2-26-18)



CHAPTER 5:  COMMERCIAL LICENSING



   Article



      I.   LICENSING PROCEDURES



      II.   MERCHANTS



      III.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS



      IV.   AMUSEMENTS



      V.   LIQUOR AND BEER



      VI.   CONSUMER SERVICES, MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESSES



      VII.   COMPLIANCE



ARTICLE I:  LICENSING PROCEDURES



Section



   5.101   General provisions



   5.102   Application processing



   5.103   License conditions and requirements



   5.104   Denials, revocations and suspensions



§ 5.101  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   For purposes of this chapter, LICENSE shall mean the written
authority granted by the city to maintain, operate or conduct a business or
commercial establishment, or engage in any trade, profession or occupation or
conduct any activity or maintain any premises which are subject to regulation
under the police power for which payment of a fee to the city may be
required; and PERSON shall mean person, partnership, corporation or other
association.



   (B)   Applications for all licenses required by this chapter shall
be submitted in writing to the Clerk and contain the following information,
unless specifically provided otherwise herein:



      (1)   The full legal name, date of birth and address of the
applicant.  If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the full legal
names and date of birth of all partners, officers and all persons with a
financial interest in the business.  Where there are more than ten
stockholders in a company, the applicant shall only be required to name the
three shareholders with the greatest financial interest in said company.



      (2)   The specific license desired or applied for, citing the
applicable section of this chapter.



      (3)   The proposed location of the licensed activity and the
full name and address of the landowner of the proposed location if the owner
is not the license applicant.



      (4)   An address where legal service of process can be made
upon the named licensee during normal business hours and/or as stated in
Articles of Incorporation as filed with the Secretary of State.



      (5)   Such further information as is requested and needed for
the proper guidance of city officials.



(`77 Code, § 5.101)  (Am. Ord. 1228, passed 7-8-91; Am. Ord. 1377, passed
10-12-98)



§ 5.102  APPLICATION PROCESSING.



   (A)   The Clerk shall refer all license applications to the Zoning
Administrator for a determination of whether the proposed licensed activity
would result in a violation of any provision of the zoning code.  The
Administrator shall provide the applicant with a statement citing any
specific violation of the zoning code that would result from the issuance of
a license at the proposed location.



   (B)   The applicant shall have the opportunity to amend the proposed
location of the license activity so as to comply with the zoning code, or to
resort to all remedies available to cure the prospective violation and obtain
authorization for said licensed activity through provision of the zoning code.



   (C)   The Clerk shall refer license applications for which an
inspection or application review is required to the member of the
administrative service charged with the duty of making such inspection or
application review.  Said official shall make a report within ten days of
receipt of the application and indicate whether there were any observed
violations of ordinances at the proposed location of the licensed activity or
whether there is reason to believe that an ordinance violation would result
from the license being approved.  The official shall specify facts
supporting such a belief.



      (1)   If no inspection or application review is conducted
within ten days, the city official charged with making such inspection or
review shall report the reason why no inspection or review was conducted. 
The inspection report and the license application shall then be returned to
the Clerk.



      (2)   The administrative official charged with the duty of
conducting any inspection that is required under this chapter is granted the
authority to conduct such inspections at any reasonable hour and in a lawful
manner.



      (3)   For license renewal applications, a report of any
inspection conducted within the 12 months preceding the date for renewal may
be utilized and no new inspection is required.



   (D)   (1)   The Clerk shall forward all license applications to
the City Council for consideration of said application.  The City Council
shall review all applications submitted to it and shall have reasonable
discretion to approve or deny any application, as allowed by law, subject to
the requirements of this chapter as hereinafter provided.



      (2)   The City Council may, by annual resolution, delegate the
authority to approve licenses for all qualified applicants under any section
or subdivision of this chapter to the administrative service; provided that
all qualifications, conditions and requirements for the issuance of a license
shall be enforced.



   (E)   Any person who has been refused or denied a license under this
chapter, shall have the right to a public hearing before the City Council, to
be held within 14 days after such hearing is requested and after five days'
notice to the license applicant.



   (F)   If the license application is refused or denied after a public
hearing, the City Council shall thereafter provide in writing findings of
fact regarding the qualifications of the applicant, the results of any
inspection and specific reasons for denial of the license application.



(`77 Code, § 5.102)  (Am. Ord. 1377, passed 10-12-98)



§ 5.103  LICENSE CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Licenses or license renewals under this chapter will be
subject to the below named conditions:



      (1)   The term of every license shall be no longer than one
year, to commence on January 1, or the date of issuance, and expire on
December 31, except where otherwise provided hereinafter.  Licenses shall be
renewed each year in the same manner and subject to the same conditions as
the initial license application.



      (2)   The location of any licensed business, trade or
profession may only be changed upon authorization of the City Council, unless
otherwise provided by this chapter.  Application for transfer of location
shall be made to the Clerk and processed in the same manner as an initial
license application.



      (3)   Licenses are not transferable from the named licensee to
any other person.  A license transfer shall be treated as a new license
application and application requirements shall be imposed as provided by this
chapter.



      (4)   Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
conspicuously posted at the location or premises of the licensed activity, or
carried by a licensee engaged in a mobile business, trade or occupation and
displayed on demand.



   (B)   The licensee or license applicant shall consent to a lawful
inspection of the licensed premise or premises that are proposed for a
licensed activity or business, where such an inspection is authorized by this
chapter.



      (1)   This provision shall not abrogate or modify any superior
right under law of an owner or person in possession of the premises to
withhold consent to such an inspection where such owner or person is not the
licensee or license applicant.



      (2)   The City Council may waive the requirement for an
inspection where withholding of consent to such inspection is beyond the
control of the license applicant.



   (C)   No license shall be issued or renewed for any business, trade,
occupation or business activity where such licensed activity would result in
a violation of the zoning ordinance at the proposed location.



   (D)   The Council may deny license approval where an unfavorable
inspection report has been made by the inspecting official.  No license
shall be issued or renewed to any applicant who has refused to grant consent
to an administrative inspection authorized by this chapter, unless such
inspection has been waived pursuant to division (B)(2) of this section.



   (E)   License fees shall be established by resolution of the City
Council and may be amended from time to time.  Fees shall be paid in full to
the License Clerk upon license application unless specifically provided
otherwise herein.



      (1)   Fees shall not be prorated unless specifically
authorized herein, or by City Council resolution, and are not refundable for
any reason, including license revocation, suspension, denial or termination
of the licensed activity.



      (2)   On application to the City Council, fee requirements may
be waived only for good cause under such circumstances whereby the regulatory
purposes of this chapter will not be defeated, and the license applicant is a
non-profit, charitable organization as defined by Section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code, as amended.



   (F)   In considering distances to churches or public school
buildings, such distances shall be measured in a straight line from the
nearest point of the building in which the licensed business is located, or
is proposed to be located, to the nearest point of the church or public
school building.



   (G)   A public school building shall include any public or private
elementary or secondary school regularly attended on a full-time basis by
students under the age of 19 years.



(`77 Code, § 5.103)  (Am. Ord. 1228, passed 7-8-91; Am. Ord. 1377, passed
10-12-98)



§ 5.104  DENIALS, REVOCATIONS AND SUSPENSIONS.



   (A)   The City Council may, for cause, revoke or suspend or deny a
license or take other action restricting the privileges of a licensee subject
to the following requirements:



      (1)   The City Council shall provide the licensee with a
written statement of reasons or causes for the proposed Council action
together with a notice for public hearing.



      (2)   The City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the
proposed action and provide findings of fact and citations to any ordinances
or regulations that have been violated together with a statement of action
taken and the conditions of any resulting revocation, suspension, denial or
other action restricting the privileges of the licensee.



      (3)   The Clerk shall certify and forward the findings and
statement of action taken to the person in whose name said license was issued
by mailing the same to the mailing address indicated on the license
application.



   (B)   A violation of any provision of this chapter or of a state
law, prescribing standards of conduct or regulations governing a licensee;
the particular type of business or commercial activity or trade or occupation
that is licensed; or the premises where the licensed activity is conducted;
shall be a prima facie showing of cause for revocation, denial, suspension or
such other action restricting the privileges of a licensee as the Council may
determine.



   (C)   Nondisclosure, misrepresentation or misstatement of a material
fact in any application for a license under this chapter shall be a prima
facie showing of cause for revocation, denial, suspension or such other
action restricting the privileges of a licensee as the City Council may
determine.



   (D)   The refusal of any licensee or his agent or representative to
grant consent to a lawful authorized administrative inspection of the
licensed premises may be grounds for denial, revocation, suspension or such
other action restricting the privileges of a licensee as the City Council may
determine, subject to the provisions of § 5.103(B)(2).



(`77 Code, § 5.104)  (Am. Ord. 1377, passed 10-12-98)



ARTICLE II:  MERCHANTS



Section



   5.201   Junk dealer/auto recycling dealer



   5.202   Transient merchants, peddlers, and solicitors



   5.203   Pawnbrokers, secondhand goods merchants and precious metal
dealers



   5.204   Sale of Christmas trees



   5.205   Motor vehicle sales



   5.206   Motor vehicle fuel dispensing



§ 5.201  JUNK DEALER/AUTO RECYCLING DEALER.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in or conduct
business as a junk dealer/auto recycling dealer or an automotive recycling
yard and/or junkyard without first having secured a conditional use permit
and a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following
definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section:



      AUTOMOTIVE RECYCLABLES and/or JUNK.  Motor vehicles in whole or
part, no longer used as such, to be used for scrap metal or stripping of
parts; old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead, or other base metals; old
cordage, ropes, rags, fibers or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other
glass; bones; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be
prepared to be used again in some form; and any or all of the foregoing; but
JUNK shall not include materials or objects accumulated by a person as
by-products, waste or scraps from the operation of his business or materials
or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his own
manufacturing processes.



      AUTOMOTIVE RECYCLING DEALER and/or JUNK DEALER.  A person who
operates an automotive recycling yard and/or junkyard, as defined above,
within the city.



      AUTOMOTIVE RECYCLING YARD and/or JUNKYARD.  A yard, lot or
place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building, containing
automotive recyclables and/or junk as defined above, upon which occurs one or
more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling or offering
for sale any such automotive recyclables and/or junk.  In whole units or by
parts, for a business or commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from
such act or acts are to be used for charity.



      PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.



   (C)   All applicants desiring to secure a license, shall make a
written application to the Clerk upon forms supplied by the city, accompanied
with a fee as set by City Council resolution.



   (D)   No license shall be issued until the applicant has executed
and deposited, with the Clerk a corporate surety bond in the sum of $10,000
guaranteeing the compliance with the provisions of this section.  Such bond
shall remain in force and must be executed for a period of one year except
that on such expiration, it shall remain in force as to all penalties, claims
and demands that may have occurred thereunder prior to such expiration.



   (E)   The City Council or its duly authorized representatives, shall
inspect the automotive recycling yard and/or junkyard of all dealers licensed
under this section at least once a year to determine whether such yards are
being operated in accordance with the provisions of this section and other
applicable provisions of law.  The licensee shall permit inspection of the
business premises by any member or representative of the City Council at any
time during regular business hours.



   (F)   Each dealer shall display the license in a conspicuous place
on the business premises.  No license issued under this section shall be
transferred or used by any person other than the one to whom it was issued.



(`77 Code, § 5.202)  (Am. Ord. 1377, passed 10-12-98; Am. Ord. 1535, passed
9-8-08)  Penalty, see § 5.701



§ 5.202  TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS, AND SOLICITORS.



   (A)   City license required.  Except as otherwise provided for by
this chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a
transient merchant without first having obtained a license from the city.



   (B)   County license required.  No person shall conduct business as
a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without
first having obtained the appropriate license from Anoka County as required
by M.S. Chapter 329 as amended.



   (C)   Definitions and interpretation.  Except as may otherwise be
provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their
commonly accepted definitions.  The singular shall include the plural and
the plural shall include the singular.  The masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter and vice-versa.  The term SHALL means mandatory and
the term MAY is permissive.  The following terms shall have the definitions
given to them:



      PEDDLER.  A person who goes from house to house, door to door,
business to business, street to street, or any other type of place to place,
for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale,
selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the
goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property that the
person is carrying or otherwise transporting.  The term PEDDLER shall mean
the same as the term “hawker.”



      PERSON.  Any natural individual, group, organization,
corporation, partnership or association.  As applied to groups,
organizations, corporations, partnerships and associations, the term shall
include each member, officer, partner, associate, agent or employee.



      REGULAR BUSINESS DAY.  Any day during which the City Hall is
normally open for the purpose of conducting public business.  Holidays
defined by state law shall not be counted as regular business days.



      SOLICITOR.  A person who goes from house to house, door to door,
business to business, street to street, or any other type of place to place,
for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, other personal property, or services, of which he may
be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or
by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later
time.  The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the
scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the persons's activity is to
obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above.  The term SOLICITOR
shall mean the same as the term “canvasser.”



      TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  A person who temporarily sets up business
out of a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty
store front for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, or delivering goods, wares, products, merchandise, or
other personal property, and who does not remain or intend to remain in any
one location.



   (D)   Exceptions to definitions.  For the purpose of the
requirements of this section, the terms PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and TRANSIENT
MERCHANT shall not apply to any person selling or attempting to sell at
wholesale any goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal
property, to a retailer of the item(s) being sold by the wholesaler.  The
terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial contacts with
other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to establish a regular
customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food and dairy
products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any person
making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers on
his established regular delivery route.  In addition, persons conducting the
type of sales commonly known as garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales,
as well as those persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or
flea market, shall be exempt from the definitions of peddlers, solicitors,
and transient merchants, as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a
properly licensed auctioneer, or any officer of the court conducting a court
ordered sale.  Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this section
shall not excuse any person from complying with any other applicable
statutory provision or local ordinance.



   (E)   Application.  Application for a city license to conduct
business as a peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 21 regular
business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting business. 
Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the City
Council and available from the office of the License Clerk.  All
applications shall be signed by the applicant.  All applications shall
include the following information:



      (1)   Applicant's full legal name, date of birth, social
security number, and driver's license number.



      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts
business or to which applicant officially answers.



      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye
color, height, weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like).



      (4)   Full address of applicant's permanent residence.



      (5)   Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence.



      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operation(s)
owned, managed, or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an
employee or agent.



      (7)   Full address of applicant's regular place of business
(if any).



      (8)   Any and all business related telephone number(s) of the
applicant.



      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying
for a license.



      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual,
monthly or daily license.



      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct
business, and if the applicant is applying for a daily or monthly license,
the number of days he will be conducting business in the city.



      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the
applicant can be reached while conducting business within the city, including
the location where a transient merchant intends to set up business.



      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or
misdemeanor for violation of any state or federal statute or any local
ordinance, other than traffic offenses.



      (14)   A list of the three most recent locations where the
applicant has conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant.



      (15)   Proof of any required county license.



      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the
property owner's agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant as
well as a site plan of the premises indicating the location on the site the
transient merchant will operate.



      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or
devices to be provided.



      (18)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City
Council.



   (F)   Fees.  All applications for a license under this section
shall be accompanied by the fee established in the city's fee schedule as
adopted from time to time by resolution passed by the City Council.



   (G)   Procedures.  Upon receipt of the completed application and
payment of the license fee, the License Clerk shall forward the application
to the City Council.  An application shall be determined to be complete only
if all required information is provided.  The Clerk shall determine if the
application is complete.  If the Clerk determines that the application is
incomplete, the Clerk shall inform the applicant of the required necessary
information which is missing.  After verification of the information
provided on the application by the Police Department and, based upon the
recommendation of the Police Department, the City Council shall vote whether
or not to issue the license.  If the City Council rejects the application,
the applicant shall be notified in writing of the City Council's decision,
the reason for the denial, and of his right to appeal the denial by
requesting, within 14 days of receiving the Council's notice of rejection, a
public hearing to be heard by the City Council within 14 days of the date of
the request.  The final decision of the City Council following the public
hearing shall be appealable by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for
a writ of certiorari.



   (H)   Duration of license.  A license granted under this section
shall be valid for the time period as indicated on the license.  Annual
licenses are valid from January 1 through December 31 of each year.



   (I)   License exemptions.  No license shall be required for any
person to sell or attempt to sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for,
any product grown, produced, cultivated or raised on any farm.  No license
shall be required of any person going from house to house, door to door,
business to business, street to street, or other type of place to place when
such activity is for the purpose of exercising that person's State or Federal
Constitutional rights (i.e. freedom of speech, press, religion, and the like)
except that this exemption may be lost if the person's exercise of
Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial activity. 
Professional fund raisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt person or
group shall not be exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter.



   (J)   Ineligibility for license.  The following shall be grounds
for denying a license under this section:



      (1)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of
having obtained any required county license.



      (2)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any
of the information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the
failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at
the time of application.



      (3)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five
years from the date of application, for any violation of any federal or state
statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on
the person's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being
sought in an honest and legal manner or that will not adversely affect the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city.  Such violations
shall include but not be limited to:  burglary, theft, larceny, swindling,
fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or threatened
physical harm against another person.



      (4)   The revocation within the past five years of any license
issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler,
solicitor or transient merchant.



      (5)   The applicant is determined to have a bad business
reputation.  Evidence of a bad business reputation shall include, but not be
limited to, the existence of more than two complaints against the applicant
with the Better Business Bureau, the Attorney General's Office, or other
similar business or consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding 12
months, or five such complaints filed against the applicant within the
preceding five years.



   (K)   Suspension and revocation.



      (1)   Any license issued under this section may be suspended
or revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the
following:



         (a)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements
on the application form.



         (b)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made
during the course of the licensed activity.



         (c)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a
license would have been denied under this section.



         (d)   Violation of any provision of this section.



      (2)   The suspension or revocation of any license issued for
the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct business as peddlers
or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee, shall serve as a suspension
or revocation of each such authorized person's authority to conduct business
as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee whose license is
suspended or revoked.



         (a)   Notice.  Prior to revoking or suspending any
license issued under this section, the city shall provide the license holder
with written notice of the alleged violation(s) and inform the licensee of
his right to a hearing on the alleged violation.  Notice shall be delivered
in person or by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the
license application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business
address provided on the license application.



         (b)   Public hearing.  Upon receiving the notice
provided in division (K)(2)(a), the licensee shall have the right to request
a public hearing.  If no request for a hearing is received by the Clerk
within 10 regular business days following the service of the notice, the city
may proceed with the suspension or revocation.  For the purpose of mailed
notices, service shall be considered complete as of the date the notice is
placed in the mail.  If a public hearing is requested within the stated
time-frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within 14 days from the date of the
request.  Within 5 regular business days of the hearing, the City Council
shall notify the licensee of its decision.



         (c)   Emergency.  If in the discretion of the City
Council, imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may occur
because of the actions of a peddler or transient merchant licensed under this
section, the City Council may immediately suspend the person's license and
provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed
in division (K)(2)(b).



         (d)   Appeals.  Any person whose license is suspended
or revoked under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision in
court.



   (L)   Transferability.  No license issued under this section shall
be transferred to any person other than the person to whom the license was
issued.



   (M)   Registration.  All solicitors, and any person exempt from the
licensing requirements of this section under division (I) of this section,
shall be required to register with the city.  Registration shall be made on
the same form required for a license application, but no fee shall be
required.  Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the Clerk
shall issue to the registrant a Certificate of Registration as proof of the
registration.  Certificates of Registration shall be non-transferable.



   (N)   Prohibited activities.  No peddler, solicitor, or transient
merchant shall conduct business in any of the following manner:



      (1)   Calling attention to his business or items to be sold by
means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any
other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.



      (2)   No licensee shall have any exclusive right to any
location on the public streets or grounds, nor shall a licensee be permitted
a stationary location thereon, nor shall a licensee be permitted to operate
in a congested area where such operation might impede or inconvenience the
public use of such streets.  For the purpose of this section, the judgment
of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as
to whether the area is congested and the public impeded or inconvenienced.



      (3)   Conducting business in such a way as to create a threat
to the health, safety and welfare of any individual or the general public.



      (4)   Conducting business before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.;
or on Sunday, before 12:00 p.m. or after 6:00 p.m.



      (5)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of
another person.



      (6)   Making any false or misleading statements about the
product or service being sold including untrue statements of endorsement. 
No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall claim to have the
endorsement of the city solely based on the city having issued a license or
certificate of registration to that person.



      (7)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to
leave, or to otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would
find obscene, threatening, intimidating, or abusive.



   (O)   Exclusion by placard.  No peddler, solicitor, or transient
merchant, unless invited to do so by the property owner or tenant, shall
enter the property of another for the purpose of conducting business as a
peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant when the property is marked with a
sign or placard at least three and three-quarter inches long and three and
three quarter inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating
“No Peddlers, Solicitors, or Transient Merchants,” or “Peddlers,
Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited,” or other comparable
statement.  No person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove,
deface, or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section.



   (P)   Violations and penalties.  Any person who violates any
provision of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in § 1.999.  Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate violation for the purposes of this section.



(`77 Code, § 5.203)  (Am. Ord. 1377, passed 10-12-98)



§ 5.203  PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND GOODS MERCHANTS AND PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The City Council of the City of Columbia Heights
finds that pawnbrokers, secondhand goods merchants and precious metal dealers
potentially provide an opportunity for the concealment of crimes because such
businesses have the ability to receive and transfer stolen property easily
and quickly.  The City Council also finds that consumer protection
regulation is warranted in transactions involving pawnbrokers, secondhand
goods merchants and precious metal dealers.  The purpose of this section is,
therefore, to prevent pawnbroking, secondhand goods and precious metal
businesses from being used as facilities for commission of crimes and to
assure that such businesses comply with the basic consumer protection
standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety and general welfare
of the residents of the city.



   (B)   License required.  No person shall exercise, operate,
carry-on or be engaged in the business of pawnbroker, secondhand goods
merchant or precious metal dealer within the city unless such person is
currently licensed under this chapter.  A license under this section shall
authorize the licensee to carry on business only at the permanent place of
business designated in the license.  No license may be transferred to a
different location or different licensee.  A separate license will be
required for each business in this section.  For instance, a pawnbroker may
not conduct, operate or engage in the business of secondhand goods dealer
without having obtained a secondhand goods dealer license in addition to a
pawnbroker license.



   (C)   Definitions.  The following words and terms when used in this
section shall have the following meanings:



      ANTIQUE.  Work of art, furniture, decorative object made at an
earlier period at least 30+ years old.



      MINOR.  Any natural person under the age of 18 years.



      PAWNBROKER.  A person who loans money on deposit or pledge of
personal property or other valuable items or who deals in the purchasing of
personal property or other valuable items on condition of selling the same
back again at a stipulated price or who loans money secured by security
interest on personal property or any part thereof.  This section does not
apply to a person doing business under and as permitted by any law of this
state or of the United States relating to banks, building and loan
associations, savings and loan associations, trust companies or credit unions.



      PERSON.  One or more natural persons; a partnership, including a
limited partnership; a corporation, including a foreign, domestic or
nonprofit corporation; a trust; a political subdivision of the state; or any
other business organization.



      PRECIOUS METALS.  Silver, gold or platinum.



      PRECIOUS METALS DEALER.  Any person, partnership or corporation,
either as principal or agent, who engages in the business of buying or
selling secondhand hand items containing precious metal, including but not
limited to jewelry, watches, coins, eating utensils, candlesticks, decorative
objects and ingots.



      SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER/MERCHANT.  A person engaging in the
business of buying or selling, or both, of any secondhand goods or
merchandise previously sold for public consumption.



   (D)   Exemptions.



      (1)   Pawnbrokers and secondhand goods dealers shall not apply
to or include the following:



         (a)   The sale of secondhand goods where all of the
following are present:



            1.   The sale is held an property occupied as a
dwelling or owned, rented or leased by a charitable or political organization.



            2.   That no sale exceeds a period of 48
consecutive hours.



            3.   That no more than two sales are held in any
12-month period.



            4.   That none of the items offered for sale shall
have been purchased for resale or received on consignment for the purpose of
resale.



         (b)   The sale of secondhand books or magazines, sport
trading cards, sound or video recordings, films, or electronic game
cartridges.



         (c)   The sale of goods at an auction held by a state
licensed auctioneer.



         (d)   The business of buying or selling only those
secondhand goods taken as a part or full payment for new goods and where such
business is incidental to and not the primary business of a person.



         (e)   A bulk sale of property from a merchant,
manufacturer or wholesaler having an established place of business or of
goods sold at open sale from bankrupt stock.



         (f)   Goods sold at what is commonly known as a farmer's
market.  Farmer's market allows the sale of vegetables, fruits, garden
produce, farm produce, and arts and crafts specifically defined as items
which are handmade and sold only by the creator of the item or the creator's
immediate family.



         (g)   Goods sold at an exhibition, providing the
exhibition does not last longer than ten days in any 12-month period.



         (h)   Sales by a person licensed as a motor vehicle
dealer.



         (i)   The exclusive sale of antiques.



         (j)   A merchant exclusively selling secondhand clothing
or clothing on consignment, or secondhand furniture.



         (k)   Sales made by the sheriff or other public
officials in the discharge of their official duties.



         (l)   Sales made by assignees or receivers appointed in
the state to make sales for the benefit of creditors.



      (2)   Precious metal dealers shall not apply to persons
conducting the following transactions:



         (a)   Transactions at occasional “garage” or
“yard” sales, estate sales or farm auctions held at the descendent's
residence, except that precious metal dealers must comply with the
requirements of M.S. §§ 325F.734 to 325F.742, as they may be amended from
time to time, for these transactions.



         (b)   Transactions regulated by M.S. Chapter 80A, as it
may be amended.



         (c)   Transactions involving the purchase of precious
metal grindings, filings, slag, sweeps, scraps, or dust from an industrial
manufacturer, dental lab, dentist or agent thereof.



         (d)   Transactions involving the purchase of
photographic film, such as lithographic and X- ray film, or silver residue or
flake recovered in lithographic and X-ray film processing.



         (e)   Transactions involving bullion.



         (f)   Transactions in which the secondhand item
containing precious metal is exchanged for a new item containing precious
metal and the value of the new item exceeds the value of the secondhand item.



         (g)   Transactions between precious metal dealers if
both dealers are licensed under M.S. § 325F.733, as it may be amended from
time to time, or if the seller's business is located outside the state to a
dealer licensed under M.S. § 325F.733.



   (E)   License application content. 



      (1)   Applications for a pawnbroker license, secondhand
merchant license or precious metals dealers license to be issued under this
section shall contain information as required on forms supplied by the
city.  The application shall state whether the applicant is a natural
person, partnership, corporation or other form of organization.



         (a)   Full legal name, place and date of birth, street
residence address and length of time at that address of the applicant.



         (b)   Whether applicant has ever used or been known by a
name other than his true name and, if so, what was such name or names, and
information concerning dates and places where used.



         (c)   The name of the business if it is to be conducted
under a designation, name or style other than the full individual name of the
applicant.



         (d)   Kind, name and location of every business or
occupation applicant has been engaged in during the preceding five years.



         (e)   Names and addresses of applicant's employers and
partners, if any, for the preceding five years.



         (f)   Whether applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor, excluding traffic violations, and,
if so, the date and place of conviction and the nature of the offense.



         (g)   If the applicant has not resided in the city for
three years last preceding the date of application, at least four character
references from residents of the State of Minnesota must be provided.



         (h)   If the applicant is a partnership, the names and
addresses of all partners and all information concerning each partner as is
required of a single applicant.  A managing partner, or partners, shall be
designated.  The interest of each partner in the business shall be disclosed.



         (i)   If the applicant is a corporation or other
association, the following additional information shall be required:



            1.   Name and, if incorporated, the state of
incorporation.



            2.   A true copy of the certificate of
incorporation, articles of incorporation or association agreement and by-laws
and, if a foreign corporation, a certificate of authority as described in
Minnesota Statutes.



            3.   The name of the operating officer or
proprietor or other agent in charge of the premises to be licensed, giving
all the information about said person as is required of a single applicant. 
As used in this section,  the term OPERATING OFFICER shall mean the person
responsible for the day- to-day operating decisions of the licensed premises.



            4.   A list of all persons who, singly or together
with their spouse, or a parent, brother, sister or child or either of them,
own or control an interest in said corporation or association in excess of 5%
or who are officers or directors of said corporation or association; together
with their addresses and all information as is required of a single applicant.



         (j)   The full legal name, address and home phone number
of the manager or proprietor of the business.



         (k)   Each application shall be accompanied by a
statement indicating the amount of investment the applicant has in the
business, building, premises, fixtures, furniture, stock in trade, and the
like, and proof of source of such money.



         (l)   Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbrokers,
secondhand goods merchant or precious metal dealers license from any other
governmental unit.



         (m)   Whether the applicant has previously been denied a
pawnbroker, secondhand goods merchant or precious metal dealers license from
any other governmental agency.



         (n)   Whenever the application is for a premises either
planned or under construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the
application shall be accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the
design of the proposed premises to be licensed.  If the plans or design are
on file with the City of Columbia Heights Building Inspection Department, no
plans need be submitted with the issuing authority.



         (o)   The exact legal description of the premises to be
licensed, together with a plot plan of the area for which the license is
sought showing dimensions, location of buildings, and street access parking
facilities.



         (p)   Such other information as the City Council or
issuing authority may require.



      (2)   No person shall make any false statement in the
application.  In addition to other penalties, the license may be revoked by
the City Council for giving false information on the application.  By
submitting an application, the applicant consents to any and all
investigations the city deems appropriate and waives any claims the applicant
may have.  Copies of the application shall be submitted to such other city
departments as the City Council shall deem necessary for the verification and
investigation of the facts set forth in the application.



   (F)   License fees.



      (1)   At the time of each original application for a license,
the applicant shall pay, in full, an investigation fee.  The investigation
fee shall be as specified by the City Council.



      (2)   The annual license fee shall be paid in full before the
application for the license is accepted.  Upon rejection of any application
for a license or upon withdrawal of an application before approval of the
issuance by the City Council, the license fee only shall be refunded to the
applicant except where rejection is for a willful misstatement in the license
application.  If any investigation outside the State of Minnesota is
required, the applicant shall be charged the cost which shall be paid by the
applicant, prior to issuance of a license, after deducting the initial
investigation fee, whether or not the license is granted.



      (3)   The annual license fee for renewal of a license shall be
paid in full at the time the renewal application is filed with the city.  An
application for the renewal of an existing license shall be made to the Clerk
at least 30 days prior to the expiration date of the license.



      (4)   All licenses issued under this section shall expire as
of midnight on December 31 of the year of issuance.  Each license shall be
issued to the applicant only and shall not be transferable to another person
or for another location.



   (G)   Bond required.



      (1)   At the time of filing an application for a license under
this section, the applicant shall file a bond in the amount of $5,000 with
the city.  The bond shall be with a duly licensed surety company as surety
thereon.  Said bond must be conditioned that the licensee shall observe the
ordinances of the city, in relation to the business of pawnbroker, secondhand
merchant or precious metal dealer, and that the licensee will account for and
deliver to any person legally entitled thereto any articles which may have
come into the possession of the licensee as pawnbroker, and/or secondhand
merchant, and/or precious metal dealer or in lieu thereof such licensee shall
pay the person or persons the reasonable value thereof.



      (2)   Such bond shall be maintained so long as the licensee
does business as such for the benefit of the city or any person who shall
suffer any damage through the act of such licensee and shall not be
terminated without the bond company giving written notice 30 days in advance
of the termination date to the City License Clerk.



   (H)   Persons and locations ineligible for a license.  No license
under this section shall be granted to or held by any person who:



      (1)   Is a minor at the time the application is filed.



      (2)   Is not a citizen of the United States or a resident
alien.



      (3)   Is not of good moral character or repute.



      (4)   Has had a pawnbroker, secondhand goods merchant, or
precious metal dealer license revoked in the last five years.



      (5)   Has been convicted of a state or federal law relating to
receiving stolen property, sale of stolen property or controlled substance,
burglary, robbery, theft, damage or trespass to property, operation of a
business, or any law or ordinance regulating the business of pawnbrokers,
secondhand goods merchants or precious metal dealers.



      (6)   In the judgment of the City Council, is not the real
party in interest or beneficial owner of the business operated, or to be
operated, under the license.



      (7)   No license shall be granted for operation of any
premises located in a residential district of the city.  A pawnbroker
license is allowed only in the General Business District of the city.  All
uses as described in this section shall comply with the zoning ordinance of
the city.



      (8)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation of
any premises on which real estate taxes, assessments or other financial
claims of the city or of the state are delinquent or unpaid.



      (9)   Holds an intoxicating liquor license under this code.



   (I)   Conditions of licenses.



      (1)   Records.  Each licensee hereunder shall keep a record
of each transaction at the time of receipt of an article deposited, left,
sold, purchased, pledged or pawned.  Said records shall be legible, made in
ink and shall be in the English language.  The records so kept shall include
the following information about each transaction:



         (a)   The full legal name, address, telephone number,
date of birth and a reasonably accurate description of the person from whom
the item was received including, at a minimum, the sex, height, weight, race,
color of eyes and hair.



         (b)   The time, date and place of transaction.



         (c)   An accurate description of the article, in
English; any and all numbers written, stamped, impressed or engraved thereon;
any identifying marks; any gems attached; and the name of the manufacturer
and model if indicated on the article.



         (d)   The amount of money loaned upon or paid for the
item or the purchase or consignment price.



         (e)   The identification number from one of the
following forms of identification of the person from whom the item was
received:



            1.   A valid Minnesota photo driver's license; or



            2.   A valid Minnesota photo identification card;
or



            3.   A valid photo identification issued by the
state of residency of the person from whom the item was received and one
other form of identification.



         (f)   Any other information the Police Department may
require or deem necessary.



         (g)   Date, mint, and condition of all coins.



      (2)   Disposition of articles.  When any article is sold or
disposed of by the licensee, the records shall contain an account of such
sale with the date thereof, interest and charges accrued, the amount for
which the article was sold and full legal name, current address and telephone
number of the person to whom sold.



      (3)   Inspection of records.  The records referred to in this
section shall be open to the inspection of the Police Department at all
reasonable times and shall be retained by the licensee for at least four
years.



      (4)   Receipt.  Every licensee shall deliver to the person
pawning, pledging, selling, leaving or depositing any articles, a certificate
numbered to correspond with the licensee's records.  The certificate shall
contain the substance of the record.



      (5)   Reports to Police Department.  Every licensee shall
prepare and deliver to the city, each day, in the manner and form prescribed
by the city, a legible, correct and complete record of the hereinbefore
required account of all personal property or other valuables received,
deposited, purchased, pledged, pawned, sold or otherwise disposed of during
the preceding day.



      (6)   Exceptions to reports.  No licensee shall be required
to furnish descriptions of any property purchased from manufacturers and
wholesale dealers having an established place of business or of any goods
purchased at an open sale from any bankrupt stock or from any other person
doing business and having an established place of business.  Any goods
referred to in this section must be accompanied by a bill of sale or other
evidence of open or legitimate purchase and must be shown to the Police
Department when demanded.



      (7)   Redemption period.



         (a)   Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an
article of property for security shall have a minimum of 120 days from the
date when the loan or pledge becomes due and payable to redeem the article
before the article becomes forfeitable.



         (b)   No article of property on deposit with any
licensee nor property purchased by or sold to, or in any other way coming
into possession and under the control of any licensee in the due course of
business, shall be permitted to be redeemed from the place of business of the
license, for a period of 72 hours, nor shall the property be sold within ten
days, after the record required to be delivered to the city has been
delivered.



         (c)   Whenever any police officer, acting in the course
and scope of his duties, shall notify a licensee not to sell or permit to be
redeemed any articles of property received on deposit or purchased by the
licensee, the articles shall not be permitted to be redeemed or sold until
such time as may be determined by the Police Chief or designee.



      (8)   Payment by check.  Payment by licensee for any article
deposited, left, purchased, pledged or pawned shall be made only by a check,
draft or other negotiable or nonnegotiable instrument or order of withdrawal
which is drawn against funds held by a financial institution.



      (9)   Posting of license.  All licensees shall post their
licenses, in a conspicuous place, in the licensed premises under the licensed
activity.



      (10)   Responsibility of licensee.  The conduct of agents or
employees of a licensee, while engaged in performance of their duties for
their principal or employer under such license, shall be deemed the conduct
of the licensee.



      (11)   Penalty for property owner.  It is unlawful for any
person who owns or controls any real property to knowingly permit it to be
used for pawnbroking without a license required by this section.



   (J)   Restricted transactions.



      (1)   No licensee shall be open for the transaction of
business on any day of the week before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.



      (2)   No licensee shall purchase, accept or receive any
article of property from any person under 18 years of age nor from
intoxicated persons, nor those of unsound mind.



      (3)   No licensee shall purchase, accept or receive any
article of property which contains an altered or obliterated serial number or
any article of property whose serial number has been removed.



      (4)   No licensee under this section shall receive as a
pledge, or purchase any revolver, pistol, blackjack or sawed-off shot gun and
shall not display any such item for sale in the shop or the shop window.



      (5)   No licensee shall purchase, accept or receive any
article of property knowing, or having reason to know, that the article of
property is encumbered by a security interest.  For the purpose of this
section, SECURITY INTEREST means an interest in property which secures
payment or other performance of an obligation.



      (6)   No licensee shall purchase, accept or receive any
article of property, from any person, knowing, or having reason to know, that
said person is not the true and correct owner of the property.



      (7)   (a)   No licensee shall purchase, accept or receive
any article of property, from any person, without first having obtained one
of the following forms of identification from the person:



            1.   A valid Minnesota photo driver's license; or



            2.   A valid Minnesota photo identification card.



            3.   A valid photo identification issued by the
state of residency of the person from whom the item was received and one
other form of identification.



         (b)   No other forms of identification shall be
acceptable.



   (K)   Inspections.



      (1)   Stolen goods.



         (a)   Any licensee shall, at all times during the term
of the license, allow any police officer to enter or inspect the premises,
where the licensee is carrying on business, and all records pertinent to the
operation of the business for the purpose of locating articles of property
suspected or alleged to have been stolen.  No licensee shall conceal any
article in his possession from any police officer.



         (b)   Articles of property determined, upon
investigation, to be stolen may be seized as evidence from the licensee by
any police officer and returned to the rightful owner in accordance with the
provisions of M.S. § 609.523, as it may be amended from time to time.



         (c)   No licensee may obstruct, hinder, or otherwise
interfere with any police investigation concerning stolen articles of
property discovered on the licensee's premises.



         (d)   A licensee must report to the Police Department
any article of property pawned or received, or sought to be pawned or
received, if the licensee has reason to believe that the article of property
was stolen or lost.



      (2)   Inspection by claimed owner.  All articles of property
coming into the possession of any licensee, under the terms hereof, shall at
all times be open to inspection and right of examination of any person
claiming to have been the owner thereof or claiming to have had any interest
therein when such person is accompanied by a police officer.



   (L)   Conduct of persons on licensed premises.



      (1)   No person may pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or deposit any
article of property not their own; nor shall any persons pawn, pledge, sell,
leave, or deposit the property of another, whether with permission or
without; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or deposit any
article of property in which another has a security interest; with any
licensee.



      (2)   No minor may pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or deposit any
article of property with any licensee.



      (3)   No person may pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or deposit an
article of property with a licensee without first presenting identification
in the form of a Minnesota photo driver's license; a Minnesota photo
identification card; or a photo identification issued by the state of
residency of the person and one other form of identification to the licensee.



      (4)   All licensees shall, by adequate signage and separate
written notice, inform persons seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or
deposit articles of property with the licensee of the foregoing sections.



         (a)   For the purposes of this section, ADEQUATE SIGNAGE
shall be deemed to mean at least one sign, of not less than four square feet
in surface area, comprised of lettering of not less than three-fourths of an
inch in height, posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises and
stating substantially the following:




TO PAWN OR SELL PROPERTY:





YOU MUST BE AT LEAST 18 YEARS OF AGE.





YOU MUST BE THE TRUE AND CORRECT OWNER OF THE PROPERTY.  THE PROPERTY MUST
BE FREE AND CLEAR OF ALL CLAIMS OR LIENS.  YOU MUST PRESENT A PHOTO
IDENTIFICATION.





VIOLATION OF ANY OF THESE REQUIREMENTS IS A CRIME.




         (b)   For the purposes of this section, SEPARATE WRITTEN
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the certificate, hereinbefore required to be
delivered to the person pawning, pledging, selling, leaving, or depositing an
article of property with a licensee; incorporating a statement to the effect
that the person pawning, pledging, selling, leaving, or depositing the
article is at least 18 years of age; is the true owner of the article; and
that the article is free and clear of all claims and liens; and requiring a
signature of acknowledgment by the person pawning, pledging, selling,
leaving, or depositing the article as to the statement.



      (5)   No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or
deposit any article of property with a licensee shall give a false or
fictitious name; nor give a false date of birth; nor give a false or out of
date address of residence or telephone number; nor present a false drivers
license or identification card; to any licensee.



   (M)   Corporations, partnerships or associations.



      (1)   Licenses issued to corporations shall be valid as long
as there is no change in the officers or ownership interest of the
corporation unless such change is approved by the City Council, in which
event said license shall continue in force until the end of the then current
license year.  Failure to report any change in stockholders, officers, or
managers shall be grounds for the revocation of all licenses held by the
corporation.  Every corporation licensed under the provisions of this
section shall adopt and maintain in its by-laws a provision that no transfer
of stock is valid or effective unless approved by the City Council and shall
require that all of its certificates of stock shall have printed on the face
thereof:  “The transfer of this stock certificate is invalid unless
approved by the City Council for the City of Columbia Heights, Minnesota,”
and failure to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the revocation
of all licenses held by the corporation.  The provisions of this section
shall not apply to the issuance of any license to a corporation whose stock
is traded on a public stock exchange.



      (2)   Licenses issued to associations or partnerships shall be
valid only as long as there is no change in the partnership or association
agreement or in the ownership of said partnership or association unless such
change is approved by the City Council, in which event said license shall
continue in force until the end of the then current license year.



      (3)   Corporations, partnerships or associations shall submit
written notice to the city of any such changes described herein on or before
30 days prior to the effective date of any such change.  In case of a
corporation, the licensee shall submit written notice to the city when a
person not listed in the initial application will be acquiring an interest
and shall give all information about said person as is required of a person
pursuant to the provisions of this section.



   (N)   Denials, suspensions or revocations.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any applicant to make a false
statement or omission upon any application form.  Any false statement in
such application, or any omission to state any information called for on such
application form, shall upon discovery of such falsehood, work an automatic
refusal of license, or if already issued, shall render any license issued
pursuant thereto void.  Prior issuance is no effect to protect the applicant
from prosecution for violation of this section or any part thereof.



      (2)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a license issued
under this section for operation on any premises on which real estate taxes,
assessments or other financial claims of the city or of the state are
delinquent, or unpaid.



      (3)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a license issued
under this section upon a finding of a violation of any of the provisions of
this section or any state statute regulating pawnbrokers.  Any conviction by
the pawnbroker for theft, receiving stolen property or any other crime or
violation involving stolen property, damage to or trespass of property, sale
of a controlled substance, or the operation of a business committed by the
applicant or any employee or agent of the applicant shall result in the
immediate suspension pending a hearing on revocation of any license issued
hereunder.



      (4)   Except in the case of a suspension pending a hearing on
revocation, a revocation or suspension of a license by the City Council shall
be preceded by a public hearing.  The hearing notice shall be given at least
ten days prior to the hearing, include notice of the time and place of the
hearing, and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee.



   (O)   Penalties.  Violation of any provision of this section shall
be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to
prevailing state laws.



(`77 Code, §§ 5.204, 5.205, 5.611)  (Am. Ord. 1377, passed 10-12-98)



§ 5.204  SALE OF CHRISTMAS TREES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall for consideration, trade, barter or
sell at retail any cut evergreen, fir, spruce or other tree for use as a
decorative Christmas tree without a license issued pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter.



      (2)   No person shall be licensed to operate an open sales lot
pursuant to this section unless such applicant has first obtained a
conditional use permit to operate such a lot.



   (B)   Licenses shall be issued for a period of three months
commencing on October 1 of each year and expiring on December 31 of each
year, notwithstanding § 5.103(A)(1) of this code.



   (C)   The City Council may refer the application to the Fire Chief
for recommendation prior to taking action on the license application.



   (D)   Prior to the issuance of a license by the Clerk, the license
applicant shall deposit with the city such sum as is set by resolution of the
City Council.  The Fire Chief shall inspect the licensed premises to
determine whether the premises have been cleaned up and no public nuisance,
as defined by this code, remains on the site.



      (1)   If a public nuisance is present, as determined by the
Fire Chief, said official shall notify the licensee to have the nuisance
abated no later than December 31.



      (2)   After December 31, the city may abate the public
nuisance and deduct the cost of abatement from the deposit.



      (3)   On January 15, the city shall refund the deposit to the
licensee, or any remaining part of said deposit, and shall provide a
statement of any public expense incurred for the nuisance abatement.



   (E)   Licensees shall post “No Smoking” signs throughout the lot
in such places as are designated by the Fire Chief.  Said signs shall be
maintained in the designated locations until all trees have been removed from
the lot.



   (F)   Before a conditional use permit is issued, the license
applicant must submit a site/plot plan showing the intended location of trees
within the lot.  The plan shall provide not less than four feet clearance
around the perimeter of the lot and at all points across each aisle.  No
license shall be granted hereunder unless the said plan is first approved by
the Fire Chief.  The licensee shall maintain the lot at all times in
accordance with the approved site plan.



   (G)   Each licensee must have on the licensed premises at all times
one properly operating Class ABC fire extinguisher.



(`77 Code, § 5.206)  (Am. Ord. 1074, passed 2-13-84; Am. Ord. 1377, passed
10-12-98)  Penalty, see § 5.701



§ 5.205  MOTOR VEHICLE SALES.



   (A)   No person shall engage in or conduct business as a dealer in
new or used motor vehicles in the city without a license issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.



      DEALER.  Any person engaged in the business of selling,
exchanging or otherwise disposing of, displaying, advertising or offering for
sale, new or used motor vehicles as a principal business or occupation, or as
an adjunct to or incidental to any other business or profession.



      MOTOR VEHICLES.  Automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, snowmobiles,
jet skis, boats, all terrain vehicles, or other similar vehicle(s) propelled
by a motor and/or any vehicles requiring a state issued license.



   (B)   The application for a license shall he made in writing, signed
and verified by the applicant on forms provided by the city.  The
application shall state the full legal name, residence and age of the
applicant, driver's license and social security numbers; if a partnership,
the full legal names of all partners; if a corporation, the full legal names
of all the officers thereof.  The application shall state the business and
residence addresses of all applicants for a period of five years prior to the
date of application; whether the applicant is the sole owner of the business
to be conducted; and shall state that no other persons than those named in
the application have any interest in the management and control of such
business.



   (C)   No licensee under this section shall store any motor vehicles
on any public street in the city.



   (D)   Every licensee under this section shall be governed by the
following regulations relating to consumer transactions:



      (1)   Each licensee or his agent or employee, shall at the
time of any sale give to the purchaser of a motor vehicle a written statement
signed by the licensee or his salesman or agent, showing the name of the
licensee and his address, the name of the person making the sale, the date of
the sale, the license number, if available, and the serial number of such
motor vehicle, the purchase price, and whether in cash or on credit terms.



      (2)   Each licensee or his agent or employee, who sells a
motor vehicle must be in compliance with all state and federal regulations.



      (3)   The licensee or his agent or employee shall furnish upon
request from a prospective purchaser, the name of the previous owner(s) of
any used motor vehicle offered for sale.



   (E)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all sales
whether or not the motor vehicle sold or advertised for sale is owned by the
licensee, or whether such licensee is acting as an agent or consignee for the
owner.



   (F)   The City Council may revoke, suspend, or take such other
action to restrict the privileges of the licensee as it may determine upon
showing that the licensee or his agent or employees knowingly violated any
provision of this section or any state or federal law(s).



(`77 Code, § 5.207)  (Am. Ord. 1377, passed 10-12-98)  Penalty, see §
5.701



§ 5.206  MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL DISPENSING.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in or conduct the
business of operating a motor vehicle fuel dispensing station without a
license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.  A motor vehicle
fuel dispensing station is a facility open to the public which consists of
gasoline, compressed natural gas (CNG) or LP gas storage containers, piping
and pertinent equipment, including pumps or dispensing devices, or any
buildings in which LP gas is stored and dispensed into engine fuel containers
of highway vehicles or into portable or permanently mounted containers used
for cooking or heating.  No person, firm or corporation shall sell,
dispense, or distribute motor vehicle fuel, compressed natural gas or LP fuel
at a motor vehicle fuel dispensing service station to the public without a
license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Applicants for a license under this section shall provide such
information on the application pertaining to the requirements of this section
as is requested by the License Clerk including, but not limited, to the
number, type and location of dispensers to be installed and/or operated on
the premises.



   (C)   The Clerk shall forward the application to the Fire Chief for
a report indicating whether or not the proposed operation will be in
compliance with all the provisions of the current Fire Code and this section.



   (D)   No person may dispense, distribute, or handle LP gas or use an
LP gas installation without wearing protective handwear of the type approved
by the City Fire Department.



   (E)   In considering whether or not to grant a license, the City
Council may also consider the past safety practices of the licensee in regard
to all matters of the subject location as well as the safety practices of the
licensee with regard to flammable and volatile materials.



   (F)   No licensee under this section, or his agent or employee,
shall fill or allow to be filled, the gasoline tank of any motor vehicle
while the engine or motor of such vehicle is running or in motion, or while
any person is smoking in or about the pump area of the motor vehicle fuel
dispensing station.



   (G)   No licensee under this section, or his agent or employee shall
deceptively mislead customers by displaying false or incomplete price figures
on signs that are designed to indicate the price of gasoline.



(`77 Code, § 5.209)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 1-13-86; Am. Ord. 1377, passed
10-12-98)  Penalty, see § 5.701



ARTICLE III:  TOBACCO REGULATIONS



Section



   5.301   Purpose and intent



   5.302   Definitions



   5.303   License



   5.304   Fees



   5.305   Basis for denial of license



   5.306   Prohibited sales



   5.307   Vending machines



   5.308   Self-service sales



   5.309   License holder responsibility



   5.310   Compliance checks and inspections



   5.311   Other illegal acts



   5.312   Exceptions and defenses



   5.313   Violations and penalty



§ 5.301  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years
purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco related devices, and electronic cigarette devices, and such sales,
possession, and use are violations of both state and federal laws; and
because studies, which the city hereby accepts and adopts, have shown that
most smokers begin smoking before they have reached the age of 18 years and
that those persons who reach the age of 18 years without having started
smoking are significantly less likely to begin smoking; and because smoking
has been shown to be the cause of several serious health problems which
subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of government; this
article shall be intended to regulate the sale, possession and use of
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, and electronic cigarette
devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect
minors against the serious effects associated with the illegal use of
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, and electronic cigarette
devices, and to further the official public policy of the state in regard to
preventing young people from starting to smoke as stated in M.S. § 144.391,
as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 1371, passed 5-11-98; Am. Ord. 1616, passed 10-27-14)



§ 5.302  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all
terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.  For the purpose
of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPLIANCE CHECKS.  The system the city uses to investigate and ensure
that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related
devices, and electronic cigarette devices are following and complying with
the requirements of this article.  Compliance checks shall involve the use
of minors as authorized by this article.  Compliance checks shall also mean
the use of minors who attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco
related devices, or electronic cigarette devices for educational, research
and training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws.  Compliance
checks may also be conducted by other units of government for the purpose of
enforcing appropriate federal, state or local laws and regulations relating
to tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, and electronic
cigarette devices.



   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED.  The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale.  Individually wrapped tobacco and
tobacco products shall include but not be limited to single cigarette packs,
single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other
packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco.  Cartons or other packaging
containing more than a single pack or other container as described in this
definition shall not be considered individually packaged.



   LOOSIES.  The common term used to refer to a single or individually
packaged cigarette.



   MINOR.  Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.



   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS.  Any form of business operated out of a
truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and
not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure
authorized for sales transactions.



   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco
products or tobacco related devices are available for sale to the general
public.  The phrase shall include but not be limited to grocery stores,
convenience stores and restaurants.



   SALE.  Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other
consideration.



   SAMPLING, TOBACCO.  The lighting, inhalation, or combination thereof
of tobacco, tobacco paraphernalia, tobacco-related products, or electronic
cigarette devices for the purpose of testing a tobacco product prior to the
sale of such product.



   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING.  Open displays of tobacco, tobacco
products or tobacco related devices in any manner where any person shall have
access to the tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices, without
the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee.
The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of
the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device between the customer
and the licensee or employee.  The phrase shall not include vending
machines.  Self-service sales are interpreted as being any sale where there
is not an actual physical exchange of the tobacco between the clerk and the
customer.



   SMOKE SHOP.  A retail establishment that has obtained an appropriate
license, in which greater than 90% of the business’s gross revenue must be
from the sale of tobacco, tobacco products or smoking related accessories.



   TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS.  Any substance or item containing tobacco
leaf, including but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff,
fine cut or other chewing tobacco, cheroots, stogies, perique, granulated,
plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco, snuff flowers,
cavendish, shorts, plug and twist tobaccos, dipping tobaccos, refuse scraps,
clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of
tobacco leaf prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing
or smoking.  TOBACCO PRODUCTS shall also refer to electronic cigarettes,
vapor devices and related products.



   TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES.  Any tobacco product as well as a pipe,
rolling papers or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used
in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing or smoking of tobacco or
tobacco products.



   VENDING MACHINE.  Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other
type of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related
devices upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly
into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco
product or tobacco related device.



(Ord. 1371, passed 5-11-98; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 9-28-09; Am. Ord. 1616,
passed 10-27-14)



§ 5.303  LICENSE.



   (A)   License required.  No person shall sell or offer to sell any
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related device without first having
obtained a license to do so from the city.



   (B)   Smoke shop license.  No person shall operate a smoke shop
without first having obtained a smoke shop license to do so from the city. 
At any given time, there shall be no more than three smoke shops, all with
appropriate licenses, throughout the city.  Currently existing smoke shop
establishments should be granted the first preference to renew their smoke
shop licenses if they choose to do so.



   (C)   Application.  An application for a license to sell tobacco,
tobacco products, or tobacco related devices shall be made on a form provided
by the city.  The application shall contain the full name of the applicant,
the applicant's residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the
name of the business for which the license is sought, and any additional
information the city deems necessary.  Upon receipt of a completed
application, the Clerk shall forward the application to the Police Department
for a background and record check prior to formal review by the City
Council.  If the Clerk shall determine that an application is incomplete, he
shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the information
necessary to make the application complete.



   (D)   Action.  The City Council may either approve or deny the
license, or it may delay action for such reasonable period of time as
necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant
it deems necessary.  If the City Council shall approve the license, the
Clerk shall issue the license to the applicant.  If the City Council denies
the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with
notice of the applicant's right to appeal the City Council's decision.



   (E)   Term.  All licenses issued under this article shall follow
the calendar year with an expiration date of December 31 of each year and are
not pro-rated.



   (F)   Revocation or suspension.  Any license issued under this
article may be revoked or suspended as provided in § 5.313.



   (G)   Transfers.  All licenses issued under this article shall be
valid only on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the
person to whom the license was issued.  Change of location or applicant will
be required to be treated as a new applicant.



   (H)   Moveable place of business.  No license shall be issued to a
moveable place of business.  Only fixed location businesses shall be
eligible to be licensed under this article.



   (I)   Display.  All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain
view of the general public on the licensed premise.



   (J)   Renewals.  The renewal of a license issued under this section
shall be handled in the same manner as the original application.  The
request for a renewal shall be made at least 30 days but no more than 60 days
before the expiration of the current license.



   (K)   Issuance as privilege and not a right.  The issuance of a
license issued under this article shall be considered a privilege and not an
absolute right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an
automatic renewal of the license.



(Ord. 1371, passed 5-11-98; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 9-28-09; Am. Ord. 1616,
passed 10-27-14; Am. Ord. 1652, passed 10-8-18)   Penalty, see § 5.313



§ 5.304  FEES.



   No license shall be issued under this article until the appropriate
license fee shall be paid in full.  The fee for a license under this article
shall be established in the city's schedule of fees.



(Ord. 1371, passed 5-11-98)  Penalty, see § 5.313



§ 5.305  BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under
this article includes but is not limited to the following:



      (1)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years.



      (2)   The applicant, or any employee thereof, has been
convicted within the past five years of any violation of a federal, state, or
local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco or
tobacco products, or tobacco related devices.



      (3)   The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related devices revoked within the preceding 12 months
of the date of application.



      (4)   The applicant fails to provide any information required
on the application, or provides false or misleading information.



      (5)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other
local law, ordinance, or other regulation from holding such a license.



   (B)   However, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the
existence of any particular ground for denial does not mean that the city
must deny the license.



   (C)   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it
shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the
license under this article.



(Ord. 1371, passed 5-11-98)  Penalty, see § 5.313



§ 5.306  PROHIBITED SALES.



   It shall be a violation of this article for any person, or employee or
responsible party, to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product, or
tobacco related device:



   (A)   To any person under the age of 18 years.



   (B)   By means of any type of vending machine.



   (C)   By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not
need to a make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed
premise in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related
device and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco
product, or tobacco related device between the licensee, or the licensee's
employee, and the customer.  This division shall not apply to retail stores
which derive at least 90% of their revenue from tobacco and tobacco related
products and which cannot be entered at any time by persons younger than 18
years of age.



   (D)   By means of loosies as defined in § 5.302.



   (E)   Containing opium, morphine, jimpson weed, bella donna,
strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or
controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in
tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process.  It
is not the intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully
manufactured cigarettes or other tobacco products.



   (F)   By any other means, to any other person, or in any other
manner or form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance
provision, or other regulation.



(Ord. 1371, passed 5-11-98; Am. Ord. 1513, passed 9-25-06)  Penalty, see §
5.313



§ 5.307  VENDING MACHINES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this article to
allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices by
the means of a vending machine.  This section does not apply to vending
machines in facilities that cannot be entered at any time by persons younger
than 18 years of age.



(Ord. 1371, passed 5-11-98; Am. Ord. 1513, passed 9-25-06)  Penalty, see §
5.313



§ 5.308  SELF-SERVICE SALES.



   It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this article to allow the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices by any means
where by the customer may have access to such items without having to request
the item from the licensee or the licensee's employee and whereby there is
not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or the tobacco
related device between the licensee or his clerk and the customer.  All
tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices shall either be stored
behind a counter or other area not freely accessible to customers, or in a
case or other storage unit not left open and accessible to the general
public.  Any retailer selling tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related
devices at the time this article is adopted shall comply with this section
within 90 days following the effective date of this article.  This section
shall not apply to retail stores which derive at least 80% of their revenue
from tobacco and tobacco related products and which cannot be entered at any
time by persons younger than 18 years of age.



(Ord. 1371, passed 5-11-98; Am. Ord. 1513, passed 9-25-06)  Penalty, see §
5.313



§ 5.309  LICENSE HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.



   It shall be the license holder's responsibility to provide training to
any employee conducting tobacco sales and/or sales of tobacco related
products and devices and to document proof of such training to be provided
upon request by any enforcing agent of the city.



(Ord. 1371, passed 5-11-98)  Penalty, see § 5.313



§ 5.310  COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.



   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city police or
other authorized city official during regular business hours.  From time to
time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct compliance checks by
engaging, with the written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over
the age of 15 years but less than 18 years to enter the licensed premise to
attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices. 
Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by city
designated law enforcement officers or other designated city personnel. 
Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful possession
of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices when such items are
obtained as a part of the compliance check.  No minor used in compliance
checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the
minor's age, and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall
answer all questions about the minor's age asked by the licensee or his
employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he is
asked.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized
by state or federal laws for educational, research, or training purposes, or
required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law.



(Ord. 1371, passed 5-11-98)  Penalty, see § 5.313



§ 5.311  OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.



   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of
this article:



   (A)   Illegal sales.  It shall be a violation of this article for
any person to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, or
tobacco related device to any minor.



   (B)   Illegal possession.  It shall be a violation of this article
for any minor to have in his possession any tobacco, tobacco product, or
tobacco related device.  This division (B) shall not apply to minors
lawfully involved in a compliance check.



   (C)   Illegal use.  It shall be a violation of this article for any
minor to smoke, chew, sniff or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, or
tobacco related device.



   (D)   Illegal procurement.  It shall be a violation of this article
for any minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any
tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device, and it shall be a
violation of this article for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain such
items on behalf of a minor.  It shall further be a violation for any person
to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related
device to any minor, and it shall further be a violation to coerce or attempt
to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any
tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device.  This division shall
not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.



   (E)   Use of false identification.  It shall be a violation of this
article for any minor to attempt to disguise his true age by the use of a
false form of identification, whether the identification is that of another
person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered
with to represent an age older than the actual age of the person.



(Ord. 1371, passed 5-11-98)  Penalty, see § 5.313



§ 5.312  EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.



   Nothing in this article shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related devices to a minor as part of a lawfully
recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony.  It shall be an
affirmative defense to the violation of this article for a person to have
reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law.



(Ord. 1371, passed 5-11-98)



§ 5.313  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.



   (A)   Violations.



      (1)   Notice.  Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the
alleged violator shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation
that sets forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged
violator of his right to be heard on the accusation.



      (2)   Hearings.  If a person accused of violating this
article so requests, a hearing shall be scheduled, the time and place of
which shall be published and provided to the accused violator.



      (3)   Hearing Officer.  The City Council, or representative
designated by the City Council, shall serve as the hearing officer.



      (4)   Decision.  If the hearing officer determines that a
violation of this article did occur, that decision, along with the hearing
officers reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under
division (B) of this section, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which
shall be provided to the accused violator.  Likewise, if the hearing officer
finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any
penalty, such findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted
accused violator.



      (5)   Appeals.  Appeals of any decision made by the hearing
officer shall be filed in the district court for the city in which the
alleged violation occurred.



      (6)   Misdemeanor prosecution.  Nothing in this section shall
prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged
violation of this article.



      (7)   Continued violation.  Each violation, and every day in
which a violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Administrative penalties.



      (1)   Licensees.  Any licensee found to have violated this
article, or whose employee shall have violated this article, shall be charged
an administrative fine of $75 for a first violation of this article; $200 for
a second offense at the same licensed premises within a 24-month period; and
$250 for a third or subsequent offense at the same location within a 24-month
period.  In addition, after the third offense, the license shall be
suspended for not less than seven days.



      (2)   Other individuals.  Other individuals, other than
minors regulated by division (B)(3) of this section, found to be in violation
of this article shall be charged an administrative fee of $50.



      (3)   Minors.  Minors found in unlawful possession of or who
unlawfully purchase or attempt to purchase, tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices, shall be subject to an administrative fine, or may
be subject to tobacco related education classes, diversion programs,
community services, or another penalty that the city believes will be
appropriate and effective.  Such administrative fine or other penalty shall
be established by City Council ordinance upon the City Council's consultation
with interested parties of the courts, educators, parents and children to
determine an appropriate penalty for minors in the city.



      (4)   Misdemeanor.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit
the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this
article.



(Ord. 1371, passed 5-11-98)



ARTICLE IV:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



   5.401   Pool/billiard halls



   5.402   Games of skill



   5.403   Carnivals



   5.404   Arcade/amusement center



§ 5.401  POOL/BILLIARD HALLS.



   (A)   No person shall operate or maintain a pool hall or pool table
on any premises used for a business or commercial activity unless that person:



      (1)   Possesses a license issued pursuant to the provisions of
this section; and



      (2)   Is at least 18 years of age at the time of submitting an
application for licensure pursuant to the provisions of this section.



   (B)   For any person operating a pool hall or billiards hall
pursuant to this section, a conditional use permit shall be required and
issued pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of the zoning
ordinance.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the terms POOL HALL and
BILLIARDS HALL shall mean any building, structure or tract of land which has
at least one use or activity providing any of the following or any
combination of any of the following amusements:



      (1)   Billiards/pool (not coin-operated);



      (2)   Snooker (not coin-operated);



      (3)   Bumper pool (not coin-operated);



      (4)   Table tennis (not coin-operated);



      (5)   Less than nine arcade games or devices as defined by §
5.404(B).



   (D)   A license application for operation of pool tables on the same
premises as any other licensed business or proposed commercial activity shall
contain a statement indicating:



      (1)   The nature of other licensed or proposed business or
commercial activity;



      (2)   The name and date of birth of the licensee or license
applicant for such a business;



      (3)   Whether the licensee or operator of the pool hall or
pool tables would have operational control over both business activities;



      (4)   Whether the operation of pool tables would be an
incident of said other licensed business, or would be an independent business
sharing the same premises.



   (E)   Applications shall contain a statement of the number of gaming
tables to be utilized, and whether the tables are coin-operated, and if
arcade games are to be utilized, the number of said games.



   (F)   Applications shall be referred to the Fire Chief and the
Building Official for an inspection of the premises and a report indicating
whether the premises are in compliance with all applicable ordinances and
regulations, unless the same premises have been previously inspected within
the same calendar year in conjunction with the issuance of a license for any
other business or commercial activity.



   (G)   Applications under this section shall include a statement
whether the applicant has ever been convicted for violation of any law
relating to gambling activities.  Such a conviction may be grounds for
denial of said license application.



   (H)   No pool hall licensed under this section shall be located:



      (1)   Within 300 feet of any school building or church; or



      (2)   If no alcohol is served at the pool hall or billiards
hall, within 200 feet of any school building or church.



   (I)   (1)   Any pool hall or billiards hall operating pursuant to
division (H)(2) of this section shall prohibit any person not at least 14
years of age from entering the establishment as a patron unless accompanied
by a parent or legal guardian.  Any person not at least 18 years of age
shall be prohibited from remaining in the establishment as a patron beyond
one-half hour prior to their curfew with notification given by the
establishment one hour prior to curfew.



      (2)   The curfew requirements shall be prominently displayed
inside at all entrances and exits to the business and in at least two other
locations inside the hall.



   (J)   (1)   The license may be revoked or suspended in accordance
with this section whenever the licensee, its owner, manager, or any of its
employees or agents have engaged in any of the following conduct:



         (a)   Fraud, deception or misrepresentation in
connection with the securing of a license;



         (b)   Conduct inimical to the interests of public
health, safety and welfare;



         (c)   Conduct involving moral turpitude;



         (d)   Conviction of an offense involving moral turpitude
by any court of competent jurisdiction;



         (e)   Failure to comply with any of the provisions of
this section or engaging in conduct which would be grounds for denial of an
initial application for licensure.



      (2)   In addition to the grounds for revocation set forth in
subdivision (1) above, it shall be grounds for revocation of the license if
the Police Department for the city receives five or more complaints within
one month's time of any of the following activities occurring within, upon or
around the premises operating the licensed pool/billiard hall, fencing of
stolen goods, possession and/or distribution of controlled substances, public
intoxication, disorderly conduct or assault.



(`77 Code, § 5.402)  (Am. Ord. 1286, passed 5-9-94; Am. Ord. 1370, passed
5-11-98)  Penalty, see § 5.701



§ 5.402  GAMES OF SKILL.



   (A)   No person shall possess, keep, permit or maintain any “game
of skill” as hereinafter defined, on any premises used for a business or
commercial activity without a license issued pursuant to the provisions of
this section.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, the term A GAME OF SKILL shall
be defined as any device played by manipulating special equipment by hand or
mechanically and said game may be played by the public generally at a price
paid either directly or indirectly.



   (C)   Applications under this section shall include a statement of:



      (1)   The name, number, and description of the game or
particular piece of equipment to be licensed.



      (2)   The name and address of the owner of the game if other
than the licensee.



      (3)   The nature of any other business or commercial activity
conducted at the proposed place of operation of games of skill.



   (D)   A separate license shall be required for each machine.  The
location of all machines operated by the same licensee may be interchanged
without application therefore, provided that a notice of change of location
is filed with the Clerk.



   (E)   No game of skill licensed under this section shall be located
within 100 feet of any school building or church.



   (F)   No licensee or his agent or employee shall permit any person
or persons to use a game of skill licensed under this section as a gambling
device.



   (G)   No more than eight games of skill shall be allowed at any one
site or place of business.  Nine or more games of skill shall be considered
an arcade under § 5.404 of this article.



   (H)   Exemptions:  Games of skill used in conjunction with an event
not exceeding a term of five days and no more than one event per year.



(`77 Code, § 5.404)  (Am. Ord. 976, passed 9-29-81; Am. Ord. 1377, passed
10-12-98)  Penalty, see § 5.701



§ 5.403  CARNIVALS.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of operating a
carnival, as defined herein, without a license issued pursuant to the
provisions of this section.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, CARNIVAL shall be defined as an
aggregation of attractions, shows, acts, games, vending devices, or amusement
devices, temporarily set up or conducted in a public place or on private
premises accessible to the public, with or without an admission fee, for the
attraction and enjoyment of the public.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, no itinerant
carnival shall be allowed within the city which is prohibited by M.S. §
624.65, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   The City Council shall require the posting of a bond or proof
of an insurance policy of liability insurance in the sum of not less than
$500,000 for injury to one person and not less than $1,000,000 for one
accident prior to the issuance of a license under this section.  Said policy
shall be written by an insurance company authorized to do business in the
State of Minnesota.  The City of Columbia Heights shall be named as an
additional insured if the event is on city property.



   (E)   Any carnival licensed hereunder shall deposit with the city
the sum of $500 before such carnival may locate upon city property.  Upon
said carnival vacating the city property, the deposit shall be refunded less
the cost of cleaning or repairs incurred by the city in restoring the
property to its former condition.



(`77 Code, § 5.408)  (Am. Ord. 1377, passed 10-12-98)  Penalty, see §
5.701



§ 5.404  ARCADE/AMUSEMENT CENTER.



   (A)   No person shall operate an arcade/amusement center without
first paying a license fee and obtaining and having a current license as
herein provided.  The license required under this section shall be in
addition to any license or licenses required to be obtained under any other
provision of this code.



   (B)   Definitions.



      ARCADE or AMUSEMENT CENTER.  Any room, place or space available
for public patronage, operated as a business, which utilizes in its operation
nine or more games of skill/amusement devices, including, but not limited to,
pool tables, billiard tables, table tennis tables, foosball tables, pinball
machines, or any mechanical or electronic amusement device, and which derives
its principle source of revenue from the use and operation of such equipment
and games (devices).  An arcade or amusement center as defined in this
section shall not include bowling alleys.



      AMUSEMENT DEVICE.  Any device played by manipulating a game of
skill or chance electronically or mechanically, and said game may be played
by the public generally at a price paid either directly or indirectly.  Such
devices shall be kept at all times within a building which conforms to the
city zoning ordinance and building code and which is the primary building on
the lot.



   (C)   Any person desiring to operate an arcade/amusement center or
to renew his license to conduct such activity shall file with the License
Clerk an application on forms provided by the city for that purpose.  The
application form shall contain the following, together with any other
information which the city may require:



      (1)   Full name, residence and business address, and date of
birth of applicant.



      (2)   Address of the proposed arcade/amusement center location
and a diagram of the proposed floor plan of the premises indicating the
number and types of devices to be used and the sanitary facilities to be
provided.



      (3)   The full name, residence and business address, and date
of birth of all persons owning or having an interest in the licensed premises
and in the proposed business.  In the case of a corporation, this shall
include the full names, residences and business addresses, and date of birth
of the officers and directors of the corporation and all shareholders who own
alone or in conjunction with their spouse or children more than 10% of the
issued shares of corporate stock.



      (4)   If the licensed business is owned by a corporation, a
copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of incorporation and
by-laws of the corporation shall be submitted with the application.



      (5)   The full name and residence address of the manager(s)
who will supervise the licensed activity.



      (6)   Whether any of the persons listed in subdivisions (1),
(3) or (5) have been engaged in the business of operating an arcade or
amusement center in the last five years.



      (7)   Whether any of the persons listed in subdivisions (1),
(3) or (5) have been convicted of a crime or have had an application for an
arcade/amusement center license denied, revoked or suspended within the last
five years.



      (8)   The applicant's plan of security for the licensed
premises.



      (9)   The hours of operation.



   (D)   The license fee shall be for the calendar year and must
accompany the license application.  The license fee shall be set by annual
resolution of the City Council.



   (E)   (1)   All applications for licenses under this section
shall be referred to the Chief of Police and to such other persons on city
staff as shall be deemed necessary for investigation and recommendation. 
The persons to whom an application has been referred shall make their report
and recommendations in writing.



      (2)   The application shall be submitted to the City Council
for review.  The City Council may grant or deny the license.  In granting
the license, the City Council may impose special conditions if it deems such
conditions to be necessary because of particular circumstances related to the
application.



   (F)   Existence of any of the following conditions shall render the
applicant ineligible for a license, to wit:



      (1)   If the applicant or the manager of the licensed business
is:



         (a)   Under 21 year of age;



         (b)   An alien;



         (c)   A foreign corporation.



      (2)   If the applicant, manager, or persons owning the
licensed activity has been convicted of an offense which relates to the
conduct of the licensed business.



      (3)   If the applicant, manager or persons owning the licensed
activity have been denied a license to conduct a like or similar activity or
has had such license suspended, revoked or canceled.



   (G)   Issuance and retention of licenses shall be subject to each of
the following conditions, to wit:



      (1)   Only premises which are within commercial districts of
the city may be licensed.  An arcade/amusement center that is a primary use
of the parcel on which it is located may not be within 150 feet of any
residential district or within 300 feet of any school or church;



      (2)   No premises may be licensed unless sufficient visibility
exists from outside the entrance to the premises for a person of average
stature to visually survey the entire premises and all possible locations of
patrons therein;



      (3)   The consumption of alcoholic beverages, whether
classified as intoxicating or non- intoxicating, or the use of any controlled
substance upon any part of the licensed premises is prohibited;



      (4)   The licensee and his employees and agents shall adhere
to the provisions of the city code relating to minors.  No licensee, nor his
employees or agents, shall knowingly permit a minor to be present on the
premises in violation of curfew laws, nor knowingly permit a person under the
age of 17 years to be present on the premises when school is in session
unless on a valid excused absence.  Curfew law must be posted on-site in a
conspicuous place about the business.



      (5)   No person under the age of 14 years shall be permitted
to enter or remain upon any part of the licensed premises unless accompanied
by his parent or legal guardian.



      (6)   Adequate off-street parking for automobiles must be
provided in compliance with the current city zoning ordinance requirements.



      (7)   The licensed premises shall fully comply with all
applicable state and local regulations dealing with health, zoning, building
and fire requirements and that the place to be licensed will not become a
public nuisance or detrimental to public safety, morals or welfare.  The
building or fire inspector may enter said premises at any time during normal
business hours, for the purpose of inspecting said premises for fire or
building code hazards.  All law enforcement personnel of the City of
Columbia Heights shall have the right to enter said premises at any time
during normal business hours, for the purpose of enforcement of the terms of
this section.



      (8)   The licensee shall be responsible for maintaining order
on all parts of the licensed premises.



      (9)   Only amusement devices with a current, valid Columbia
Heights license may be offered for use or kept on the licensed premises.



      (10)   No wagering or betting for a consideration or any other
gambling shall be permitted on the licensed premises.



      (11)   The applicant or manager, 21 years or older, and as
designated in the license application shall be present on the premises during
all times the premises are open.  No new manager may be placed in
supervision of the premises until he has been approved by the City Council.



      (12)   No amusement devices shall be operated between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.



   (H)   At the time of filing an application for license under this
section, the applicant shall file a bond with a corporate surety with the
City License Clerk in the amount of $5,000.  All such bonds shall be kept in
full force and effect throughout the license period and shall be conditioned
as follows:



      (1)   The licensee shall obey the laws relating to the
licensed business.



      (2)   The licensee shall pay to the city when due all taxes,
license fees, penalties and any other charges provided by law.



      (3)   In the event of violation of any law relating to the
business for which the licensee has been granted, the bond may be forfeited
to the city upon a public hearing and consideration by the City Council.



   (I)   The license may be revoked or suspended in accordance with
this section whenever the licensee, its owner, manager, or any of its
employees or agents have engaged in any of the following conduct:



      (1)   Fraud, deception or misrepresentation in connection with
the securing of a license.



      (2)   Has violated any Minnesota State Statutes.



      (3)   Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this
section or engaging in conduct which would be grounds for denial of an
initial application for licensure.



(`77 Code, § 5.411)  (Am. Ord. 963, passed 9-15-81; Am. Ord. 1377, passed
10-12-98)  Penalty, see § 5.701



ARTICLE V:  LIQUOR AND BEER



Section



   5.501   Definitions



   5.502   3.2% malt liquors (beer)



   5.503   Malt liquors



   5.504   On-sale club liquor



   5.505   Intoxicating liquor



   5.506   On-sale wine licenses



   5.507   Limited intoxicating liquor license



   5.508   Sunday on-sale liquor licenses



   5.509   Sunday club licenses



   5.510   On-sale temporary liquor licenses



   5.511   Policy for alcohol license violations



   5.512   Penalty



§ 5.501  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  Any beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol by
volume.



   BEER.  BEER or 3.2% MALT LIQUOR means any malt beverage with an
alcoholic content of more than 0.5% by volume and not more than 3.2% by
weight.



   BONA FIDE CLUB or CLUB. 



      (1)   An incorporated organization organized under the laws of
the state for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for
intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, a church physically
located within the city, or a congressionally chartered veterans'
organization, which:



         (a)   Has more than 30 members;



         (b)   Has owned or rented a building or space in a
building for more than one year that is suitable and adequate for the
accommodation of its members;



         (c)   Is directed by a board of directors, executive
committee, or other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for
that purpose.  No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive any
profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club,
or their guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each
year by the governing body.



      (2)   The serving of beer/liquor must be incidental to and not
the major purpose of the club.



   BREW PUB. A restaurant that conducts the retail of on-sale malt liquor
consumed and brewed on the premise and who manufactures less than 3,500
barrels of malt liquor a year.



   BREWER TAPROOM. A facility on the premises of, or adjacent to, a malt
liquor manufacturer intended for on-sale and consumption of malt liquor
produced by the brewer.



   DISTILLED SPIRITS.  Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of
wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin and other distilled spirits, including all
dilutions and mixtures thereof, for nonindustrial use.



   HOTEL.  An establishment where food and lodging are regularly
furnished to transients and which has:



      (1)   A dining room serving the general public at tables and
having facilities for seating at least 75 guests at one time; and



      (2)   A minimum of ten guest rooms.



   INTEREST.  This term as used in this section includes any pecuniary
interest in the ownership, operation, management or profits of a retail
liquor establishment, but does not include bona fide loans, bona fide fixed
sum rental agreements, bona fide open accounts or other obligations held with
or without security arising out of the ordinary and regular course of
business of selling or leasing merchandise, fixtures or supplies to such
establishments or an interest of 10% or less in any corporation holding a
license.  A person who receives moneys from time to time directly or
indirectly from a licensee, in the absence of a bona fide consideration
therefore and excluding bona fide gifts or donations, shall be deemed to have
a pecuniary interest in such retail license.  In determining BONA FIDE the
reasonable value of the goods or things received as consideration for any
payment by the licensee and all other facts reasonably tending to prove or
disprove the existence of any purposeful scheme or arrangement to evade the
prohibitions of this article shall be considered.



   INTOXICATING LIQUOR.  Ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous,
vinous, and malt beverages containing more than 3.2% of alcohol by weight.



   LICENSED PREMISES.  The premises described in the approved license
application.  In the case of a restaurant, club, or exclusive liquor store
licensed for on-sales of alcoholic beverages and located on a golf course,
LICENSED PREMISES means the entire golf course except for areas where motor
vehicles are regularly parked or operated.



   MALT LIQUOR.  Any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by
fermentation and containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume.



   MANUFACTURER.  A person who, by a process of manufacture, fermenting,
brewing, distilling, refining, rectifying, blending, or by the combination of
different materials, prepares or produces intoxicating liquor for sale.



   MINOR.  A person less than 18 years of age.



   OFF-SALE.  The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for
consumption off or away from the licensed premises only.



   ON-SALE.  The sale of alcoholic beverages by the glass or by the drink
for consumption on the licensed premises only.



   ORIGINAL PACKAGE.  A sealed or corked container in which the liquor is
placed by the manufacturer.



   PERSON.  The term PERSON includes a natural person of either sex, a
partnership, a corporation or association of persons, and the agent or
manager or employee of any of the aforesaid. The singular includes the
plural, and the masculine pronoun includes the feminine and neuter.



   PREMISES.  The inside of the building itself or the leased space
inside a building as submitted on the floor plan submitted in conjunction
with the initial application for license.  Outside areas, such as any
patios, parking lots or other areas shall not be included unless specifically
listed on the license.



   RESTAURANT.  An establishment, other than a hotel, of which the major
business is preparing and serving of lunches or meals at tables to the
general public to be consumed on the premises.



   RETAIL.  Sale for consumption.



   SALEor SELL.  These terms shall mean and include all barters and all
manners or means of furnishing intoxicating liquor as herein described.



   WHOLESALE.  Any sale for purposes of resale.



   WHOLESALER.  A person who sells alcoholic beverages to persons to whom
sale is permitted from a stock maintained in a warehouse in the state.



   WINE.  The product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of
grapes, including still wine, sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from
condensed grape must, wine made from other agricultural products than sound,
ripe grapes, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry
and sake, in each instance containing not less than 0.5% nor more than 14%
alcohol by volume for nonindustrial use. WINE does not include distilled
spirits.



(Ord. 1416, passed 7-24-00; Am. Ord. 1610, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 1620,
passed 3-23-15; Am. Ord. 1638, passed 2-27-17)



§ 5.502  3.2% MALT LIQUORS (BEER).



   (A)   No person, except the holder of intoxicating liquor licenses,
wholesalers and manufacturers to the extent authorized by law, shall deal in
or dispose of by gift, sale or otherwise, or keep or offer for sale, any beer
within the city without first having received a license as hereinafter
provided.  Licenses shall be of three kinds: (1) Retail “On-Sale” 3.2%
Beer; (2) Retail “Off-Sale” 3.2% Beer; and (3) Retail Temporary
“On-Sale” 3.2% beer.



   (B)   “On-Sale” 3.2% beer licenses may be granted only to bona
fide clubs, bowling establishments, restaurants and hotels where food is
prepared and served for consumption on the premises or to the city for
municipal facilities and events.  “On-sale” 3.2 beer licenses shall
permit the sale of beer for consumption on the premises only.



   (C)   “Off-sale” 3.2% beer licenses shall permit the sale of
3.2% beer at retail in the original package for consumption off the premises
only.



   (D)   “Temporary on-sale” 3.2% beer licenses may be granted to
clubs, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organizations, or to the city for
municipal facilities and events only.  “Temporary on-sale 3.2%f beer
licenses shall be subject to any special terms and conditions as the City
Council may prescribe.  No more than 3 four-day, 4 three-day, 6 two-day, or
12 one-day temporary licenses, in any combination not to exceed 12 days per
year to any one organization or for any one location, within a 12-month
period.  No more than one temporary license to any one organization or for
any one location, within any 30-day period.



   (E)   Every application for a license to sell beer shall be made on
a form supplied by the city.  Applications shall be filed with the Clerk. 
It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in an application.  By
submitting an application, the applicant consents to any and all
investigations the city deems appropriate and waives any claims the applicant
may have.  Copies of the application shall be submitted to such other city
departments as the City Council shall deem necessary for verification and
investigation of the facts set forth in the application.



   (F)   Applications for beer licenses shall state the following:



      (1)   Whether the applicant is a natural person, partnership,
corporation or other form of organization;



      (2)   Full legal name of applicant and applicant’s spouse,
place and date of birth, street residence address and length of time at that
address of the applicant and applicant’s spouse; and any other information
deemed necessary by the City Council or issuing authority.



      (3)   Three character references.



      (4)   The nature of any other business to be operated in
conjunction with the sale of beer and whether the applicant is the owner or
operator of such other business, and if so, the length of time in such
business.



      (5)   In the case of corporations, partnerships, and other
organizations, such information relating to the identity of each officer,
director and partner as required in division (F)(2).



   (G)   In the case of temporary beer applications, the application
shall include the requirements as stated in division (F) as well as the
following information:



      (1)   Name and address of club/church.



      (2)   Full legal name of person in charge of event if not
applicant, spouse’s full legal name if applicable; date of birth, residence
street address and length of time at that address of person in charge and
spouse; and any other information deemed necessary by the City Council or
issuing authority.



      (3)   Site plan of the area where sales will occur indicating
the size, location and nature of the premises planned to be used along with a
depiction of its relationship to the adjacent premises.



      (4)   Certificate of incorporation.



      (5)   Statement from property owner granting permission to
applicant for use of the premises on which the stated activity is proposed.



      (6)   Executed signature of an officer of the club/church.



   (H)   All applications shall be referred to the Chief of Police. 
The Chief of Police or his designee is empowered to conduct any and all
investigations to verify the information on the application, including
ordering a computerized criminal history inquiry obtained through the
Criminal Justice System and/or a driver’s license history inquiry as
recorded by the State Department of Public Safety on the applicant.  An
investigation fee as set by City Council resolution shall accompany each
application.  The application shall also be referred to the Chief of the
Fire Department, the Building Official and the City Planning and Zoning
Department for a report indicating whether said premises are in compliance
with applicable ordinances and regulations.  A public hearing shall then be
held before the City Council, at which time the application for a license
shall be considered.  Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard
for or against the granting of the license at a public hearing.  The Council
may accept or reject the license application in its discretion upon
completion of the public hearing.



   (I)   Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall
not be transferable to another holder.  Each license shall be issued only
for the premises described in the application.



   (J)   For temporary on-sale licenses, if the event is postponed
because of weather, the City Manager or his designee has the authority to
change the effective dates of the license, as long as the total amount of
hours approved by the City Council does not change.



   (K)   No license shall be granted to any person:



      (1)   Who is under 21 years of age.



      (2)   Who has been convicted of a felony, or any law of this
state or local ordinance relating to the manufacture, transportation or sale
of 3.2% malt beer or of intoxicating liquors.



      (3)   For the sale of 3.2% malt liquor on any premises also
occupied by a previous licensee who was convicted of a violation of this
section.



      (4)   Who is a manufacturer of beer or who is interested in
the control of any place where beer is manufactured.



      (5)   Who is not a citizen of the United States or a resident
alien, or upon whom it is impractical to conduct a background and financial
investigation due to the unavailability of information.



      (6)   Who is not of good moral character and repute.



      (7)   Who is or, during the period of this license, becomes
the holder of a federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp for the
sale of intoxicating liquor at such place.



      (8)   Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which
the license is issued. In the case of a temporary beer license, no license
shall be issued to any applicant who is unable to demonstrate that the
applicant has permission to use the premises proposed to be licensed on the
dates for which the license is sought.



      (9)   No license shall be issued to any applicant for a
location within 300 feet of any school or church, unless such license has
been previously approved when no school or church was so situated.



   (L)   Licenses granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   No gambling, nor any gambling device allowed that is
prohibited by law.



      (2)   All licensees under this section shall allow the
business premises to be inspected by police or health officials at any time.



      (3)   No sale of 3.2% malt liquor (beer) may be made between
2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through Saturday, nor between
2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday.



      (4)   No licensee who is not also licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor shall sell or permit the consumption or display of
intoxicating liquors on the licensed premises or serve any liquids for the
purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor.  The presence of intoxicating
liquors on the premises of such a licensee shall be prima facie evidence of
possession of intoxicating liquors for the purpose of sale; and the serving
of any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquors shall be
prima facie evidence that intoxicating liquor is being permitted to be
consumed or displayed contrary to this section.



      (5)   No person under 18 years of age shall be employed on the
premises, except that persons under 18 years of age may be employed as
musicians, bus boys and kitchen help.



      (6)   No person or customer, other than the licensee and his
employees, may remain on any licensed premises after 2:30 a.m.



      (7)   No licensee or his agent shall serve beer or permit the
sale of beer to any person under 21 years of age.



      (8)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of
his place of business and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order. 
The act of any employee on the licensed premises authorized to sell beer
there is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be
liable to all penalties provided by ordinance, statute, or regulation equally
with the employee.



      (9)   No licensee shall permit 18, 19 and 20 year olds to
remain on the premises unless to perform work for the establishment including
the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages, consume meals, and attend social
functions that are held in a portion of the establishment where liquor is not
sold.



      (10)   No licensee shall permit in any licensed establishment,
or any adjoining property owned or leased by the licensee, any boxing,
wrestling, or any other form of entertainment whose primary purpose is
physical contact by striking or touching an opponent with hands, head, feet,
or body.  Team sports, in which physical contact is incidental to the
primary purpose of the game such as basketball, volleyball, soccer, football,
baseball, hockey, and softball, are not included among activities prohibited
by this section.



   (M)   No license shall be granted for sale on any premises where a
licensee has been convicted of any violation of this section, or of the state
beer or liquor law, or where any license hereunder has been revoked for cause
until one year has elapsed after such conviction or revocation.



   (N)   No “on-sale” license shall be granted for a bona fide club
which has not been in operation and eligible to receive a license for at
least one year immediately preceding the application for a license.



   (O)   (1)   Each application for a license must be accompanied by
the applicable license and investigation fees payment in full. As stated in
§ 5.103(E)(1): “Fees shall not be prorated unless specifically authorized
herein, or by City Council resolution, and are not refundable for any reason,
including license revocation, suspension, denial or termination of the
licensed activity.”  The annual fee for an “on-sale” and
“off-sale” license shall be as set by City Council resolution.



      (2)   No license shall be issued for a temporary beer license
unless the applicant has first paid an application fee and a license fee in
an amount set by resolution of the Council.  In the absence of a resolution,
the application fee shall be $500 and the license fee shall be $100 per day
or portion thereof.



   (P)   “On-sale” and “off-sale” licenses shall expire on the
last day of December in each year.  Each such license shall be issued for a
period of one year, except that if a portion of the license year has elapsed
when the application is made, a license may be issued for the remainder of
the year. “Temporary on-sale” licenses are only good for the dates, times
and locations specifically stated on the license.



   (Q)   (1)   At the time of filing an application for any on-sale
or off-sale 3.2% malt liquor license, the applicant shall file with the Clerk
proof of financial responsibility for liability.  The issuer or surety on
any liability insurance policy or bond shall be duly licensed to do business
in the State of Minnesota, and all documents shall be approved as to content,
form and execution.  The licensee and the city shall be named as joint
insured on the liability insurance policy.  The policy shall be effective
for the entire license year.



      (2)   Proof of financial responsibility may be provided by
supplying to the Clerk any of the following items:



         (a)   A certificate that there is in effect for the
license period an insurance policy providing at least $50,000 of coverage
because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence, $100,000
because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence,
$10,000 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one
occurrence, $50,000 for loss of means of support of any one person in any one
occurrence, and $100,000 for loss of means of support of two or more persons
in any one occurrence; or



         (b)   A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages
as provided in subdivision (a); or



         (c)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the
licensee has deposited with that office $100,000 in cash or securities which
may legally be purchased by savings banks or for trust funds having a market
value of $100,000.



   (R)   These licensees must provide the same insurance provided in
division (Q). The location of the event and date of the event must be
indicated on the certificate of insurance.



   (S)   Any liability insurance required by this section must provide
that it may not be canceled for:



      (1)   Any cause, except for nonpayment of premium, by either
the insured or the insurer unless the canceling party has first given 30
days’ notice in writing to the issuing authority of intent to cancel the
policy; and



      (2)   Nonpayment of premium unless the canceling party has
first given ten days’ notice in writing to the issuing authority of intent
to cancel the policy.



   (T)   The operation of an on-sale, off-sale, or temporary on-sale
beer license without having on file at all times with the city the liability
insurance policy or other evidence of financial responsibility required
herein shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the license. Notice of
cancellation of a current liquor liability policy serves as notice to the
licensee of the impending revocation and unless evidence of compliance with
the financial responsibility requirements of this section are presented to
the Clerk before the termination is effective, the license will be revoked
instantly upon the lapse in coverage.



   (U)    Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions and
provisions of this section and of other applicable ordinances of the city or
state law.



   (V)   All licensed premises shall have the license posted in a
conspicuous place at all times.



   (W)   No manufacturer or wholesaler of beer shall have any ownership
of or interest in an establishment licensed to sell at retail contrary to the
provisions of M.S. § 340A.308, as it may be amended from time to time.  No
retail licensee and manufacturer or wholesaler of beer shall be parties to
any exclusive purchase contract. No retail licensee shall receive any
benefits contrary to law from a manufacturer or wholesaler of beer and no
such manufacturer or wholesaler shall confer any benefits contrary to law
upon a retail licensee.



   (X)   Any peace officer shall have the unqualified right to enter,
inspect and search the premises of a licensee during business hours without a
search and seizure warrant and may, in the absence of a license to sell
intoxicating liquor, seize all intoxicating liquors found on the licensed
premises.  Business hours shall be deemed any time when licensee or
employees are present on the premises.  Refusal to permit such inspection is
a violation of this section and grounds for revocation of license.



   (Y)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (Z)   Any “on or off sale” license holder is subject to
provisions of  5.510 regarding penalties for license violations.



(`77 Code, § 5.501)  (Am. Ord. 1119, passed 2-24-86; Am. Ord. 1135, passed
9-22-86; Am. Ord. 1154, passed 8-24-87; Am. Ord. 1416, passed 7-24-00; Am.
Ord. 1482, passed 3-28-05; Am. Ord. 1610, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 1640,
passed 6-12-17)  Penalty, see § 5.701



§ 5.503  MALT LIQUORS.



   (A)   No person, except the holder of intoxicating liquor licenses,
wholesalers and manufacturers to the extent authorized by law, shall deal in
or dispose of by gift, sale or otherwise, or keep or offer for sale, any malt
liquor within the city without first having received a license as hereinafter
provided. Licenses shall be of three kinds:



      (1)   On-sale brewer taproom;



      (2)   On-sale brew pub; and



      (3)   Off-sale malt liquor.



   (B)   On-sale brewer taproom licenses may be granted to a brewer
licensed under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(c), (i) or (j), subject to the
provisions of M.S. § 340A.26, as it may be amended from time to time and as
follows:



      (1)   A brewer may only hold one on-sale brewer taproom
license; and



      (2)   The license permits the sale of malt liquor produced by
the brewer for consumption of the malt liquor on the premises of, or adjacent
to, a brewer taproom owned by the brewer.



   (C)   On-sale brew pub licenses may be granted to hotels, clubs,
municipal liquor stores, restaurants, and non-profit organizations for sale
and consumption of malt liquor produced on the licensed premise.



   (D)   Off-sale malt liquor licenses may be granted to a licensee
with either an on-sale brewer taproom license or on-sale brew pub license,
which shall permit the off-sale of malt liquor on the licensee’s premise,
subject to the provisions of M.S. §§ 340A.24 or 340A.28, as it may be
amended from time to time and as follows:



      (1)   A brewer may only hold one off-sale malt liquor license;



      (2)   The off-sale of malt liquor shall only be permitted
during the same days and hours of municipal liquor stores, and between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. on Sundays and 2:00 a.m. on Mondays;



      (3)   The only off-sale of malt liquor shall be the malt
liquor produced by the licensee at the licensee’s premise; and



      (4)   The packaging of the off-sale malt liquor containers and
bottles are subject to M.S. § 340A.285, as it may be amended from time to
time.



   (E)   Every application for a license to sell malt liquor shall be
made on a form supplied by the city. Applications shall be filed with the
Clerk. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in an application. By
submitting an application, the applicant consents to any and all
investigations the city deems appropriate and waives any claims the applicant
may have. Copies of the application shall be submitted to such other city
departments as the Council shall deem necessary for verification and
investigation of the facts set forth in the application.



   (F)   Applications for malt liquor licenses shall state the
following:



      (1)   Whether the applicant is a natural person, partnership,
corporation or other form of organization;



      (2)   Full legal name of applicant and applicant’s spouse,
place and date of birth, street residence address and length of time at that
address of the applicant and applicant’s spouse; and any other information
deemed necessary by the Council or issuing authority;



      (3)   Three character references;



      (4)   The nature of any other business to be operated in
conjunction with the sale of malt liquor and whether the applicant is the
owner or operator of such other business, and if so, the length of time in
such business; and



      (5)   In the case of corporations, partnerships, and other
organizations, such information relating to the identity of each officer,
director and partner as required in division (F)(2).



   (G)   All applications shall be referred to the Chief of Police. The
Chief of Police or designee is empowered to conduct any and all
investigations to verify the information on the application, including
ordering a computerized criminal history inquiry obtained through the
Criminal Justice System and/or a driver’s license history inquiry as
recorded by the State Department of Public Safety on the applicant. An
investigation fee as set by Council resolution shall accompany each
application. The application shall also be referred to the Chief of the Fire
Department, the Building Official and the City Planning and Zoning Department
for a report indicating whether said premises are in compliance with
applicable ordinances and regulations. A public hearing shall then be held
before the Council, at which time the application for a license shall be
considered. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license at a public hearing. The Council may
accept or reject the license application in its discretion upon completion of
the public hearing.



   (H)   Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall
not be transferable to another holder. Each license shall be issued only for
the premises described in the application.



   (I)   No license shall be granted to any person:



      (1)   Who is under 21 years of age;



      (2)   Who has been convicted of a felony, or any law of this
state or local ordinance relating to the manufacture, transportation or sale
of 3.2% malt, malt liquor or of intoxicating liquors;



      (3)   For the sale of malt liquor on any premises also
occupied by a previous licensee who was convicted of a violation of this
section;



      (4)   Who is not a citizen of the United States or a resident
alien, or upon whom it is impractical to conduct a background and financial
investigation due to the unavailability of information;



      (5)   Who is not of good moral character and repute;



      (6)   Who is or, during the period of this license, becomes
the holder of a federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp for the
sale of intoxicating liquor at such place; or



      (7)   Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which
the license is issued.



   (J)   Licenses granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   No gambling, nor any gambling device allowed that is
prohibited by law.



      (2)   All licensees under this section shall allow the
business premises to be inspected by police or health officials at any time.



      (3)   No sale of malt liquor may be made between 1:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through Saturday, nor between 1:00 a.m. and
10:00 a.m. on Sunday.



      (4)   No licensee who is not also licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor shall sell or permit the consumption or display of
intoxicating liquors on the licensed premises or serve any liquids for the
purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor. The presence of intoxicating
liquors on the premises of such a licensee shall be prima facie evidence of
possession of intoxicating liquors for the purpose of sale; and the serving
of any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquors shall be
prima facie evidence that intoxicating liquor is being permitted to be
consumed or displayed contrary to this section.



      (5)   No person under 18 years of age shall be employed on the
premises, except that persons under 18 years of age may be employed as
musicians, bus boys and kitchen help.



      (6)   No person or customer, other than the licensee and his
or her employees, may remain on any licensed premises after 1:30 a.m.



      (7)   No licensee or his or her agent shall serve malt liquor
or permit the sale of malt liquor to any person under 21 years of age.



      (8)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of
his or her place of business and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and
order. The act of any employee on the licensed premises authorized to sell
malt liquor there is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee
shall be liable to all penalties provided by ordinance, statute, or
regulation equally with the employee.



      (9)   No licensee shall permit 18, 19 and 20 year olds to
remain on the premises unless to perform work for the establishment including
the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages, consume meals, and attend social
functions that are held in a portion of the establishment where liquor is not
sold.



      (10)   No licensee shall permit in any licensed establishment,
or any adjoining property owned or leased by the licensee, any boxing,
wrestling, or any other form of entertainment whose primary purpose is
physical contact by striking or touching an opponent with hands, head, feet,
or body. Team sports, in which physical contact is incidental to the primary
purpose of the game such as basketball, volleyball, soccer, football,
baseball, hockey, and softball, are not included among activities prohibited
by this section.



   (K)   No license shall be granted for sale on any premises where a
licensee has been convicted of any violation of this section, or of the state
beer or liquor law, or where any license hereunder has been revoked for cause
until one year has elapsed after such conviction or revocation.



   (L)   No on-sale license shall be granted for a bona fide club which
has not been in operation and eligible to receive a license for at least one
year immediately preceding the application for a license.



   (M)   Each application for a license must be accompanied by the
applicable license and investigation fees payment in full. As stated in §
5.103(E)(1): “Fees shall not be prorated unless specifically authorized
herein, or by Council resolution, and are not refundable for any reason,
including license revocation, suspension, denial or termination of the
licensed activity.” The annual fee for an on-sale and off-sale license
shall be as set by Council resolution.



   (N)   On-sale and off-sale licenses shall expire on the last day of
December in each year. Each such license shall be issued for a period of one
year, except that if a portion of the license year has elapsed when the
application is made, a license may be issued for the remainder of the year.



   (O)   (1)   At the time of filing an application for any on-sale
or off-sale malt liquor license, the applicant shall file with the Clerk
proof of financial responsibility for liability. The issuer or surety on any
liability insurance policy or bond shall be duly licensed to do business in
the State of Minnesota, and all documents shall be approved as to content,
form and execution. The licensee and the city shall be named as joint insured
on the liability insurance policy. The policy shall be effective for the
entire license year.



      (2)   Proof of financial responsibility may be provided by
supplying to the Clerk any of the following items:



         (a)   A certificate that there is in effect for the
license period an insurance policy providing at least $50,000 of coverage
because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence, $100,000
because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence,
$10,000 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one
occurrence, $50,000 for loss of means of support of any one person in any one
occurrence, and $100,000 for loss of means of support of two or more persons
in any one occurrence;



         (b)   A bond of surety company with minimum coverages as
provided in division (2)(a) above; or



         (c)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the
licensee has deposited with that office $100,000 in cash or securities which
may legally be purchased by savings banks or for trust funds having a market
value of $100,000.



   (P)   Any liability insurance required by this section must provide
that it may not be canceled for:



      (1)   Any cause, except for nonpayment of premium, by either
the insured or the insurer unless the  canceling party has first given 30
days’ notice in writing to the issuing authority of intent to cancel the
policy; and



      (2)   Nonpayment of premium unless the canceling party has
first given ten days’ notice in writing to the issuing authority of intent
to cancel the policy.



   (Q)   The operation of an on-sale, off-sale malt liquor license
without having on file at all times with the city the liability insurance
policy or other evidence of financial responsibility required herein shall be
grounds for immediate revocation of the license. Notice of cancellation of a
current liquor liability policy serves as notice to the licensee of the
impending revocation and unless evidence of compliance with the financial
responsibility requirements of this section are presented to the Clerk before
the termination is effective, the license will be revoked instantly upon the
lapse in coverage.



   (R)   Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions and
provisions of this section and of other applicable ordinances of the city or
state law.



   (S)   All licensed premises shall have the license posted in a
conspicuous place at all times.



   (T)   No manufacturer or wholesaler of malt liquor shall have any
ownership of or interest in an establishment licensed to sell at retail
contrary to the provisions of M.S. § 340A.308, as it may be amended from
time to time. No retail licensee and manufacturer or wholesaler of malt
liquor shall be parties to any exclusive purchase contract. No retail
licensee shall receive any benefits contrary to law from a manufacturer or
wholesaler of malt liquor and no such manufacturer or wholesaler shall confer
any benefits contrary to law upon a retail licensee.



   (U)   Any peace officer shall have the unqualified right to enter,
inspect and search the premises of a licensee during business hours without a
search and seizure warrant and may, in the absence of a license to sell
intoxicating liquor, seize all intoxicating liquors found on the licensed
premises. Business hours shall be deemed any time when licensee or employees
are present on the premises. Refusal to permit such inspection is a violation
of this section and grounds for revocation of license.



   (V)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (W)   Any on-sale or off-sale license holder is subject to the
provisions of § 5.511 regarding penalties for license violations.



(Ord. 1638, passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 1640, passed 6-12-17)



§ 5.504  ON-SALE CLUB LIQUOR.



   (A)   On-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor may be
issued to bona fide clubs, as defined herein, which have been in existence
for three years or more, or to an incorporated congressionally chartered
veterans organization which has been in existence for three years or more.



      (1)   The licenses issued shall be for sale of intoxicating
liquors to club members and guests only.



      (2)   The license fee shall be set by Minnesota State Statute.
No license will be issued unless at the time of application the applicant has
paid the license fee in full and a non-refundable investigation fee as set by
City Council resolution.  Where all applicants are in-state, the
investigation fee will be $500; where any applicants are out of state, the
investigation fee shall be $2,000. If the investigation fee for in-state or
out of state applicants exceeds the minimum fee, the additional costs of the
investigation will be billed to the applicant(s).  Upon rejection of any
application for a license, or upon withdrawal of an application before
approval of the issuance by the City Council, the license fee shall be
refunded to the applicant. In any case, the investigation fee will be
non-refundable. All licenses shall expire on the last day of December of each
year.



   (B)   Any club as defined herein, may make application for such
license. The application shall be made with the Clerk and shall contain the
following information in addition to a forge from the Minnesota Liquor
Control Commissioner:



      (1)   Name and address of club.



      (2)   Date of and copy of certificate of incorporation of club
or other documentation of legal status.



      (3)   Certified copy of the by-laws of the club, including
therein a definition of the word “member.”



      (4)   A list of the membership.



      (5)   A copy of the Charter, if any.



      (6)   List of corporate officers, board of directors and
manager.



      (7)   Copy of lease agreement or statement of ownership of
premises occupied by the applicant.



      (8)   A statement as to whether or not real estate taxes and
local assessments for the premises to be licensed are fully paid, and if not
paid, the years and amounts which are unpaid.



      (9)   Executed signature of an officer of the corporation.



      (10)   Full legal name of applicant and applicant’s spouse,
place and date of birth, street address of residence and length of time at
that address of the applicant and applicant’s spouse; and any other
information deemed necessary by the City Council or issuing authority.



   (C)   At the time of filing an application for any on-sale
intoxicating liquor license, the applicant shall file with the Clerk proof of
financial responsibility for liability. The issuer or surety on any liability
insurance policy or bond shall be duly licensed to do business in the State
of Minnesota, and all documents shall be approved as to content, form and
execution. The licensee and the city shall be named as joint insured on the
liability insurance policy. The policy shall be effective for the entire
license year or term of license. Proof of financial responsibility may be
provided by supplying to the Clerk any of the following items:



      (1)   A certificate that there is in effect for the license
period an insurance policy providing at least $50,000 of coverage because of
bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence, $100,000 because of
bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence, $10,000 because
of bodily injury to or destruction of property of others in any one
occurrence, $50,000 for loss of means of support of any one person in any one
occurrence, and $100,000 for loss of means of support of two or more persons
in any one occurrence; or



      (2)   A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages as
provided in division (D)(1); or



      (3)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the licensee
has deposited with the State Treasurer $100,000 in cash or securities that
may be legally purchased by savings banks or trust funds having a market
value of $100,000.



   (D)   The operation of an intoxicating liquor license without having
on file at all times with the city the liability insurance policy or other
evidence of financial responsibility required herein shall be grounds for
immediate revocation of the license. Notice of cancellation of a current
liquor liability policy serves as notice to the licensee of the impending
revocation and unless evidence of compliance with the financial
responsibility requirements of this section are presented to the Clerk before
the termination is effective, the license will be revoked instantly upon the
lapse in coverage. Any liability insurance required by this section must
provide that it may not be canceled for:



      (1)   Any cause, except for nonpayment of premium, by either
the insured or the insurer unless the canceling party has first given 30
days’ notice in writing to the issuing authority of intent to cancel the
policy; and



      (2)   Nonpayment of premium unless the canceling party has
first given ten days’ notice in writing to the issuing authority of intent
to cancel the policy.



   (E)   All applications shall be referred to the Chief of Police. The
Chief of Police or his designee is empowered to conduct any and all
investigations to verify the information on the application, including
ordering a computerized criminal history inquiry obtained through the
Criminal Justice System and/or a driver’s license history inquiry as
recorded by the State Department of Public Safety on the applicant. The
application shall also be referred to the Chief of the Fire Department, the
Building Official and the City Planning and Zoning Department for a report
indicating whether said premises are in compliance with applicable ordinances
and regulations. A public hearing shall then be held before the City Council,
at which time the application for a license shall be considered. Opportunity
shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the
license at a public hearing. The City Council may accept or reject the
license application in its discretion upon completion of the public hearing.
Each license shall be issued to the applicant(s) only and shall not be
transferable to another holder. Each license shall be issued only for the
premises described in the application.



   (F)   No license shall be issued to any applicant for a location
within 300 feet of any school or church, unless such license has been
previously approved when no school or church was so situated.



   (G)   Clubs which are licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall be subject to the following regulations:



      (1)   No sale of intoxicating liquor may be made between 2:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through Saturday, nor between 2:00
a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday.



      (2)   Sales shall be made only to club members and their
guests.



      (3)   Liquor may only be sold at the premises designated in
the license.



      (4)   The Clerk shall be notified of any change in the person
managing the liquor operations for the club.



      (5)   No licensee shall permit in any licensed establishment,
or any adjoining property owned or leased by the licensee, any boxing,
wrestling, or any other form of entertainment whose primary purpose is
physical contact by striking or touching an opponent with hands, head, feet,
or body.  Team sports, in which physical contact is incidental to the
primary purpose of the game such as basketball, volleyball, soccer, football,
baseball, hockey, and softball, are not included among activities prohibited
by this section.



   (H)   Any on-sale license issued pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall be subject to § 5.504(L).



   (I)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
per state statute.



   (J)   Any club license is subject to provisions of  5.510 regarding
penalties for license violations.



(`77 Code, § 5.502)  (Am. Ord. 1135, passed 9-22-86; Am. Ord. 1154, passed
8-24-87; Am. Ord. 1190, passed 10-23-89; Am. Ord. 1419, passed 9-25-00; Am.
Ord. 1482, passed 3-28-05; Am. Ord. 1610, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 1638,
passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 1640, passed 6-12-17)



§ 5.505  INTOXICATING LIQUOR.



   (A)   No person, except wholesalers or manufacturers to the extent
authorized by state statute, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, or
keep for sale any intoxicating liquor without first having received a license
to do so as provided in this chapter. On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses
may be issued to the following establishments:



      (1)   Hotels;



      (2)   Restaurants with minimum seating for 150 guests at one
time and a dining area with a minimum floor area of 3,000 square feet;



      (3)   Bowling centers with not less than 15 lanes and with
appropriate facilities for the serving of food to not less than 30 persons;



      (4)   Clubs or congressionally chartered veterans’
organizations, with the approval of the commissioner, provided that the
organization has been in existence for at least three years; liquor sales
only to members and bona fide guests.



   (B)   On sale intoxicating liquor licenses shall be granted to
establishments that derive at least 60% of the annual gross receipts from the
sale of food. A hotel shall have a dining area providing seating for at least
75 guests at one time and a minimum of ten guest rooms, and of that part of
the total business receipts attributable to or derived from the serving of
foods and intoxicating liquors, no less than 60% of the business receipts
from a license year must be attributable to the sale of food. A bowling
center shall be conducted in such a manner that no less than 60% of the
business receipts for the license year shall be derived from the serving of
food and bowling.



   (C)   A restaurant which contains a minimum of 3,300 square feet of
building area located on the same floor with minimum seating for 150 guests
at one time and a combined waiting and dining space with a minimum floor area
of 2,000 square feet may make application for a limited intoxicating liquor
license provided that the premises does not contain an elevated counter,
commonly known as a bar and meets the 60% requirements of division (B). The
annual license fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council. In the
absence of a resolution, the license fee shall be $5,500.



   (D)   No license shall be granted for any premises which does not
have a sprinkler system.



   (E)   Every application for a license to sell intoxicating liquor
on-sale shall be made on a form supplied by the city. Applications shall be
filed with the Clerk. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in an
application. By submitting an application, the applicant consents to any and
all investigations the city deems appropriate and waives any claims the
applicant may have. Copies of the application shall be submitted to such
other city departments as the City Council shall deem necessary for
verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application.



   (F)   In addition to the information required on the State Liquor
Control Commissioner’s form, the on-sale intoxicating liquor license
application shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Type of license applicant seeks.



      (2)   Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation,
partnership, or other form of organization.



      (3)   Full legal name of applicant and applicant’s spouse,
place and date of birth, street address of residence and length of time at
that address of the applicant and applicant’s spouse; and any other
information deemed necessary by the City Council or issuing authority.



         (a)   Whether the applicant has ever used or been known
by a name other than his true name, and, if so, what was such name or names
and information concerning dates and places where used.



         (b)   Name of business.



         (c)   The nature of any other business to be operated in
conjunction with the on-sale of intoxicating liquor and whether the applicant
is the owner or operator of such other business, and if so, the length of
time in such business.



         (d)   Street addresses at which applicant and current
spouse have lived during the preceding ten years.



         (e)   Kind, name and location of every business or
occupation applicant or present spouse have been engaged in during the
preceding ten years.



         (f)   Names and addresses of applicant’s and
spouse’s employers and partners, if any, for the preceding ten years.



         (g)   Whether applicant or spouse has ever been
convicted of any felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than
traffic.  If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the time,
place and offense for which convictions were had.



         (h)   Whether applicant or spouse has ever been engaged
as an employee or in operating a bar, saloon, hotel, restaurant, café,
tavern or other business of a similar nature. If so, applicant shall furnish
information as to the time, place, and length of time.



         (i)   Whether applicant has ever been in military
service. If so, applicant shall attach DD/214 form.



      (4)   In the case of corporations, partnerships, or other form
of organization, such information relating to the identity of each officer,
director and partner as required in division (F)(3).



      (5)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization
and is applying for an on- sale license, the following will be required:



         (a)   Name and, if incorporated, the state of
incorporation.



         (b)   A true copy of certificate of incorporation or
other documentation of legal status.



      (6)   An applicant for an on-sale license shall submit a floor
plan of the dining room or dining rooms which shall be open to the public,
shall show dimensions, and shall indicate the number of persons intended to
be served in each of said rooms.



      (7)   Three character references located within the State of
Minnesota.



      (8)   Whether or not all real estate taxes and local
assessments for the premises to be licensed which are due and payable have
been paid and if not paid, the years and amounts which are unpaid.



      (9)   Such other information as the City Council shall require.



   (G)   (1)   Applications for the renewal of an existing license
shall be made a minimum of 60 days prior to the date of the expiration of the
license.



      (2)   At the time application is made for a renewal of an on
sale license, the applicant shall file with the Clerk a statement prepared by
a certified public accountant that shows the total gross sales and the total
food sales of the restaurant for the 12-month period immediately preceding
the date for filing renewal applications.



   (H)   If the application is by a natural person, it shall be signed
and sworn to by such person; if by a corporation, or other organization, by
an authorized representative of the same.



   (I)   No license will be issued unless at the time of application
the applicant has paid the license fee in full and a non-refundable
investigation fee as set by City Council resolution. In the absence of a
resolution, the license fee shall be $6,500; where all applicants are
in-state, the investigation fee will be $500; where any applicants are
out-of-state, the investigation fee shall be $2,000. If the investigation fee
for in-state or out of state applicants exceeds the minimum fee, the
additional costs of the investigation will be billed to the applicant(s). A
new application shall be submitted and a license fee and investigation fee
paid when there is a change in ownership or control of a licensed
corporation. Upon rejection of any application for a license, or upon
withdrawal of an application before approval of the issuance by the City
Council, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. In any case, the
investigation fee will be non-refundable. The license fee for an on-sale
license granted after the commencement of the license year shall be pro-rated
on a monthly basis. All licenses shall expire on the last day of December of
each year.



      (1)   When the license is for premises where the building is
not ready for occupancy, the time fixed for computation of the license fee
for the initial license period shall be 90 days after approval of the license
by City Council or upon the date the building is ready for occupancy,
whichever is sooner.



      (2)   No transfer of a license shall be permitted from place
to place or person to person without complying with the requirements of an
original application.



   (J)   (1)   All applications shall be referred to the Chief of
Police. The Chief of Police or his designee is empowered to conduct any and
all investigations to verify the information on the application, including
ordering a computerized criminal history inquiry obtained through the
Criminal Justice System and/or a driver’s license history inquiry as
recorded by the State Department of Public Safety on the applicant. The
application shall also be referred to the Chief of the Fire Department, the
Building Official and the City Planning and Zoning Department for a report
indicating whether said premises are in compliance with applicable ordinances
and regulations. A public hearing shall then be held before the City Council,
at which time the application for a license shall be considered. Opportunity
shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the
license at a public hearing. The City Council may accept or reject the
license application in its discretion upon completion of the public hearing.



      (2)   Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and
shall not be transferable to another holder. Each license shall be issued
only for the premises described in the application.



   (K)   No license shall be granted to or held by any person:



      (1)   Who is less than 21 years of age.



      (2)   Who is not of good moral character and repute.



      (3)   Who is not a citizen of the United States or a resident
alien, or upon whom it is impractical to conduct a background and financial
investigation due to the unavailability of information.



      (4)   Who has been convicted of a felony or any violation of
law of this state or local ordinance relating to the manufacture,
transportation or sale of beer, wine, or of intoxicating liquors.



      (5)   For the sale of intoxicating liquor on any premises also
occupied by a previous licensee who was convicted of a violation of this
section or where a license has been revoked by the City Council.



      (6)   Who is a manufacturer of intoxicating liquor.



      (7)   Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which
the license is issued.



      (8)   Who is or during the period of this license becomes the
holder of a federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp for the sale
of intoxicating liquor at such place.



      (9)   No license shall be issued to any applicant for a
location within 300 feet of any school or church, unless such license has
been previously approved when no school or church was so situated.



   (L)   On sale intoxicating liquor licenses granted pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall be subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions
and provisions of this section and of any other applicable ordinances of the
city or state law.



      (2)   The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
the licensed establishment at all times.



      (3)   Any peace officer shall have the unqualified right to
enter, inspect, and search the premises of the licensee during business hours
without a warrant upon information or belief of a violation of federal, state
or local laws. Business hours shall be deemed any time when licensee or
employees are present on the premises. Refusal to permit such inspection is a
violation of this section and grounds for revocation of license.



      (4)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of
his place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order in the place
of business and on the premises. The act of any employee on the licensed
premises authorized to sell intoxicating liquor there is deemed the act of
the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties
provided by ordinance, statute, or regulation equally with the employee.



      (5)   No on-sale licensee shall sell intoxicating liquor
off-sale.



      (6)   No license shall be effective beyond the space named in
the license for which it was granted.



      (7)   No intoxicating liquor shall be sold or furnished or
delivered to any obviously intoxicated person, or to any person to whom sale
is prohibited by state law.



      (8)   No licensee shall permit 18, 19, or 20 year old persons
to remain on the premises unless to perform work for the establishment
including the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages, consume meals, and
attend social functions that are held in a portion of the establishment where
liquor is not sold.



      (9)   No licensee shall sell, offer for sale, or keep for
sale, intoxicating liquors from any original package which has been refilled
or partly refilled. No licensee shall directly or through any other person
delete or in any manner tamper with the contents of any original package so
as to change its composition or alcoholic content while in the original
package. Possession on the premises by the licensee of any intoxicating
liquor in the original package differing in composition or alcoholic content
in the liquor when received from the manufacturer or wholesaler from whom it
was purchased, shall be prima facie evidence that the contents or the
original package have been diluted, tampered with or changed.



      (10)   In the case of corporations, partnerships, or other
forms of organizations, when there is a change in officers, directors, or
partners, a new application must be submitted.



      (11)   No gambling allowed, nor any gambling device prohibited
by law.



      (12)   No licensee shall permit in any licensed establishment,
or any adjoining property owned or leased by the licensee, any boxing,
wrestling, or any other form of entertainment whose primary purpose is
physical contact by striking or touching an opponent with hands, head, feet,
or body.  Team sports, in which physical contact is incidental to the
primary purpose of the game such as basketball, volleyball, soccer, football,
baseball, hockey, and softball, are not included among activities prohibited
by this section.



   (M)   No sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption on a licensed
premises may be made between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday
through Saturday, nor between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday.



   (N)   (1)   At the time of filing an application for any on-sale
intoxicating liquor license, the applicant shall file with the Clerk proof of
financial responsibility for liability. The issuer or surety on any liability
insurance policy or bond shall be duly licensed to do business in the State
of Minnesota, and all documents shall be approved as to content, form and
execution. The licensee and the city shall be named as joint insured on the
liability insurance policy. The policy shall be effective for the entire
license year or term of license.



      (2)   Proof of financial responsibility may be provided by
supplying to the Clerk any of the following items:



         (a)   A certificate that there is in effect for the
license period an insurance policy or pool providing at least $50,000 of
coverage because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence,
$100,000 because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one
occurrence, $10,000 because of bodily injury to or destruction of property of
others in any one occurrence, $50,000 for loss of means of support of any one
person in any one occurrence, and $100,000 for loss of means of support of
two or more persons in any one occurrence; or



         (b)   A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages
as provided in division (N)(2)(a); or



         (c)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the
licensee has deposited with the State Treasurer $100,000 in cash or
securities that may be legally purchased by savings banks or trust funds
having a market value of $100,000.



   (O)   (1)   The operation of an intoxicating liquor license
without having on file at all times with the city the liability insurance
policy or other evidence of financial responsibility required herein shall be
grounds for immediate revocation of the license. Notice of cancellation of a
current liquor liability policy serves as notice to the licensee of the
impending revocation and unless evidence of compliance with the financial
responsibility requirements of this section are presented to the Clerk before
the termination is effective, the license will be revoked instantly upon the
lapse in coverage.



      (2)   Any liability insurance required by this section must
provide that it may not be canceled for:



         (a)   Any cause, except for nonpayment of premium, by
either the insured or the insurer unless the canceling party has first given
30 days’ notice in writing to the issuing authority of intent to cancel the
policy; and



         (b)   Nonpayment of premium unless the canceling party
has first given ten days’ notice in writing to the issuing authority of
intent to cancel the policy.



   (P)   (1)   The City Council may suspend or revoke any
intoxicating liquor license for the violation of any provision or condition
of this section or of any state law or federal law regulating the sale of
intoxicating liquor, and shall revoke such license for any willful violation
which, under the laws of the state, is grounds for mandatory revocation, and
shall revoke for failure to keep the insurance required by division (N) in
full force and effect.



      (2)   License holder is also subject to provisions of  5.510
regarding penalties for license violations.



   (Q)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
per state statute.



(`77 Code, § 5.503)  (Am. Ord. 1119, passed 2-24-86; Am. Ord. 1135, passed
9-22-86; Am. Ord. 1154, passed 8-24-87; Am. Ord. 1419, passed 9-25-00; Am.
Ord. 1482, passed 3-28-05; Am. Ord. 1610, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 1638,
passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 1640, passed 6-12-17)



§ 5.506  ON-SALE WINE LICENSES.



   (A)   No person, except wholesalers or manufacturers to the extent
authorized under state license, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell,
or keep for sale any wine without first having received an on-sale wine
license as provided in this section or an intoxicating liquor license. The
term “on-sale wine license” means a license authorizing the sale of wine
and 3.2% malt liquor for consumption on the licensed premises only in
conjunction with the sale of food.



   (B)   “On-sale wine” licenses shall be granted only to
restaurants which are conducted in such a manner that at least 60% of the
annual gross receipts of the establishment must be derived from or
attributable to the sale of food.  Such establishment shall have facilities
for seating not less than 25 guests at one time.  A hotel shall be eligible
for an on-sale wine license provided that, of that part of the total annual
gross receipts attributable to or derived from the serving of food and wine,
60% or more of the annual gross receipts for a license year is the serving of
food, the dining area must seat a minimum of 25 people at tables, and the
hotel must have a minimum of ten rooms.



   (C)   A holder of an on-sale wine license who is in compliance with
all requirements of this section may sell intoxicating malt liquor (strong
beer) on-sale without an additional license.



   (D)   Only the sale of wine not exceeding 14% alcohol by volume for
consumption on the licensed premises in conjunction with the sale of food
shall be permitted.



   (E)   The number of wine licenses issued are unlimited and are not
counted in the number of intoxicating liquor licenses allowed under state
statute.



   (F)   Every application for a license to sell wine on-sale shall be
made on a form supplied by the city.  Applications shall be filed with the
Clerk.  It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in an
application.  By submitting an application, the applicant consents to any
and all investigations the city deems appropriate and waives any claims the
applicant may have.  Copies of the application shall be submitted to such
other city departments as the City Council shall deem necessary for
verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application.



   (G)   No license will be issued unless at the time of application
the applicant has paid the license fee in full and a non-refundable
investigation fee as set by City Council resolution.  In the absence of a
resolution, the license fee shall be $2,000; where all applicants are
in-state, the investigation fee will be $500; where any applicants are out of
state, the investigation fee shall be $2,000.  If the investigation fee for
in-state or out-of-state applicants exceeds the minimum fee, the additional
costs of the investigation will be billed to the applicant.  A new
application shall be submitted and a license fee and investigation fee paid
when there is a change in ownership or control of a licensed corporation. 
Upon rejection of any application for a license, or, upon withdrawal of an
application before approval of the issuance by the City Council, the license
fee shall be refunded to the applicant.  In any case, the investigation fee
will be non-refundable.  The license fee for an on-sale license granted
after the commencement of the license year shall be pro-rated on a monthly
basis.  All licenses shall expire on the last day of December of each year.



   (H)   In addition to the information required on the State Liquor
Control Commissioner’s form, the on-sale wine license application shall
contain the following information:



      (1)   Type of license applicant seeks.



      (2)   Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation,
partnership, or other form of organization.



      (3)   Full legal name of applicant and applicant’s spouse,
place and date of birth, street address of residence and length of time at
that address of the applicant and applicant’s spouse; and any other
information deemed necessary by the City Council or issuing authority.



      (4)   Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a
name other than his true name, and, if so, what was such name or names and
information concerning dates and places where used.



      (5)   Name of business.



      (6)   The nature of any other business to be operated in
conjunction with the on-sale of wine and whether the applicant is the owner
or operator of such other business, and if so, the length of time in such
business.



      (7)   Street addresses at which applicant and current spouse
have lived during the preceding ten years.



      (8)   Kind, name and location of every business or occupation
applicant or present spouse have been engaged in during the preceding ten
years.



      (9)   Names and addresses of applicant’s and spouse’s
employers and partners, if any, for the preceding ten years.



      (10)   Whether applicant or spouse has ever been convicted of
any felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than traffic.  If so,
the applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place and offense for
which convictions were had.



      (11)   Whether applicant or spouse has ever been engaged as an
employee or in operating a saloon, hotel, restaurant, café, tavern or other
business of a similar nature.  If so, applicant shall furnish information as
to the time, place, and length of time.



      (12)   Whether applicant has ever been in military service. 
If so, applicant shall attach DD/214 form.



      (13)   In the case of corporations, partnerships, or other
form of organization, such information relating to the identity of each
officer, director and partner as required in subdivisions (3) through (12)
above.



      (14)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization
and is applying for an on- sale license, the following will be required:



         (a)   Name and, if incorporated, the state of
incorporation.



         (b)   A true copy of certificate of incorporation or
other documentation of legal status.



      (15)   Three character references located within the State of
Minnesota.



   (I)   (1)   All applications shall be referred to the Chief of
Police.  The Chief of Police or his designee is empowered to conduct any and
all investigations to verify the information on the application, including
ordering a computerized criminal history inquiry obtained through the
Criminal Justice System and/or a driver’s license history inquiry as
recorded by the State Department of Public Safety on the applicant.  The
application shall also be referred to the Chief of the Fire Department, the
Building Official and the City Planning and Zoning Department for a report
indicating whether said premises are in compliance with applicable ordinances
and regulations.  A public hearing shall then be held before the City
Council, at which time the application for a license shall be considered. 
Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the
granting of the license at a public hearing.



      (2)   The Council may accept or reject the license application
in its discretion upon completion of the public hearing.



   (J)   Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall
not be transferable to another holder.  Each license shall be issued only
for the premises described in the application.



   (K)   No license shall be granted to any person:



      (1)   Who is less than 21 years of age.



      (2)   Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which
the license is issued.



      (3)   Who has been convicted of a felony or any violation of
law of this state or local ordinance relating to the manufacture,
transportation or sale of beer, wine, or of intoxicating liquors.



      (4)   For the sale of wine on any premises also occupied by a
previous licensee who was convicted of a violation of this section or where a
license has been revoked by the City Council.



      (5)   Who is a manufacturer of wine or beer.



      (6)   Who is not a citizen of the United States or a resident
alien, or upon whom it is impractical to conduct a background and financial
investigation due to the unavailability of information.



      (7)   Is not of good moral character and repute.



      (8)   Who is or during the period of this license becomes the
holder of a federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp for the sale
of intoxicating liquor at such place.



      (9)   No wine license shall be issued for premises other than
a hotel or restaurant.



   (L)   At the time application is made for a renewal of an on-sale
license, the applicant shall file with the Clerk a statement prepared by a
certified public accountant that shows the total gross sales and the total
food sales of the restaurant for the 12-month period immediately preceding
the date for filing renewal applications.



   (M)   If the application is made by a natural person, it shall be
signed and sworn to by such person; if by a corporation or other
organization, by an authorized representative of the same.



   (N)   On-sale wine licenses granted pursuant to the provisions of
this section shall be subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
the licensed establishment at all times.



      (2)   All licensees under this section shall allow the
business premises to be inspected by police or health officials at any time.



      (3)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of
his place of business and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order. 
The act of any employee on the licensed premises authorized to sell wine is
deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to
all penalties provided by ordinance, statute, or regulation equally with the
employee.



      (4)   No on-sale licensee shall sell wine off-sale.



      (5)   No license shall be effective beyond the space named in
the license for which it was granted.



      (6)   No wine shall be sold or furnished or delivered to any
obviously intoxicated person, or to any person to whom sale is prohibited by
state law.



      (7)   No licensee shall permit 18, 19 or 20 year old persons
to remain on the premises unless to perform work for the establishment
including the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages, consume meals, and
attend social functions that are held in a portion of the establishment where
liquor is not sold.



      (8)   No licensee shall sell, offer for sale, or keep for
sale, wine from any original package which has been refilled or partly
refilled.  No licensee shall directly or through any other person delete or
in any manner tamper with the contents of any original package so as to
change its composition or alcoholic content while in the original package. 
Possession on the premises by the licensee of any wine in the original
package differing in composition or alcoholic content in the liquor when
received from the manufacturer or wholesaler from whom it was purchased,
shall be prima facie evidence that the contents of the original package have
been diluted, tampered with, or changed.



      (9)   No gambling allowed, nor any gambling device prohibited
by law.



      (10)   No licensee shall permit in any licensed establishment,
or any adjoining property owned or leased by the licensee, any boxing,
wrestling, or any other form of entertainment whose primary purpose is
physical contact by striking or touching an opponent with hands, head, feet,
or body.  Team sports, in which physical contact is incidental to the
primary purpose of the game such as basketball, volleyball, soccer, football,
baseball, hockey, and softball, are not included among activities prohibited
by this section.



   (O)   No sale of wine may be made between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on
the days of Monday through Saturday, nor between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on
Sunday.



   (P)   (1)   At the time of filing an application for any on-sale
wine license, the applicant shall file with the Clerk proof of financial
responsibility for liability.  The issuer or surety on any liability
insurance policy or bond shall be duly licensed to do business in the State
of Minnesota, and all documents shall be approved as to content, form and
execution.  The licensee and the city shall be named as joint insured on the
liability insurance policy.  The policy shall be effective for the entire
license year.



      (2)   Proof of financial responsibility may be provided by
supplying to the Clerk any of the following items:



         (a)   A certificate that there is in effect for the
license period an insurance policy providing at least $50,000 of coverage
because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence, $100,000
because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence,
$10,000 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one
occurrence, $50,000 for loss of means of support of any one person in any one
occurrence, and $100,000 for loss of means of support of two or more persons
in any one occurrence; or



         (b)   A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages
as provided in subdivision (a); or



         (c)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the
licensee has deposited with that office $100,000 in cash or securities which
may legally be purchased by savings banks or for trust funds having a market
value of $100,000.



      (3)   The operation of a wine license without having on file
at all times with the city the liability insurance policy or other evidence
of financial responsibility required herein shall be grounds for immediate
revocation of the license.  Notice of cancellation of a current liquor
liability policy serves as notice to the licensee of the impending revocation
and unless evidence of compliance with the financial responsibility
requirements of this section are presented to the Clerk before the
termination is effective, the license will be revoked instantly upon the
lapse in coverage.



   (Q)   Any liability insurance required by this section must provide
that it may not be canceled for:



      (1)   Any cause, except for nonpayment of premium, by either
the insured or the insurer unless the canceling party has first given 30
days’ notice in writing to the issuing authority of intent to cancel the
policy; and



      (2)   Nonpayment of premium unless the canceling party has
first given ten days’ notice in writing to the issuing authority of intent
to cancel the policy.



   (R)   The City Council may suspend or revoke any on-sale wine
license for the violation of any provision or condition of this section or of
any state law or federal law regulating the sale of wine, and shall revoke
such license for any willful violation which, under the laws of the state, is
grounds for mandatory revocation, and, shall revoke for failure to keep the
insurance required by divisions (P) and (Q) in full force and effect.



   (S)   License holder is also subject to provisions of  5.510
regarding penalties for license violations.



   (T)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
per state statute.



(`77 Code, § 5.504)  (Am. Ord. 965, passed 11-23-81; Am. Ord. 1119, passed
2-24-86; Am. Ord. 1135, passed 9-22-86; Am. Ord. 1416, passed 7-24-00; Am.
Ord. 1482, passed 3-28-05; Am. Ord. 1605, passed 1-9-12; Am. Ord. 1610,
passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 1638, passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 1640, passed 6-12-17)



§ 5.507  LIMITED INTOXICATING LIQUOR LICENSE.



   (A)   The provisions of § 5.503, with the exceptions of §§
5.503(C) and (M), are applicable in all respects to all persons licensed or
otherwise affected by limited intoxicating liquor licenses except as is
otherwise herein specifically provided.



   (B)   The annual license fee for limited intoxicating liquor
licenses shall be set by resolution of the Council.  In the absence of a
resolution, the annual license fee shall be $5,400.



   (C)   No sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises
licensed under this section may be made before 8:00 a.m. on any day; after
11:00 p.m. on any day; on Sundays; or between 8:00 p.m. on December 24 and
8:00 a.m. on December 25.



   (D)   No license shall be granted under this section for a
restaurant that:



      (1)   Contains less than 3,300 square feet of building area
located on the same floor;



      (2)   Contains a combined dining and waiting area of less than
2,000 square feet;



      (3)   Contains a seating capacity open to the general public
of less than 150 seats; or



      (4)   Contains an elevated counter, commonly known as a bar,
the primary purpose of which is use as a place where persons may purchase and
consume intoxicating liquor.



   (E)   No license shall be granted under this section for the sale of
any intoxicating liquor except in conjunction with a food purchase.  No
person shall sell or purchase intoxicating liquor on premises licensed under
this section except in conjunction with a food purchase.



   (F)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
punished as provided in § 1.999.



   (G)   License holder is also subject to provisions of  5.510
regarding penalties for license violations.



(`77 Code, § 5.505)  (Am. Ord. 1035, passed 3-14-83; Am. Ord. 1135, passed
9-22-86; Am. Ord. 1610, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 1638, passed 2-27-17)



§ 5.508  SUNDAY ON-SALE LIQUOR LICENSES.



   (A)   Establishments to which on-sale licenses have been issued or
hereafter may be issued, pursuant to §§ 5.502 and 5.503 may serve
intoxicating liquors between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m.
on Mondays in conjunction with the serving of food, provided that such
establishment is in conformance with the Minnesota Clean Air Act.



   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall sell or serve, directly
or indirectly, intoxicating liquors pursuant to division (A) without having
first obtained a special license pursuant to this section.



   (C)   A Sunday liquor license may be issued only for a one-year
period coinciding with the dates of applicant’s intoxicating liquor
license, for a fee of $200. If Minnesota Statutes are amended to allow
charging a fee in excess of $200, the Council may, by resolution, charge a
fee in excess thereof.



   (D)   Any license granted hereunder may be revoked or suspended for
any violation of §§ 5.503 or 5.502.



   (E)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
per state statute.



   (F)   License holder is also subject to provisions of  5.510
regarding penalties for license violations.



(`77 Code, § 5.506)  (Am. Ord. 1069, passed 1-12-84; Am. Ord. 1419, passed
9-25-00; Am. Ord. 1610, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 1638, passed 2-27-17; Am.
Ord. 1640, passed 6-12-17)



§ 5.509  SUNDAY CLUB LICENSES.



   (A)   Establishments to which on-sale licenses have been issued or
hereafter may be issued, pursuant to § 5.502 may serve intoxicating liquors
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sundays in conjunction
with the serving of food, provided that such establishment is in conformance
with the following, to-wit:



      (1)   The Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act (M.S. §§ 144.411 to
144.417, as they may be amended from time to time);



      (2)   The licensing provisions of § 5.502;



      (3)   The applicant is not in violation of any provision of
this code.



   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall sell or serve, directly
or indirectly, intoxicating liquors pursuant to division (A) of this section
without having first obtained a special license pursuant to this section.



   (C)   A Sunday club liquor license may be issued for a one-year
period coinciding with the dates of the applicant’s other license or for
such lesser period as is set by resolution of the Council.  The license fee
shall be set by resolution of the Council.



   (D)   Any license granted hereunder may be revoked for cause or for
any violation of § 5.502 of this code.



   (E)   The provisions of M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 5, as it may be
amended from time to time, shall apply to Sunday liquor licenses.



   (F)   No license to serve intoxicating liquor on Sunday shall be
granted under this chapter unless the applicant makes application pursuant to
§ 5.502 of this code.



   (G)   The provisions of § 5.502(R) shall apply to any person, firm
or corporation selling or serving beverages in violation of this section.



(`77 Code, § 5.508)  (Am. Ord. 1069, passed 1-12-84; Am. Ord. 1116, passed
2-13-86; Am. Ord. 1610, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 1638, passed 2-27-17) 
Penalty, see § 5.701



§ 5.510  ON-SALE TEMPORARY LIQUOR LICENSES.



   (A)   A temporary license for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in
connection with a social event within the city sponsored by the licensee may
be issued to a club or charitable, religious, or other nonprofit organization
in existence for at least three years as set forth in this section.



   (B)   The license may authorize the on-sale of intoxicating liquor
for not more than four consecutive days, and may authorize on-sales on
premises other than the premises the licensee owns or permanently occupies.
No more than 3 four-day, 4 three-day, 6 two-day, or 12 one-day temporary
licenses, in any combination not to exceed 12 days per year to any one
organization or for any one location, within a twelve month period. No more
than one temporary license to any one organization or for any one location
within any 30-day period. Temporary on-sale licenses are only valid for the
dates, times and locations specifically stated on the license.



   (C)   The license may provide that the licensee may contract for
intoxicating liquor catering services with the holder for a full-year on-sale
intoxicating liquor license issued by the municipality.



   (D)   License applicants shall furnish the information required by
§ 5.503(E). In addition, the Council may, at its option, require a license
applicant to provide the information as follows:



      (1)   Name and address of club/church.



      (2)   Full legal name of person in charge of event if not
applicant, spouse’s full legal name if applicable; date of birth, residence
street address and length of time at that address of person in charge and
spouse; and any other information deemed necessary by the City Council or
issuing authority.



      (3)   Site plan of the area where sales will occur indicating
the size, location and nature of the premises planned to be used along with a
depiction of its relationship to the adjacent premises.



      (4)   Certificate of incorporation.



      (5)   Statement from property owner granting permission to
applicant for use of the premises on which the stated activity is proposed.



      (6)   Executed signature of an officer of the club/church.



   (E)   All applications shall be referred to the Chief of Police. The
Chief of Police or his designee is empowered to conduct any and all
investigations to verify the information on the application, including
ordering a computerized criminal history inquiry obtained through the
Criminal Justice System and/or a driver’s license history inquiry as
recorded by the State Department of Public Safety on the applicant. The
application shall also be referred to the Chief of the Fire Department, the
Building Official and the City Planning and Zoning Department for a report
indicating whether said premises are in compliance with applicable ordinances
and regulations. A public hearing shall then be held before the City Council,
at which time the application for a license shall be considered. Opportunity
shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the
license at a public hearing.



   (F)   The Council may accept or reject the license application in
its discretion upon completion of the public hearing, subject to the
following criteria:



      (1)   No license shall be issued to any organization whose
applicant has been convicted of a felony or any violation of any law of this
state or local ordinance related to the sale, manufacture or transportation
of beer, wine or intoxicating liquor.



      (2)   No license shall be issued unless the applicant has
first paid a license fee in an amount set by resolution of the Council. In
the absence of a resolution, the license fee shall be $100 per day or portion
thereof. No license will be issued unless at the time of application the
applicant has paid a non-refundable investigation fee as set by City Council
resolution. Where all applicants are in-state, the investigation fee will be
$500; where any applicants are out of state, the investigation fee shall be
$2,000. If the investigation fee for in-state or out-of-state applicants
exceeds the minimum fee, the additional costs of the investigation will be
billed to the applicant(s). If the organization holds an existing annual
liquor license, an investigation fee need not be collected. Upon rejection of
any application for a license, or upon withdrawal of an application before
approval of the issuance by the City Council, the license fee shall be
refunded to the applicant. In any case, the investigation fee will be
non-refundable.



   (G)   Licenses granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   No licensee or his or her agent may sell or permit the
sale of intoxicating liquor licensed to be sold under this section between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on days Monday through Saturday, nor
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday. No licensee or his
agent or any other person shall consume or allow to be consumed on the
licensed premises any intoxicating liquor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m. Should the Council decide to additionally restrict the hours of
sale in granting the license, no licensee or his or her agent may sell or
permit the sale of intoxicating liquor at any time not specifically allowed
in such license.



      (2)   All licensees under this section shall allow the
business premises to be inspected by police or health officials at any time
during which the premises are open to the public. Business hours shall be
deemed any time when licensee or employees are present on the premises.
Refusal to permit such inspection is a violation of this section and grounds
for revocation of license.



      (3)   All sales and consumption of intoxicating liquor must be
in a separated and confined area.



      (4)   No licensee shall permit 18, 19, or 20 year old persons
to remain on the premises unless to perform work for the establishment
including the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages.



      (5)   No intoxicating liquor shall be sold or furnished or
delivered to any obviously intoxicated person or to any person to whom sale
is prohibited by state law.



      (6)   No licensee shall permit in any licensed establishment,
or any adjoining property owned or leased by the licensee, any boxing,
wrestling, or any other form of entertainment whose primary purpose is
physical contact by striking or touching an opponent with hands, head, feet,
or body.  Team sports, in which physical contact is incidental to the
primary purpose of the game such as basketball, volleyball, soccer, football,
baseball, hockey, and softball, are not included among activities prohibited
by this section.



   (H)   (1)   At the time of filing an application for any
temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license, the applicant shall file with
the Clerk proof of financial responsibility for liability. The issuer or
surety on any liability insurance policy or bond shall be duly licensed to do
business in the State of Minnesota, and all documents shall be approved as to
content, form and execution. The licensee and the city shall be named as
joint insured on the liability insurance policy. The policy shall be
effective for the entire license term. The location of the event and date of
the event must be indicated on the certificate of insurance.



      (2)   Proof of financial responsibility may be provided by
supplying to the Clerk any of the following items:



         (a)   A certificate that there is in effect for the
license period an insurance policy providing at least $50,000 of coverage
because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence, $100,000
because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence,
$10,000 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one
occurrence, $50,000 for loss of means of support of any one person in any one
occurrence, and $100,000 for loss of means of support of two or more persons
in any one occurrence; or



         (b)   A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages
as provided in subdivision (a) above; or



         (c)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the
licensee has deposited with that office $100,000 in cash or securities which
may legally be purchased by savings banks or for trust funds having a market
value of $100,000.



   (I)   Any liability insurance required by this section must provide
that it may not be canceled for:



      (1)   Any cause, except for nonpayment of premium, by either
the insured or the insurer unless the canceling party has first given 30
days’ notice in writing to the issuing authority of intent to cancel the
policy; and



      (2)   Nonpayment of premium unless the canceling party has
first given ten days’ notice in writing to the issuing authority of intent
to cancel the policy.



   (J)   The operation of a temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor
license without having on file at all times with the city the liability
insurance policy or other evidence of financial responsibility required
herein shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the license. Notice of
cancellation of a current liquor liability policy serves as notice to the
licensee of the impending revocation and unless evidence of compliance with
the financial responsibility requirements of this section are presented to
the Clerk before the termination is effective, the license will be revoked
instantly upon the lapse in coverage.



   (K)   Licenses under this section are not valid unless first
approved by the State of Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety.



   (L)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
per state statute.



(`77 Code, § 5.510)  (Am. Ord. 1149, passed 6-22-87; Am. Ord. 1419, passed
9-25-00; Am. Ord. 1482, passed 3-28-05; Am. Ord. 1610, passed 11-26-12; Am.
Ord. 1638, passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 1640, passed 6-12-17)



§ 5.511  POLICY FOR ALCOHOL LICENSE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   It is the goal of the city to have each liquor license comply
with the law 100% of the time in relation to the chapter regarding liquor. 
The city will maintain staff to complete annual compliance checks,
periodically check establishments for compliance with hours and license
conditions.  The city will act as a resource to provide server training or
to direct businesses to approved training on an annual basis.  The city
wishes to have all businesses choose to be a best practices liquor license.



   (B)   Best practices.  Best practices licensees will have the
benefit of following the best practices violation matrix.  The best
practices program is voluntary and serves as a cooperative venture between
licensees and the city to meet the goals of the city laid out in the city
code.  Best practices licensees will fill out an application from the city
committing their establishment to working towards 100% compliance with the
applicable ordinances and state statutes.



      (1)   Required activities.  Best practices licensee will
agree to keep records of best practices activities and to have them available
for inspection.  The best practices licensee will have 75% of all alcohol
selling staff trained by the Police Department, Minnesota Department of
Alcohol and Gambling Enforcement, the Minnesota Municipal Beverage
Association, the Minnesota Licensed Beverage Association, (or any other
organization who provides similar training upon approval by city's Liquor
Licensing Department) on an annual basis.  Best practices licensees will
have a written internal training program for new employees and a written
policy requiring identification on anyone appearing to be 40 years old or
younger.



      (2)   Optional activities.  Best practices licensees will do
four (three if they do integrated ID scanner on register) of the following:



         (a)   Continuously certify 75% of all employees who sell
alcohol are trained.



         (b)   Internal employee reward/recognition program for
employees who catch underage customers.



         (c)   Run an approved internal compliance program.



         (d)   Automated ID card scanner integrated into cash
register.



         (e)   Pre-arrange to meet with staff and prosecutor on
violations.



         (f)   Have a policy to check ID on every sale.



         (g)   Have a policy to work with the Police Department
to prevent secondary resale of alcohol.



         (h)   Have a minimum age of 21 for employees selling
alcohol products.



   (C)   Process followed for violations.  The purpose of this section
is to establish a standard by which the city determines the length of a
license suspension, revocation, and/or civil penalty.  This policy shall
apply to all on-sale and off-sale license holders.  These penalties are
deemed to be appropriate for all violations.  Licensees shall be informed
that this policy applies to the license holder and does not apply to the
criminal charges against the person who actually violates the law.  The City
Council may choose to deviate from the prescribed penalty if there are
extenuating circumstances.  Should the City Council deviate from the adopted
policy, they must take official action and document the reasons for the
deviation.  The City Council may only consider the penalty portion of the
action.  Should the licensee wish to appeal the facts of a violation, they
must request a due process hearing.



      (1)   Notice.  Upon a determination that a violation of a
city ordinance or state law relating to alcoholic beverages has occurred in a
licensed premises, the licensee will be issued a notice, either personally or
by U.S. Mail, setting forth the nature, date, and time of the alleged
violation, the administrative penalties if applicable, the process for
appealing the determination and the penalty for failing to comply with the
penalty.  Mailed notice will be considered complete upon deposit in the U.S.
Mail addressed to the licensee at the most current address contained in city
records.



      (2)   Compliance.  Within 14 calendar days of the date of the
notice, a licensee may comply with the penalties set out in the notice by
paying the administrative fine and notifying the Licensing Clerk of the dates
the licensee chooses to submit to any imposed suspension.  Suspension days
must be consecutive business days the last of which must not be more than 60
days after the date of the notice.



      (3)   Hearing.  Any licensee who receives notice of a
violation may, within 14 calendar days of the date of issuance of the notice,
request in writing a hearing before the City Council.  A request for a
hearing must be submitted to the Licensing Clerk who will cause the request
to be placed on the agenda of the next regular City Council meeting that will
be held not less than 15 calendar days after receipt of the request. 
Written notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing will be
provided to the licensee no less than ten calendar days before the hearing. 
The notice will be considered complete upon deposit in the U.S. Mail
addressed to the licensee at the most current address shown in city
records.  The City Council may sustain, dismiss or amend the violation, and
may sustain, waive, reduce, or increase any penalty provided for in this
chapter, except that no penalty may exceed the maximum permitted under state
law.  The City Council, if it sustains or amends the violation, will
establish a new compliance date for the penalties imposed.



      (4)   Revocation.  Notwithstanding any provisions in this
chapter to the contrary, a violation for which the established penalty is
revocation must be forwarded to the City Council for disposition.  The
notice of violation will include the nature, date, and time of the violation
and the date, time, and place of the Council's consideration, which will be
not less than ten, nor more than 20 calendar days after the date of service
of the notice.  Notice will be considered complete upon personal service on
the licensee or upon deposit in the U.S. Mail addressed to the licensee at
the most current address shown in city records.  The Council may sustain,
dismiss, or amend the violation.  If Council sustains or amends the
violation it may revoke the license or impose such other penalty it deems as
appropriate provided the penalty does not exceed the maximum permitted under
state law.



      (5)   Multiple violations.  Each incident with respect to
date, time, place, and persons involved, will be deemed a single violation
for the purposes of imposing administrative penalties notwithstanding that an
incident may involve more than one offense.  The City Council may take
multiple offenses into consideration when determining whether to deviate from
the established penalties for any violation.



      (6)   Violations when another is pending.  Any violation that
occurs at a licensed premise while a prior violation is pending for those
same premises will be treated as a separate violation and considered a
subsequent violation for purposes of imposing an administrative penalty.



      (7)   Submission to Council in lieu of administrative
procedures.  With the concurrence of the City Manager, or their designees,
the Licensing Clerk, in lieu of accepting the administrative penalties
provided for in § 5.510, may submit any violation to the City Council for
review and determination.  The decision must take into consideration the
number and seriousness of the offenses allegedly committed in a single
incident.  The decision to submit a violation to the Council must be
included in the initial violation notice along with the date, time, and place
the Council will consider the matter.



(Ord. 1610, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 1638, passed 2-27-17)



§ 5.512  PENALTY.



   (A)   Penalty for noncompliance.  In addition to any criminal
penalties which may be imposed by a court of law, the City Council may
suspend a license for up to 60 days, may revoke a license and/or may impose a
civil fine on a licensee not to exceed $2,000 for each violation on a finding
that the license holder or its employee has failed to comply with a statute,
rule or ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, or wine.



   (B)   Minimum penalty.  The purpose of this section is to establish
a standard by which the City Council determines the civil fine, the length of
license suspensions and the propriety of revocations, and shall apply to all
premises licensed under this chapter.  These penalties are presumed to be
appropriate for every case, however, the Council may deviate in an individual
case where the Council finds that there exist certain extenuating or
aggravating circumstances, making it more appropriate to deviate, such as,
but not limited to, a licensee's efforts in combination with the state or
city to prevent the sale of alcohol to minors or, in the converse, when a
licensee has a history of repeated violations of state or local liquor
laws.  When deviating from these standards, the Council will provide written
findings that support the penalty selected.  When a violation occurs, the
staff shall provide information to the City Council to either assess the
presumptive penalty or depart upward or downward based on extenuating or
aggravating circumstances.  The staff shall notify the licensee of the
information being considered and acted upon by the City Council.



   (C)   Penalties.



      (1)    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the sale
of alcoholic beverages to a person under the age of 21, the sale of alcoholic
beverages to an obviously intoxicated person, or the failure of an on-sale
licensee to take reasonable steps to prevent a person from leaving the
licensed premises with an alcoholic beverage will subject the licensee to the
following administrative penalties (best practices applies only to license
holders who are enrolled in the program at the time of the violations):



 

FOR BEST PRACTICES LICENSE HOLDERS:


Type of License
 
1st Violation
 
2nd Violation
 
3rd Violation
 
4th Violation


On Sale Intoxicating Liquor
 
$250
 
$500 and 3 day suspension
 
$1,000 and 5 day suspension
 
Revocation


On/Off Sale Beer
 
$250
 
$500 and 3 day suspension
 
$1,000 and 5 day suspension
 
Revocation


On/Off Sale Malt Liquor
 
$250
 
$500 and 3 day suspension
 
$1,000 and 5 day suspension
 
Revocation


Wine/beer
 
$250
 
$500 and 3 day suspension
 
$1,000 and 5 day suspension
 
Revocation


Club Liquor
 
$250
 
$500 and 3 day suspension
 
$1,000 and 5 day suspension
 
Revocation



 



 

FOR OTHER LICENSE HOLDERS:


Type of License
 
1st Violation
 
2nd Violation
 
3rd Violation
 
4th Violation


On Sale Intoxicating Liquor
 
$500
 
$750 and 5 day suspension
 
$1,000 and 10 day suspension
 
Revocation


On/Off Sale Beer
 
$500
 
$750 and 5 day suspension
 
$1,000 and 10 day suspension
 
Revocation


On/Off Sale Malt Liquor
 
$500
 
$750 and 5 day suspension
 
$1,000 and 10 day suspension
 
Revocation


Wine/beer
 
$500
 
$750 and 5 day suspension
 
$1,000 and 10 day suspension
 
Revocation


Club Liquor
 
$500
 
$750 and 5 day suspension
 
$1,000 and 10 day suspension
 
Revocation



 



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the
following violations will subject the licensee to the following
administrative penalties:



 

Type of Violation
 
1st Violation
 
2nd Violation
 
3rd Violation
 
4th Violation


Refusal to allow city inspectors or police admission to premises
 
$1,000 and 7 days suspension
 
$2,000 and 14 days suspension
 
Revocation
 
N/A


After hours sale, display or consumption of alcoholic beverages
 
$1,000 and 7 days suspension
 
$2,000 and 14 days suspension
 
Revocation
 
N/A


Illegal gambling on premises
 
$1,000 and 7 days suspension
 
$2,000 and 14 days suspension
 
Revocation
 
N/A


Commission of a felony related to licensed activity
 
Revocation
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A


Sale of alcoholic beverages while license is under suspension
 
Revocation
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A


Sale of intoxicating liquor with only 3.2 percent malt liquor license
 
Revocation
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A



 



      (3)   Any prior violation that occurred more than 24 calendar
months immediately preceding the most current violation will not be
considered in determining successive violations.



      (4)   The nature of the most current violation will determine
the appropriate penalty as established by divisions (1) or (2) above,
provided, however, that any and all violations occurring within 24 months
immediately preceding the most current violation will be considered in
determining successive violations.



      (5)   Any licensee who fails to pay an administrative fine or
adhere to a suspension, whether imposed by this section or the City Council,
within the allotted time period will be subject to an additional suspension
of the license for a period of time as determined by the City Council, but
not to exceed 60 consecutive days.  Any licensee who fails to comply with a
City Council imposed license suspension resulting from a prior non-compliance
with the administrative penalties imposed by this chapter is subject to
license revocation.



      (6)   Nothing in this section will prohibit the city from
seeking criminal prosecution of any alleged violation of this chapter in
addition to any administrative penalties provided for herein.



(Ord. 1610, passed 11-26-12; Am. Ord. 1638, passed 2-27-17)



ARTICLE VI:  CONSUMER SERVICES, MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESSES



Section



   5.601   Taxicabs



   5.602   Motor vehicle rental/leasing



   5.603   Garbage collections



   5.604   Multiple dwellings



   5.605   Contractors



   5.606   Popcorn, candy, ice cream and food catering vehicles



   5.607   Pet shops and commercial kennels



   5.608   Tree services



   5.609   Massage therapists/massage therapist businesses



   5.610   Sexually oriented adult businesses



§ 5.601  TAXICABS.



   (A)   No person shall engage in or operate a taxicab business and
pick up persons for hire in the course of such business within the city
limits, without a taxicab driver and taxicab license to operate in another
political subdivision in this state, including the Minneapolis-St. Paul
International Airport. A driver and cab so licensed may carry passengers to
any place or point within the city and may solicit or pick up business within
the city.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, the following words shall have
the meanings ascribed to them:



      OPERATOR.  Shall mean any person who drives a taxicab, whether
such person be the owner of such taxicab or an employee of said owner.



      OWNER.  Shall mean any person owning or having control of the
use of one or more taxicabs for use in a taxicab business, whether or not
said owner is a taxicab operator.



      STREET.  Any street, alley, avenue, court, bridge, lane or
public place in the city.



      TAXICAB.  Shall mean any motor vehicle engaged in the carrying
of persons for hire, either over a fixed route, operated from a street stand,
subject to calls from a garage, or otherwise operated for hire; but the term
shall not include vehicles subject to control and regulation by the State
Railroad and Warehouse Commission, the Metropolitan Transit Commission, or
vehicles regularly used by undertakers.



      TAXICAB STAND.  Shall mean any public place which is exclusively
reserved by authority of the city for the use of taxicabs.



      TAXIMETER.  Shall mean any mechanical instrument or device by
which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated, either by
distance traveled or waiting time or both, and upon which such charge shall
be indicated by figures.



   (C)   Every taxicab under this section shall have some designation
of the character of the vehicle painted in plain visible letters on each side
thereof.



      (1)   A card printed in plain legible letters shall be
displayed inside each taxicab and shall indicate the maximum rates that are
to be charged, the name of the operator; together with a statement that
articles lost in the taxicab will be forwarded to the city Police Department,
where they may be identified and claimed, and the statement “Ask the Driver
for Bill and Receipt” in bold type.



      (2)   (a)   Every taxicab shall be equipped with a
taximeter. Each taximeter shall be sealed with case and gear intact, and
shall be semi-annually certified and checked for accuracy and working
condition by an agency qualified to perform such service.



         (b)   Each taximeter shall be kept in plain view of the
passenger and shall be maintained in good and accurate working order at all
times.



      (3)   Rates charged by taxicabs for conveyance in this city
shall be the same as the rates set by the political subdivision the taxi is
licensed out of. Upon request therefor, every passenger shall be given a
receipt upon payment of his fare.



      (4)   When in operation, taxicabs not carrying passengers
shall be parked at stands designated for that purpose from time to time by
resolution of the Council.  Said resolution shall also designate the number
of taxicabs which may be stationed at any such stand.



      (5)   The taxicab drive shall maintain proof of an insurance
policy with an insurance company duly licensed to transact such business in
this state; insuring against: loss from the liability imposed by law for
damages on account of bodily injuries or death, or for damages to property
resulting from the ownership, maintenance or use of any taxicab in the
taxicab at all times. The limit in such insurance policy of such taxicab
shall not be less than $100,000 for bodily injuries to or death of one person
and $300,000 on account of any one accident resulting in injuries and/or
death to more than one person, and a total of $10,000 liability for damages
to property of others, arising out of any one accident. This policy shall be
presented to any police officer upon request.



   (D)   Every taxicab operator shall be subject to the below named
regulations. The operator and the vehicle owner shall jointly insure
enforcement of such regulations.



      (1)   All operators shall be clean and courteous at all times.



      (2)   No operator shall carry any person other than the
passenger first employing a taxicab without the consent of such passenger.



      (3)   No operator shall charge or attempt to charge any
passenger a greater rate of fare than that established by the political
subdivision that licensed the taxicab.



      (4)   No operator shall knowingly deceive with the intent to
defraud any passenger who may ride with him, or who may desire to ride in his
vehicle, as to his destination or distance to be traveled.



      (5)   No operator shall solicit passengers as fares except
when traveling around the streets or at a regularly designated stand. No
operator shall alight from his taxicab at any time for the purpose of
soliciting passengers, provided that this shall not prohibit any driver from
alighting from his taxicab to assist a passenger entering or alighting from
his taxicab.



      (6)   Each operator shall forward lost articles found in his
taxicab to the Police Department.



(`77 Code, § 5.603)  (Am. Ord. 1377, passed 10-12-98; Am. Ord. 1441, passed
10-8-01)  Penalty, see § 5.701



§ 5.602  MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL/LEASING.



   (A)   No person shall engage in or conduct the business of leasing
or renting trucks, automobiles, trailers or other motorized vehicle without a
license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section.



   (B)   This use will require a conditional use permit and shall be
reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission for a report and
recommendation to the City Council.  The applicant shall provide a site/plot
plan showing the location of the rental area within the property lines of the
site and identify where the motor vehicles or trailers and all accessories
will be stored and parked.  The plan shall designate the number, size and
types of vehicles and/or trailers to be utilized in the rental business.



      (1)   A screening design in compliance with the requirements
of the zoning ordinance shall be included in the site plan.



      (2)   All surface storage areas shall have a hard surface of
either bituminous or concrete.



      (3)   No license shall be issued or continued in operation
unless the license applicant has paid the annual license fee and is in
compliance with all other requirements of the section.  All licenses shall
terminate on December 31 of each year and shall be renewed annually.



(`77 Code, § 5.604)  (Am. Ord. 1377, passed 10-12-98)  Penalty, see §
5.701



§ 5.603  GARBAGE COLLECTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall engage in or conduct the business of
collecting garbage, rubbish or recyclable materials without a license issued
pursuant to the provisions of Anoka County Operating and Base Licenses and
the Solid Waste Management Coordinating Board.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      AUTHORIZED RECYCLING PROGRAM.  A program for the collection and
recycling of recyclable materials which are instituted, sponsored, authorized
or controlled by the city.



      GARBAGE.  Organic refuse resulting from the storage or
preparation of food and decayed or spoiled food, and any other organic refuse
from any source.



      RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.  All items of garbage and rubbish
designated by the City Manager to be a part of an authorized recycling
program and which are intended for transportation, processing and
remanufacturing or reuse.



      RUBBISH.  All inorganic refuse, such as, but not limited to,
metals, glass, packaging materials, and ashes.



      SCAVENGING.  The unauthorized collection of recyclable materials
that have been set out by residents of the city specifically for
participating in curbside recycling programs.



   (C)   (1)   Licensees shall provide a covered receptacle for the
storage of collected solid waste.  The receptacle shall be constructed so
that the stored contents will not leak or spill therefrom.  The receptacle
shall be kept as clean and free from offensive odors as possible.



      (2)   Licensees under this section shall be required to make
all collections between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and shall make
collections in a manner that will minimize traffic disruption.



   (D)   The licensee under this section, or any employee thereof,
shall issue a notice to all customers and users of the licensee’s services
whenever garbage, rubbish and recyclable materials removal is not effected in
accordance with the terms of the contract between the city and the
licensee.  Such notice shall indicate the reason for failure to collect the
garbage, rubbish, or recyclable materials, and a copy of said notice shall be
filed with the city.



   (E)   Scavenging, as defined in division (B) of this section, is
prohibited.  It is a violation of the city code and subject to the penalties
enforced therein.



(`77 Code, § 5.605)  (Am. Ord. 1078, passed 2-27-84; Am. Ord. 1181, passed
3-27-89; Am. Ord. 1377, passed 10-12-98; Am. Ord. 1578, passed 4-12-10) 
Penalty, see § 5.701



§ 5.604  MULTIPLE DWELLINGS.



   (A)   No person who owns a multiple dwelling, dwelling unit, or
common area within a multiple dwelling shall allow it to be occupied or let
to another for occupancy any unit in a multiple dwelling, except hotels,
motels, and any dwelling or dwelling unit required to be licensed under
Chapter 5A, without a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this
section.  For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:



      COMMON AREA.  A hall, corridor, or passageway for providing
ingress and egress from a dwelling unit to a public way or any other area
located within or about a multiple dwelling and not within exclusive control
of any one dwelling unit.



      DWELLING UNIT.  A room or group of rooms located within a
multiple dwelling which form a single habitable unit with facilities which
are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating.



      MULTIPLE DWELLING.  Any building or structure containing three
or more separate dwelling units, whether used solely or exclusively for
residential purposes or otherwise.



   (B)   Applicants shall provide the following information on license
applications:



      (1)   Name and address of owner of the multiple dwelling and
the name and address of the operator or agent actively managing said multiple
dwelling.



      (2)   The name and address of the vendee if the multiple
dwelling is being sold on a contract for deed.



      (3)   The legal description and address of the multiple
dwelling.



      (4)   The number and kind of units within the multiple
dwelling, the floor area for each such unit, and the total floor area of the
building.



      (5)   The number of toilet and bath facilities shared by the
occupants of two or more dwelling units.



      (6)   A description of the type of construction of the
exterior of the building.



      (7)   The number of off-street parking spaces available.



   (C)   The Clerk shall refer applications for a multiple dwelling
license to the Fire Chief and the Building Official for a lawful inspection
of the premises and a report indicating whether the premises are in
compliance with applicable ordinances and regulations.



      (1)   Upon request, a copy of the inspection report shall be
provided to any occupant, lessee, tenant, or other person with a possessory
interest in a dwelling unit.



      (2)   A report of any inspection conducted within the previous
12 months for the purpose of enforcement of housing, health or safety
standards prescribed by this code shall be considered in conjunction with a
license application under this section.



   (D)   No license shall be issued under this section unless the
licensee, or a representative designated in writing, is a resident of Anoka,
Hennepin, Ramsey, Scott, Dakota, Washington or Carver Counties.  The
licensee, or his representative when the licensee is not a resident of the
city, shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of the multiple
dwelling in accordance with the laws of the State of Minnesota, ordinances of
the city, and regulations promulgated by appropriate authorities.



   (E)   A copy of the issued license shall be conspicuously posted in
a public corridor, hallway, or lobby of the licensed dwelling.



   (F)   No license shall be granted under this section unless each
dwelling unit within a multiple dwelling containing one or more dwelling
units with a common street address proposed to be licensed hereunder shall
have posted conspicuously on its entrance the apartment number identifying
such dwelling unit.



   (G)   No license shall be required for any dwelling unit which
dwelling unit is owner occupied.



(`77 Code, § 5.606)  (Am. Ord. 1074, passed 2-13-84; Am. Ord. 1228, passed
7-8-91)  Penalty, see § 5.701



§ 5.605  CONTRACTORS.



   (A)   No person shall perform work as a contractor involved in
building construction, alterations, or remodeling or any work for which a
work permit is required by this code, without a license issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Licenses shall be required for, but not limited to, each of
the below-named trades and construction work:



      (1)   (a)   General contractors, including erection,
alterations or repair of buildings unless said contractor is a holder of a
current license from the Minnesota Department of Commerce for residential
construction.



         (b)   As provided by M.S. Chapter 326, as it may be
amended from time to time, for any residential building contractor required
to be licensed by the State of Minnesota, the applicant for building permit
for residential work shall pay a fee of $5 per building permit for
administration and review of residential contractor licenses.



      (2)   Specialty contractors or those contractors holding an
exemption certificate from the State of Minnesota Department of Commerce.



      (3)   Masonry, cement work, cement block work, or brick work.



      (4)   Plumbing, including the installation of cesspools,
septic tanks, drainfields, connections to the municipal sewer and water
systems, inside plumbing, and including excavations for sewer and water line
installations.



      (5)   Commercial, industrial, institutional roof work. 
Residential roofing contractors must be licensed by the Minnesota Department
of Commerce.



      (6)   Plastering, stucco work, sheet rock installation and
taping.



      (7)   Heating, ventilation and refrigeration, including gas
piping, gas service, gas equipment installation, oil heating, and piping work.



      (8)   Excavations, including excavations for footings,
basements and grading of lots, and the like.



      (9)   Wrecking/demolition of buildings.



      (10)   Installation/repaving/resurface of driveways, parking
lots, public sidewalks, and the like.



      (11)   Sign erection, construction and repairs, including
billboards and electrical signs.



      (12)   Sprinkler and fire extinguishing equipment installers
unless a holder of an active license from the State of Minnesota.



   (C)   Applications for a license under this section shall be
submitted to the License Clerk and shall include such evidence of competency
as may be required by the City Council.



      (1)   Evidence of qualifications established before any agency
of the State of Minnesota shall be prima facie evidence of competency under
this section or submittal of a current competency card from any city offering
such test.



      (2)   Whenever an agency of the State of Minnesota imposes
licensing or registration requirements for any trade licensed under this
section, proof of satisfaction of all state requirements shall be provided
with the license application.



      (3)   Whenever a contractor is aware of a hazardous situation
or of hazardous equipment where the fuel service has been interrupted, such
contractor shall inform the City Inspector of the location and hazard within
one business day.



   (D)   (1)   Upon approval of the license application and prior to
the issuance of a license, the applicant shall file a bond in the amount of
$3,000 conditioned upon compliance with all provisions of the code regulating
or governing construction work.  Exception:  Plumbing contractors provided
they have submitted a current certificate from the State of Minnesota
Department of Health, Plumbing Code Division.



      (2)   The applicant shall also file with the Clerk a
certificate of insurance indicating public liability insurance in the amount
of $100,000 per person and $300,000 per accident for bodily injury, and
$10,000 for property damage.  Proof of workers’ compensation insurance as
required by law shall also be provided and indicated on the certificate of
insurance.



   (E)   (1)   A license granted to a general contractor shall
include the right to perform all of the work included in his general
contract.  Such license shall include any or all persons performing the work
which is classified and listed in division (B) of this section, providing
that each person performing such work is in the regular employ of such
general contractor and qualified under state law and the provisions of this
chapter to perform such work.  The general contractor shall be responsible
for all of the work so performed.



      (2)   Sub-contractors on any work shall be required to comply
with the sections of this code pertaining to license, bond, qualifications,
and the like, for his particular type of work.



   (F)   Employees under the supervision of the licensee may be engaged
except that such provision shall not be construed as exempting any such
employee from licensing or registration requirements imposed by state law.



   (G)   No person shall be required to obtain a license under this
section to perform any work at his own residence, provided that such person
is qualified to perform such work in accordance with all applicable standards
prescribed by this code.



(`77 Code, § 5.607)  (Am. Ord. 1074, passed 2-13-84; Am. Ord. 1377, passed
10-12-98)  Penalty, see § 5.701



§ 5.606  POPCORN, CANDY, ICE CREAM AND FOOD CATERING VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall engage in or conduct the business of selling
popcorn, candy, ice cream, ice milk or other confectionery items from a
mobile or moveable wagon, truck, trailer, or vehicle without a license issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.  All other food catering
vehicles must carry a license from the State of Minnesota Board of
Agriculture and shall operate pursuant to division (F) of this section.



   (B)   Application for a license under this section shall include the
full name of the applicant, address, date of birth and driver’s license
number, a statement describing all equipment and vehicles (i.e. make, model)
to be used in the course of business together with any identifying license
and serial numbers.  The application shall further indicate hours of
operation.  The applicant shall list the full names, addresses, date of
birth, driver’s license number of each driver/operator of each vehicle and
must notify the License Clerk of any changes or additions during the license
period.  All such vehicles must comply with the requirements as set forth by
the Minnesota Department of Agriculture and applicant shall present proof of
such license.



   (C)   After a license application is approved by the City Council,
the applicant shall present to the License Clerk proof of insurance on each
vehicle with an insurance company licensed to transact business in this
state.  The certificate shall state that coverage cannot be cancelled
mid-term or not renewed without 30 days’ prior written notice to the city,
any phraseology limiting this requirement shall be stricken.  The limits of
such policy are as follows:



      (1)   Automobile liability:



         (a)   Combined single limits:  $500,000 each
occurrence; or



         (b)   Bodily injury liability:  $100,000 each person;
$500,000 each occurrence; and



         (c)   Property damage liability:  $100,000 each
occurrence.



      (2)   Commercial general liability covering operations and
products liability:



         (a)   Combined single limits:  $100,000 each
occurrence; $500,000 aggregate; or



         (b)   Bodily injury liability:  $100,000 each person;
$500,000 aggregate; and



         (c)   Property damage liability:  $50,000 each
occurrence.



      (3)   Workers’ compensation coverage:  Statutory coverage
to comply with M.S. § 1776.182, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   Licensees under this section shall be restricted to the
following hours for conducting business:



      (1)   No sales may be made between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m. of the following day.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, business may be conducted
until 8:30 p.m. from June 1 to Labor Day, inclusive.



      (3)   Despite the hourly restrictions of divisions (1) and
(2), any licensee who sells or attempts to sell the products which are the
subject of this section from not more than one location within a 12-hour
period, may conduct business until 10:30 p.m.



   (E)   No licensee under this section shall call attention to his
business or to his merchandise by blowing a horn, by the use of a voice
amplifying device, or by any other method of causing a loud noise, provided,
however, that a licensee under this section may sound a manually operated
non-amplified bell only while the vehicle is in motion, and between noon and
6:00 p.m.



   (F)   (1)   No person, while engaging in the business described
in this section, shall operate a vehicle which is not equipped with warning
lights to specifically indicate that the vehicle makes frequent stops and is
of a slow moving nature.



      (2)   Mobile food catering vehicles must be parked at the
street curb while engaging in vending operations and vending shall be done
only from the curb side of the vehicle.  Each food catering vehicle must be
equipped with flashing lights on both front and rear of the vehicle, clearly
visible to oncoming automobiles in full daylight.  For the full period
during which such food catering vehicle is stopped for vending or stopped in
such a manner or place as to reasonably cause others to believe that it is
proposing to engage in vending operations, said operator shall stand
alongside said food catering vehicle in such manner as to be able to observe
traffic coming from all directions and to observe children crossing the
street in the immediate vicinity of said food catering vehicle.  Such person
shall give adequate warning to oncoming vehicles and to children so as to
avoid accident or injury to such children.



   (G)   Any person violating any provision of this section, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by § 1.999.



(`77 Code, § 5.608)  (Am. Ord. 1074, passed 2-13-84; Am. Ord. 1127, passed
8-25-86; Am. Ord. 1377, passed 10-12-98)



§ 5.607  PET SHOPS AND COMMERCIAL KENNELS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a pet shop or commercial kennel
without a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.  All
such operations shall comply with the requirements of the zoning ordinance.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions
shall apply:



      ANIMAL.  Means cats, dogs, domestic animals, and wild animals,
and crossbreeds with wild animals not customarily maintained at all times in
a cage.



      KENNELS.  A place where three or more animals are kept for the
business of selling, boarding for a fee, breeding for a fee, or some other
enterprise intended primarily for profit-making purposes except for an animal
hospital, pet shop or veterinary clinic.



      PET SHOP.  Any person, partnership or corporation engaged in the
business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding animals of any species
except veterinary hospitals or kennels.



      VETERINARY HOSPITAL.  Any establishment maintained and operated
by a licensed veterinarian for the diagnosis, care and treatment of diseases
and injuries of animals.



   (C)   The City Council may require license applicants under this
section to provide a statement indicating whether the applicant or any of his
employees or agents have been convicted of any crimes relating to animal
abuse or animal cruelty.  Such requirements shall be a continuing one with
respect to any new employees or agents of the applicant.  Any conviction of
a crime by the applicant or his agents or employees which bears any relevancy
to the applicant’s proposed business may be found by the City Council to be
grounds for denial of the license application or revocation or suspension of
any existing license.



   (D)   No kennel licensee under this section may conduct business
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of the following day. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, pet shops and veterinary hospitals/clinics are
excluded from these restrictions.



   (E)   (1)   The expiration date of licenses addressed in this
section shall expire on December 31 of each year.  Applications for renewal
shall be made a minimum of 30 days prior to expiration of the current
license.  No license issued under the terms of this section shall be
transferable between persons or premises.



      (2)   The Humane Officer shall conduct an inspection prior to
the issuance of the license and shall recommend to the City Council whether
or not to renew the license without full compliance to the requirements of
this section.



   (F)   Kennels and pet shops shall be kept in a clean and healthful
condition at all times and shall be open to inspection by any person charged
with the enforcement of this section.  All pet shops and kennels shall be
maintained in accordance with current standards of  the Pet Industry Joint
Advisory Council (PIJAC).  A licensee shall be responsible for all actions
and conduct of any employee or agent of the licensee and any violation of
this section by an employee or agent shall be deemed to be actions and
conduct of the licensee.  The copy of the current standards of the PIJAC
shall be provided by the owner/license holder for employees to use as a
reference manual.  Licensees and all employees shall have an understanding
of the animal care statutes set by the State of Minnesota and Pet Industry
Joint Advisory Council.



(`77 Code, § 5.609)  (Am. Ord. 1333, passed 10-28-96; Am. Ord. 1377, passed
10-12-98)  Penalty, see § 5.701



§ 5.608  TREE SERVICES.



   (A)   No individual, partnership or corporation may cut, trim,
prune, plant, remove, spray or otherwise treat trees for financial
remuneration within the city without first having secured a license from the
city to conduct such business unless such individual, partnership, or
corporation is the owner of the property on which such tree is located.



   (B)   The application for a license shall be made on a form approved
by the city which shows, among other things, the name and address of the
applicant, the number of vehicles of applicant, together with a description
and license number of each vehicle, the type of equipment proposed to be
used, and a description of the primary disposal site for any trees to be
removed.



   (C)   No license or renewal shall be granted, nor shall the same be
effective, until the applicant shall file with the city a certificate of
insurance providing proof of a public liability insurance policy covering all
operations of such applicant under this section for the sum of at least
$100,000 against liability for bodily injuries or death for each person, for
the sum of at least $300,000 against liability for bodily injuries or death
to more than one person from one accident and for at least $100,000 against
liability for damage or destruction of property.  The city shall be named
and the insurance provided shall include the city as an additional party
insured.  Said policy shall provide that it may not be canceled by the
insurer except after ten days’ written notice to the city, and if such
insurance is so canceled and the licensee shall fail to replace the same with
another policy conforming to the provisions of this section, said license
shall be automatically suspended until such insurance shall have been
replaced.  No individual, partnership or corporation required to be licensed
under this section may perform any tree services within the city without
first having filed the liability insurance required by this section.



   (D)   Each license applicant shall file with the City License Clerk
a certificate of insurance indicating workers’ compensation when such
insurance is required by state statute.  No individual, partnership or
corporation required to be licensed under this section may perform any tree
services within the city without having first filed the certificate of
workers’ compensation insurance required by this section.



   (E)   No license shall be granted to any applicant if the primary
disposal site for trees is not approved by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency.  Upon request of the City License Clerk or his representative, any
licensee shall forthwith supply evidence that such licensee has dumped or
disposed of all diseased trees only at sites approved by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.  Should such evidence not be supplied within ten
days of such request, such license shall be suspended until such evidence
shall be supplied.



   (F)   The annual license fee shall be set by resolution of the City
Council.  Any individual, partnership or corporation violating any provision
of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by §
1.999.



(`77 Code, § 5.610)  (Am. Ord. 1377, passed 10-12-98)



§ 5.609  MASSAGE THERAPISTS/MASSAGE THERAPIST BUSINESSES.



   (A)   License required.



      (1)   No massage therapy business within a commercial area
shall operate without a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this
section.



      (2)   No person shall operate a business as a massage
therapist without having first obtained a massage therapist business license
issued pursuant to the provisions of this section.



      (3)   This section shall not apply to any hospital,
sanatorium, rest home, nursing home, boarding home, or other institution for
the hospitalization or care of human beings, duly licensed under the
provisions of M.S. §§ 144.50 through 144.703, as they may be amended from
time to time, or to persons duly licensed, or in the employment of or under
contract with persons duly licensed by the State of Minnesota to practice
medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy or podiatry,
with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices.



   (B)   Definitions.  For purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      MASSAGE THERAPIST.  Any person who, for a fee, rubs, presses,
strokes, kneads, taps, rolls, pounds, vibrates or stimulates these
superficial parts of the human body with the hands or any instrument.



      MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS.  Any person, partnership or
corporation, either as principal or agent, who engages in the business of
massage therapy or the employment of others performing massage therapy for a
fee for which the business is located within a commercial zoning district.



   (C)   Applicability.  Any business under this section shall apply
with all requirements of the zoning ordinance.



   (D)   Application.



      (1)   Every person desiring a license to perform massage
therapy shall apply to the City Council for a license on an application form
provided by the Clerk.  The application shall include:



         (a)   Full name, place and date of birth and current
street address of the applicant.



         (b)   The length of experience in this occupation and
the past places of employment and positions held for the last ten years; and



         (c)   A description of any crime or other offense,
including the time, place, date and disposition for which the applicant has
been arrested and convicted.



      (2)   No person shall make any material false statement in any
application.



      (3)   Each application for a massage therapist license shall
furnish with the application a diploma or certificate of graduation from an
American Massage Therapist Association approved school or a diploma or
certificate of graduation from a school which is either accredited by a
recognized educational accrediting agency or association or is licensed by
the state or local government agency having jurisdiction over the school. 
Such certificate/diploma shall be prominently displayed in the area wherein
massage is conducted.



      (4)   Each applicant shall also furnish proof, at the time of
the application, of course work in the theory and practice of massage
(including but not limited to Swedish, Esalen, Shiatsu, and/or Foot
Reflexology techniques), hygiene, and anatomy, including but not limited to
skeletal and muscular structure and organ placement.



      (5)   Each applicant, at the time of application, shall
demonstrate that the applicant has had no less than six months’ experience
in the practice of therapeutic massage therapy treatments with a minimum of
25 verified full practice massage therapy treatments which applicant has
performed in a noncommercial setting and in the status of a trainee.  For
purposes of this subdivision, TRAINEE shall mean those persons with less than
one year’s experience in the practice of therapeutic massage and engaged in
the active pursuit of knowledge of massage and related areas.  Applicants
who have been actively engaged in the practice of therapeutic massage for at
least six months outside of the city may, in the alternative, furnish proof
of such practice.  No person shall make application for a massage therapy
business license unless such person has been licensed as a massage therapist
within the city. In addition to complying with the application requirements
for a massage therapist required by this subdivision, an applicant for a
massage therapist business license must show proof that the proposed location
of the massage therapy business is properly zoned for such use and must
demonstrate that the applicant has a right to a superior possessory interest
in the premises at the location approved to be licensed.



      (6)   Each application for a massage therapist license or a
massage therapist business license shall be required to submit to and pass an
examination as to the qualifications and competence of said applicant for the
practice of massage.  The examination shall be given by the Clerk or such
persons as he may designate, in the form he may prescribe, whether written,
oral, or practical so as to determine whether the applicant has sufficient
knowledge, skill, training, and experience to safely and competently
administer massages to the general public.  Such examination shall test the
applicant’s knowledge of massage and public health statutes, ordinances,
rules and regulations; knowledge of anatomy; knowledge of the theory of
massage; and knowledge and ability in practical massage.  The Clerk shall
determine whether the applicant has demonstrated sufficient knowledge, skill,
training, and experience to safely and competently administer massages to the
general public.  The Clerk shall have the power to delegate the
administration and grading of the examination and the Clerk shall have the
authority to accept test results from previous examinations conducted by an
authorized testing agency.



      (7)   Execution of the application.  If the applicant is a
natural person, the application shall be signed and sworn to by the person;
if a corporation, by an agent authorized to sign; if a partnership, by a
partner.



      (8)   Any falsification of information on the license
application shall result in the denial of said license.



      (9)   The Chief of Police or his designee shall investigate
into the truthfulness of the statements set forth in the application and
shall endorse his findings thereon.  The applicant shall furnish to the
Chief of Police such evidence as he may reasonably require in support of the
statements set forth in the application.



   (E)   License fee.  The annual license fee for a massage therapist
and a massage therapist business licensee shall be determined by resolution
of the City Council.  In the absence of a resolution, the fee shall be
$100.  In addition to the fee specified above, an additional $100 fee shall
be paid by an applicant:



      (1)   Upon initial application for one of the licenses
specified in this section; and



      (2)   Upon application for one of the licenses specified in
this section after failing to renew the license within one year of the
expiration date of the previously held license.  The license and application
fees provided by this subdivision shall not be refunded whether or not the
license sought is granted.



      (3)   Renewals.  An application for a renewal of a massage
therapist license or massage therapy business license shall be made in the
same manner as the original application.



   (F)   Expiration.  All licenses issued under this section shall
expire on December 31 of each year.



   (G)   Location. The massage therapist business licensee shall either
own the building in which the business is conducted or have a lease on the
business premises which extends for more than six months.  No massage
therapist business license may be transferred to a different location.



   (H)   Prohibitive acts.  No licensed massage therapist or massage
therapist business licensee shall permit or engage in the practice or
business of massage therapy in a location or in a manner that violates any of
the provisions of this section or any of the following standards, to wit:



      (1)   Operation standards.



         (a)   All customers are to be provided with single
service disposable foot coverings which are not to be reused.



         (b)   All employees shall wash their hands thoroughly in
an approved handwashing facility before starting any body massaging,
handling, clean linen or clean supplies.



         (c)   All massage tables are to be provided with single
use linen or a single use disposable paper sheet covering that is both wide
and long enough to cover the complete table top.  All towels are to be
laundered in an approved manner after each use.  All soiled linen and towels
are to be sorted in an approved receptacle.



         (d)   Only single service disposable drinking cups for
customers shall be allowed within the establishment.



         (e)   All customers shall inform the operator of any
medical disabilities prior to use of facilities.



         (f)   The personnel shall observe all occupants in the
sauna room at five-minute intervals.



         (g)   All cosmetic products shall remain in their
original containers or in properly labeled self identifying containers.



         (h)   A copy of these rules and regulations shall be
posted in a conspicuous place for customer observance.



      (2)   Equipment standards.



         (a)   The covering on the massage table shall be
waterproof.



         (b)   The massage tables shall be constructed of
material that is smooth and easily cleanable.



         (c)   A functioning combination of relative humidity and
temperature indicator shall be installed on the inside wall and another on
the outside wall of each sauna room.  The indicator shall be so located as
to be easily observed.



         (d)   During housekeeping procedures there shall be a
minimum of 15 foot candles of illumination available.  This illumination
shall be provided by permanent electrical fixtures in all sauna and massage
rooms.



      (3)   Health and disease control.  No person, while affected
with any disease in a communicable form, or while a carrier of such disease,
or while affected with boils, infected wounds, sores, or an acute respiratory
infection, shall work in or use the service of any sauna or massage parlor in
any capacity in which there is a likelihood of such person contaminating
surfaces with pathogenic microorganisms or transmitting disease to other
individuals, and no person known or suspected of being affected with any such
disease or condition shall be employed or permitted in such an area or
capacity.  If the licensee or his manager has reason to suspect that an
employee has contracted any disease, in a communicable form or had become a
carrier of such disease, he shall notify the Health Officer immediately.



   (I)   Denial, suspension or revocation.  Any license under this
section may be denied, suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   The use or proposed use is in conflict with the Columbia
Heights Zoning Code;



      (2)   The use or proposed use is in conflict with any health,
building, building maintenance or other provision of this code or state law;



      (3)   Violation of any provisions of this section;



      (4)   Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in the securing of a
license or any false misrepresentation on any license application;



      (5)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the
course of the applicant’s business;



      (6)   Conviction of the applicant or licensee, any partner or
shareholder of the applicant or licensee, any employee of the applicant or
licensee within the preceding five years, of any crime, petty misdemeanor or
municipal ordinance relating to the general health, welfare, morals, and
safety of the community; or



      (7)   Habitual drunkenness or intemperance in the use of drugs
including, but not limited to, the use of drugs defined in M.S. § 618.01, as
it may be amended from time to time, barbiturates, hallucinogenic drugs,
amphetamines, benzedrine, dexadrine or other sedatives, depressants,
stimulants or tranquilizers; engaging in conduct involving moral turpitude or
permitting or allowing others within their employ or agency to engage in
conduct involving moral turpitude or failing to prevent agents, officers or
employees in engaging in conduct involving moral turpitude.



(`77 Code, § 5.612)  (Am. Ord. 1138, passed 2-23-87; Am. Ord. 1296, passed
1-9-95; Am. Ord. 1377, passed 10-12-98; Am. Ord. 1635, passed 11-28-16) 
Penalty, see § 5.701



§ 5.610  SEXUALLY ORIENTED ADULT BUSINESSES.



   (A)   (1)   The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate
sexually oriented adult businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the citizens of the City of Columbia Heights and to
establish reasonable and uniform regulations to:



         (a)   Prevent additional criminal activity;



         (b)   Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its
consequent adverse effect on real estate values of properties within the
neighborhood;



         (c)   To locate sexually oriented adult businesses away
from residential areas, schools and churches;



         (d)   Prevent concentration of sexually oriented adult
businesses within certain areas of the city.



      (2)   The provisions of this section have neither the purpose
nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented adult materials. 
Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this section to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall own or operate a sexually oriented
business without having a valid license issued by the city.



      (2)   Massage of any type must comply with § 5.609 of this
article.



      (3)   All sexually oriented adult businesses shall comply with
the requirements of the zoning ordinance.



   (C)   Any of the following activities and businesses described below
are sexually oriented adult businesses as defined in this code:



      ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO.  An establishment or business which
provides the service of applying paint or other substance whether transparent
or nontransparent to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or
partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT BOOK AND MEDIA STORE.  An establishment having as a
substantial portion of its stock in trade or stock in display books,
magazines, films, videotape or other media which are characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT CABARET.  An establishment which provides dancing or other
live entertainment, if such establishment excludes minors by virtue of age or
if such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on the performance, depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT.  A companionship
establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the
service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion
between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities,
or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT ESTABLISHMENT.  Any business which offers its patrons
services, entertainment or the sale of merchandise characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES.  Adult uses include adult bookstores,
adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult
steam room/bathhouse/sauna facilities, adult companionship establishments,
adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult cabarets,
adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling
studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios, and other
premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses or places open to some or
all members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, which are capable of being seen by
members of the public.  Activities classified as obscene as defined by M.S.
§ 617.241, as it may be amended from time to time, are not included.



      ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL.  Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or
motel room which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein
material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER.



         (a)   An enclosed building with a capacity for less than
50 persons used for presenting motion pictures, including but not limited to
film and videotape, having as a dominant theme material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



         (b)   Any business or building which presents motion
pictures, including films and videotapes, having as a dominant theme material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, for viewing on the premises, including but not limited to
private booths, viewing by means of coin-operated or other mechanical devices
and the viewing of excerpts of motion pictures offered for sale or rent.



      ADULT MODELING STUDIO.  An establishment whose major business is
the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so provided with the
intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such
customers and who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified
anatomical areas which being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched,
drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers.



      ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin or token-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motor picture
machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.



      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used regularly and routinely for presenting
live entertainment or motion pictures, including but not limited to film and
videotape, having as a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons
therein.



      ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS.  A business which sells, offers to sell,
or displays devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are
designed for sexual stimulation.



      ADULT SAUNA.  A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or
which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning,
relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



   (D)   For purposes of this section, the following words shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them:



      CHURCH.  A building or structure, or group of buildings or
structures, which the design and construction are primarily intended for the
conducting of organized religious services and associated accessory uses.



      SCHOOL.  A public school as defined in M.S. § 120.05, as it may
be amended from time to time, or a nonpublic school or a nonsectarian
nonpublic school as defined in M.S. § 123.932, as it may be amended from
time to time.



      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Specified anatomical areas are any
of the following:



         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:  human
genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair; buttock, and female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola; and



         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if opaquely covered.



      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



         (a)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral
copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct
physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the
context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the
context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented
acts or conduct:  anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus,
fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty;
or



         (b)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of
sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or



         (c)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral
copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or



         (d)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breast; or



         (e)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of
whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and
who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering,
binding or other physical restraint of any such persons; or



         (f)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other
sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or



         (g)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal
or anal irrigation.



   (E)   Every application for a license under this section shall be
verified and filed with the Clerk.



   (F)   Except as specifically provided in this code, no person may
erect, convert, enlarge, reconstruct or alter, or use any land or structure
for any purpose nor in any manner which is not in conformity with this
section.



   (G)   No sexually oriented adult business shall engage in any
activity or conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity or
conduct in or about the establishment which is prohibited by any ordinance of
the City of Columbia Heights, the laws of the State of Minnesota, or the
United States of America.  Nothing in this section shall be construed as
authorizing or permitting conduct which is prohibited or regulated by other
statutes or ordinances, including but not limited to statutes or ordinances
prohibiting the exhibition, sale or distribution of obscene material
generally, or the exhibition, sale, or distribution of specified materials to
minors.



   (H)   All sexually oriented adult businesses which were lawfully in
existence as of the effective date of this section and which were rendered
nonconforming by the application of this section shall be abated within three
years of the date of enactment of this chapter.



   (I)   (1)   No sexually oriented business may be located within
200 feet of any residential zoning district boundary or less than 500 feet
from any church or school, or 150 feet from any park.



      (2)   No sexually oriented business may be located within 400
feet of another sexually oriented business.



   (J)   No sexually oriented business shall be open to the public
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. of the following day.



   (K)   (1)   The premises on which a sexually oriented business is
located shall prevent off-site viewing of its merchandise by completely
covering the windows and doors of its operation with an opaque covering.



      (2)   All entrances to a sexually oriented business, with the
exception of emergency fire exits which are not usable by patrons to enter
the business, shall be visible from a public right-of-way.



      (3)   The layout of the display areas of a sexually oriented
business shall be designed so that the management of the establishment and
any law enforcement personnel can observe all patrons while they have access
to any merchandise offered for sale or viewing including but not limited to
books, magazines, photographs, videotapes, or any other persons or materials.



      (4)   The exterior of the premises on which a sexually
oriented business is located shall be illuminated in a manner adequate to
observe the location, activities, and identity of all persons on the exterior
premises.



      (5)   No premises on which a sexually oriented business is
located shall contain partitions between subdivisions of a room, portion or
part of a building, structure or premises having an aperture which is
designed or constructed to facilitate sexual activity between persons on
either side of the partition.



      (6)   No premises on which a sexually oriented business is
located may have booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room, or
individual rooms, used for the viewing of motion pictures or any other form
of entertainment, having doors, curtains or portal partitions, unless its
booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, or individual rooms so used
shall have at least one side open to an adjacent public room so that the area
inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room.  Such areas shall
be lighted in a manner that the persons in the areas used for viewing motion
pictures or any other form of entertainment are visible from the adjacent
public room.



   (L)   No sexually oriented business shall display a sign containing
representational depictions of an adult nature or graphic description of an
adult theme.



   (M)   Application process.



      (1)   Applications for a sexually oriented adult business
shall contain information as required on forms supplied by the city.  Any
license issued under this section is valid only for the licensed premises. 
The application shall state whether the applicant is a natural person,
partnership, corporation or other form of organization.



         (a)   Full legal name, place and date of birth, street
residence address and length of time at that address of the applicant and, if
married, also spouse.



         (b)   Whether applicant has ever used or been known by a
name other than his true name and, if so, what was such name or names, and
information concerning dates and places where used.



         (c)   The street addresses at which applicant and
present spouse have lived during the preceding ten years.



         (d)   The name of the business if it is to be conducted
under a designation, name or style other than the full individual name of the
applicant.



         (e)   Kind, name and location of every business or
occupation applicant has been engaged in during the preceding ten years.



         (f)   Names and addresses of applicant’s employers and
partners, if any, for the preceding ten years.



         (g)   Whether applicant or spouse has ever been
convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor, excluding traffic
violations, and, if so, the date and place of conviction and the nature of
the offense.



         (h)   The names, residence and business addresses and
telephone numbers of three persons of good moral character not related to the
applicant or financially interested in the premises or business who may be
referred to as to the applicant’s character or, in the case of a manager,
the manager’s character.  These referrals shall be residents of the Twin
City Metropolitan area unless either the applicant or the Columbia Heights
Police Department can demonstrate to the Council that it would be preferable
to have referrals from persons residing outside of Anoka County.



         (i)   If the applicant is a partnership, the names and
addresses of all partners and all information concerning each partner as is
required of a single applicant.  A managing partner, or partners, shall be
designated.  The interest of each partner in the business shall be disclosed.



         (j)   If the applicant is a corporation or other
association, the following additional information shall be required.



            1.   Name and, if incorporated, the state of
incorporation.



            2.   A true copy of the certificate of
incorporation, articles of incorporation or association agreement and by-laws
and, if a foreign corporation, a certificate of authority as described in
Minnesota Statutes.



            3.   The name of the operating officer or
proprietor or other agent in charge of the premises to be licensed, giving
all the information about said person as is required of a single applicant. 
As used in this section, the term OPERATING OFFICER shall mean the person
responsible for the day- to-day operating decisions of the licensed premises.



            4.   A list of all persons who, singly or together
with their spouse, or a parent, brother, sister or child or either of them,
own or control an interest in said corporation or association in excess of 5%
or who are officers or directors of said corporation or association; together
with their addresses and all information as is required of a single applicant.



         (k)   The full legal name, address and home phone number
of the manager or proprietor of the business.



         (l)   Each application shall be accompanied by a
statement indicating the amount of investment the applicant has in the
business, building, premises, fixtures, furniture, stock in trade, and the
like, and proof of source of such money.



         (m)   Whether the applicant holds a current license for
the operation of a similar business from any other governmental unit.



         (n)   Whether the applicant has previously been denied a
license from any other governmental agency.



         (o)   The application must be accompanied by a sketch or
diagram showing the configuration of the interior of the premises, including
a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business.  The sketch
or diagram must be a drawing to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches.  Once a license is granted, no change in the premises may be
made without the applicant having first reapplied to the city and
demonstrating that the applicant has complied with all of the requirements of
this section.



         (p)   Whenever the application is for a premises either
planned or under construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the
application shall be accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the
design of the proposed premises to be licensed.  If the plans or design are
on file with the City of Columbia Heights Building Inspection Department, no
plans need be submitted with the issuing authority.



         (q)   The exact legal description of the premises to be
licensed, together with a plot/site plan of the area for which the license is
sought showing dimensions, location of buildings, street access parking
facilities.  The site plan must also include the location and distances to
the nearest church building and school.



         (r)   Whether or not all real estate and personal
property taxes for the premises to be licensed which are due and payable have
been paid and if not paid, the years and amounts which are unpaid.



         (s)   Such other information as the City Council or
issuing authority may require relevant to any matters addressed by this
chapter.



      (2)   No person shall make any false statement in the
application.  In addition to other penalties, the license may be revoked by
the City Council for giving false information on the application.



      (3)   By submitting an application, the applicant consents to
any and all investigations the city deems appropriate and waives any claims
the applicant may have.  Copies of the application shall be submitted to
such other city departments as the City Council shall deem necessary for the
verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application. 
The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter
and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law
by the Health Department, Fire Department, and Building Official.



   (N)   The Clerk shall refer consideration of the issuance of a
license by the city to the City Council within 45 days after the receipt of
an application unless he finds one or more of the following to be true:



      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age.



      (2)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in
his payment to the city, county or state of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties
assessed against him or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented
business.



      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.



      (4)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse has been
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the
offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within
two years immediately preceding the application.  The fact that a conviction
is being appealed shall have no effect.



      (5)   An applicant is residing with a person who has been
denied a license by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within
the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose license to operate a
sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months.



      (6)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented
business have not been approved by the Health Department, Fire Department,
and the Building Official as being in compliance with applicable laws and
ordinances; such inspections shall be completed within 30 days from the date
the application was submitted, provided that the application contains all of
the information required by this section.  If the application is deficient,
the inspections shall be completed within 30 days from the date the
deficiency has been corrected.



      (7)   The license fee or investigation fee required by this
chapter has not been paid.



      (8)   An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented
business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has
demonstrated that he is unable to operate or manage a sexually oriented
business premises in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thus necessitating
action by law enforcement officers.



      (9)   An applicant or applicant’s spouse has been convicted
of a crime involving any of the following offenses:



         (a)   Any sex crimes as defined by Minnesota Statutes,
or as defined by any ordinance or statute in conformity therewith;



         (b)   Any obscenity crime as defined by Minnesota
Statutes, or as defined by any ordinance or statute in conformity therewith,
for which:



            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;



            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony
offense; or



            3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two
or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any 24-month period.



      (10)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant’s spouse.



      (11)   An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has
been convicted of an offense listed in subdivision (9) of this division may
qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period
required by subdivision (9) has elapsed.



      (12)   For purposes of this section, the requirements imposed
on an applicant as a prerequisite to licenses shall apply if any person with
an interest in the business or premises as disclosed by division (M) of this
section shall fail to qualify for a license.



   (O)   The City Council shall act to approve or disapprove the
license application within 120 days from the date the application was
submitted, provided that the application contains all the information
required by this section.  If the application is deficient, the City Council
shall act on the application within 120 days from the date that the
deficiency had been corrected.



   (P)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the
address of the sexually oriented business.  The license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business
so that it may be easily read at any time.



   (Q)   (1)   Each license shall expire on December 31 of each year
and may be renewed only by making an application as provided in this
section.  Application for renewal must be made at least 60 days before the
expiration date of a current license, and when made less than 60 days before
the expiration date of the current license, the expiration of the license
will not be effected.



      (2)   When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant
shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial.  If,
subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal
license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license
if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.



   (R)   The city may suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30
days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:



      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any provisions of
this chapter.



      (2)   Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on
the sexually oriented business premises.



      (3)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter.



      (4)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the
sexually oriented business premises.



      (5)   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually
oriented business in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thus necessitating
action by law enforcement officers.



      (6)   Any violations of the general provisions of the
licensing procedures, §§ 5.102 through 5.104, inclusive.



   (S)   The city shall revoke a license if it determines that:



      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted to the city during the application process.



      (2)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises.



      (3)   A licensee or an employee knowingly allowed prostitution
on the premises.



      (4)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s
license was suspended.



      (5)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in
division (N)(9) of this section for which the time period required in
division (N)(9) of this section has not elapsed.



      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12 month period, a
person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed
premises of a crime listed in division (N)(9) of this section for which a
conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the
sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed.



      (7)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to occur in or
on the licensed premises.



      (8)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the county or
state for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to
the sexually oriented business.



      (9)   A licensee has committed an act for which the city may
suspend the license pursuant to division (R) of this section and that the
license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.



      (10)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on the revocation of the license.



      (11)   Subdivision (7) of this division does not apply to
adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or
employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or
within public view.



      (12)   When the city revokes a license, the revocation shall
continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually
oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became
effective.  If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for
the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective.  If the license was revoked under subdivision (5), the applicant
may not be granted another license until the appropriated number of years
required under division (N)(9) has elapsed.



   (T)   A licensee shall not transfer this license to another, nor
shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of
a license at any place other than the address designated in the application.



   (U)   Every section, provision or part of this section or any
license issued pursuant to this section is declared severable from every
other section, provision or part thereof to the extent that if any section,
provision or part of this section or any license issued pursuant to this
section shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction it shall
not invalidate any other section, provision or part hereof.



   (V)   (1)   No person shall provide false information or
misrepresent any fact or information under division (M) of this section.



      (2)   No person, including a licensee, owner, operator or
employee, shall allow a minor to be on the licensed premises of a sexually
oriented business unless the minor is accompanied by the minor’s current
legal guardian.



      (3)   No person, including the licensee, owner, operator or
employee, shall enter a sexually oriented business open to the public if the
premises on which the sexually oriented business is located is in violation
of this section.



      (4)   No person, including the licensee, owner, operator or
employee, shall deny access to any building or housing official of the city
or any employee of the Police Department, Health Department or Fire
Department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time that the premises are
occupied or open for business.



(`77 Code, § 5.613)  (Am. Ord. 1215, passed 11-13-90; Am. Ord. 1377, passed
10-12-98)  Penalty, see § 5.701



ARTICLE VII:  COMPLIANCE



Section



   5.701   Violations



§ 5.701  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter; engages in or operates any
business in violation of the provisions of this chapter; engages in or
violates the restrictions imposed upon any licensee under this chapter;
engages in, participates in, or operates any of the businesses described in
this chapter without having first obtained a license therefor; or engages in,
participates in, or operates any of the businesses described in this chapter
after a license therefor has expired, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in § 1.999.  Each day that a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation who provides false
information, makes a material misrepresentation, or fails to disclose
material information under the provisions of § 5.101(B) of this code, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in § 1.999.



   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall take, collect, or
scavenge recyclable material set out for the authorized collection program
within the city, without having first been licensed hereunder to do so, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by § 1.999.



(`77 Code, § 5.701)  (Am. Ord. 1181, passed 3-27-89)



CHAPTER 5A:  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



   Article



      I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      II.   MINIMUM STANDARDS



      III.   INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT



      IV.   OCCUPANCY LICENSING



      V.   REMEDIES



      VI.   VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES



ARTICLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   5A.101   Statement of purpose



   5A.102   Applicability



   5A.103   Definitions



§ 5A.101  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   (A)   These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance
Code of The City of Columbia Heights hereinafter referred to as "this code".



   (B)   The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing
residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and
constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures,
equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation,
protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other
hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners,
operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises,
and for administration, enforcement and penalties.



   (C)   This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent,
which is to protect the character and stability of all premises within the
city; to correct and prevent conditions that adversely affect or are likely
to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare, and health; to provide
minimum standards for the maintenance of existing property and to thus
prevent substandard property and blight; and to preserve the value of land
and buildings throughout the city. Existing structures and premises that do
not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a
minimum level of health and safety as required herein.



   (D)   If a section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this
code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.



   (E)   With respect to disputes between property owners (owners) and
tenants, and except as otherwise specifically provided by terms of this code,
the City Council (Council) will not intrude upon the accepted contractual
relationships between owners and tenants. The Council will not intervene as
an advocate of either party, nor will it act as an arbiter, nor will it be
receptive to complaints from owners or tenants, which are not specifically
and clearly relevant to the provisions of this code. In the absence of such
relevancy with regard to rental disputes, it is intended that the contracting
parties exercise such legal sanctions as are available to them without the
intervention of city government. In enacting this code, the Council does not
intend to interfere or permit interference with legal rights to personal
privacy.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.102  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters
affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in § 5A.101.
Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify different
requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.



   (B)   Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this
code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises
was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working
order. The requirements of this code are not intended to provide the basis
for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices
in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or
the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of
buildings, structures and premises.



   (C)   Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes
of occupancy, shall be completed in accordance with the procedures and
provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code, Minnesota State Fire Code,
and city code.



   (D)   The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish
or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies
relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous,
unsafe and unsanitary.



   (E)   Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which
are caused, directly or indirectly, by the enforcement of this code shall be
executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's installation instructions.



   (F)   Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper
operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public
safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code,
shall be determined by the Code Official.



   (G)   The Code Official, officer or employee charged with the
enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not
thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all
personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result
of an act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. Any suit
instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by
that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the
provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the
jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The Code
Official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit
or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code;
and any officer of the Department of Property Maintenance Inspection, acting
in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts
performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in
the performance of official duties in connection therewith.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.103  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A building or structure subordinate to the
main or principal structure which is not authorized to be used for living or
sleeping by human occupants and which is located on or partially on the
premises.



      APARTMENT UNIT.  Apartment, or apartment unit, has the same
meaning as DWELLING UNIT within this code.



      APPROVED.  An indication that an item meets construction,
installation, and maintenance standards of the State of Minnesota, city code
and Code Official.



      BASEMENT.  That portion of a building which is partly or
completely below grade.



      BATHROOM.  A group of fixtures consisting of a water closet,
lavatory, and bathtub or shower. Such fixtures are located together on the
same floor level.



      BUILDING.  Any structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy.



      CITY.  The City of Columbia Heights.



      CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council, which is the governing
authority of the City of Columbia Heights.



      CLEAN.  The absence of rubbish, garbage, vermin or other
unsightly, offensive or extraneous matter.



      CODE OFFICIAL.  The official who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized
representative.



      CONDEMN.  To adjudge unfit for occupancy.



      COUNCIL.  Same meaning as CITY COUNCIL.



      DWELLING.  A structure or portion thereof used, or designed to
be used, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied for living
purposes. Does not include rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes, trailers,
tents, cabins, or trailer coaches.



      DWELLING UNIT.  A single unit providing complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.



      EASEMENT.  That portion of land or property reserved for present
or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the
property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a
said lot or lots.



      EXIT.  A continuous and unobstructed means of egress to a public
way and shall include intervening doors, doorways, corridors, ramps,
stairways, smoke-proof enclosures, horizontal exits, exit passageways, exit
access, exit enclosures, exit discharge, exit courts and yards.



      EXTERIOR PROPERTY.  The open space on the premises and on
adjoining property under the control of owners, or operators of such premises.



      EXTERMINATION.  The control and elimination of insects, rodents,
vermin or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying,
fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods.



      FAMILY.  An individual, or two or more persons each related by
blood, marriage, adoption, or foster children, living together as a single
housekeeping unit; or a group of not more than three persons not so related,
maintaining a common household and using common cooking and kitchen
facilities.



      FENCE.  Any partition, structure, wall, or gate erected as a
divided marker, barrier, or enclosure, and located along the boundary or
within the required yard.



      FUNCTIONING.  In such physical condition as to safely perform
the service or services for which an item is designed or intended.



      GARBAGE.  As defined in § 5.603(B).



      GUARD.  A building component or a system of building components
located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes
the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.



      HABITABLE SPACE.  Space in a structure for living, sleeping,
eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or
utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.



      HOT WATER.  Water heated to a temperature of not less than
110°Fahrenheit, measured at faucet outlet.



      HOUSEKEEPING UNIT.  A room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet,
lavatory, and bathtub or shower.



      IMMINENT DANGER.  A condition which could cause serious or
life-threatening injury or death at any time.



      INFESTATION.  The presence within or around a dwelling or
dwelling unit of any insect, bird, rodent, vermin or other pest.



      KITCHEN.  An area used, or designated to be used, for the
preparation of food.



      LABELED.  Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which
has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a
nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other
organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic
inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and by whose label
the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized
standards.



      LANDSCAPE.  Site amenities, including trees, shrubs, ground
covers, flowers, fencing, berms, retaining walls, and other outdoor
finishings.



      LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET.  To permit, provide or offer
possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building,
premise or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record
thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or
pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of
land.



      MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.  A system specifically addresses and
regulated in this code and composed of components, devices, appliances and
equipment including, but not limited to, heating, ventilation, exhaust, air
conditioning, and communication units integral to and located on top, beside,
or adjacent to a building.



      OCCUPANCY.  The purpose for which a building or portion thereof
is utilized or occupied



      OCCUPANT.  Any person (including owner or operator) living in,
or having possession of a space within a building.



      OPENABLE AREA.  That part of a window, skylight or door which is
available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the
outdoors.



      OPERATOR.  Any person who has charge, care or control of a
structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.



      OWNER.  Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having
a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official
records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the
property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian
of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the
estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court.



      PERSON.  An individual, heirs, executors, administrators or
assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their
successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.



      PREMISES.  A lot, or parcel of land, easement or public way,
including any structures thereon.



      PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.  Chapter 5A of this city code
together with the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, as
amended, International Code Conference.



      PROPERTY MAINTENANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  Agent designated by
the City Manager to enforce provisions of the Property Maintenance Code.



      PUBLIC HALL.  A hall, corridor or a passageway for providing
egress from a dwelling unit to a public way and not within the exclusive
control of one family.



      PUBLIC WAY.  Any street, alley or similar parcel of land
essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded,
dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.



      RENTAL.  Same meaning as LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET REPAIR. 
Shall mean to restore to a sound, acceptable state of operation,
serviceability or appearance. Repairs shall be expected to last as long as
the replacement by new items.



      REPLACE or REPLACEMENT.  To remove an existing or portion of a
system and to construct or install a new item of a quality similar to that of
the existing item when it was new. Replacement ordinarily takes place when
repair of the item is impractical.



      RETAINING WALL.  A wall or structure constructed of stone,
concrete, wood, or other materials, used to retain soil, as a slope
transition, or edge of a planting area.



      RODENT HARBORAGE.  A place where rodents commonly live, nest, or
establish their habitat.



      ROOMING HOUSES.  Any group of rooms which form single habitable
units used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for
cooking or eating purposes.



      RUBBISH.  As defined in § 5.603(B).



      SAFE.  The condition of being free from danger and hazards which
may cause accidents or disease.



      SCREENING.  A barrier which blocks all views from public roads
and differing land uses to off-street parking areas, loading areas, service
and utility areas, and mechanical equipment.



      STORY, FIRST.  The lowest story in a building which qualifies as
a story, as defined herein, except that a floor level in a building having
only one floor level shall be classified as a first story, provided such
floor level is not more than four feet below grade, as defined herein, for
more than 50% of the total perimeter, or more than eight feet below grade, as
defined herein, at any point.



      STRUCTURE.  That which is built or constructed or a portion
thereof.



      TENANT.  A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or
not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a
unit.



      TOILET ROOM.  A room containing a water closet or urinal but not
a bathtub or shower.



      UNSAFE.  A condition or a combination of conditions which are
dangerous or hazardous to persons or property.



      UNSANITARY.  Conditions which are dangerous or hazardous to the
health of persons.



      VEHICLE or MOTOR VEHICLE.  As defined in M.S. § 169.01.



      VENTILATION.  The natural or mechanical process of supplying
conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.



      WATER CLOSET.  A toilet, with a bowl and trap made in one piece,
which is connected to the city water and sewage system or other approved
water supply and sewer system.



      WORKMANLIKE.  Executed in a skilled and professional manner
including obtaining all necessary city/state permits, inspections, approvals
of the authority having jurisdiction, adherence to all applicable codes,
installation to manufacturer's specifications, the use of proper materials
for designed purposes, installation to current architectural or engineering
standards, surfaces (material, color, texture) to conform to current
surrounding areas, and all work shall be generally plumb, level, square, in
line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.



      YARD.  An open space on the same lot with a structure.



   (B)   Whenever the words DWELLING UNIT, DWELLING, PREMISES,
BUILDING, ROOMING HOUSE, ROOMING UNIT, HOUSEKEEPING UNIT, STRUCTURE, or STORY
are stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed
by the words "or any part thereof."



   (C)   Words stated in the present tense include the future; words
stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular
number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.



   (D)   Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in
the Minnesota State Building Code, Minnesota State Fire Code, or city code,
such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.



   (E)   Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by
this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the
context implies.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



ARTICLE II:  MINIMUM STANDARDS



Section



   5A.201   Basic equipment and facilities



   5A.202   Exterior property areas



   5A.203   Exterior structure



   5A.204   Interior structure



   5A.205   Rubbish, garbage, recycling, and composting



   5A.206   Occupancy limitations



   5A.207   Light



   5A.208   Ventilation



   5A.209   Plumbing



   5A.210   Heating and mechanical



   5A.211   Electrical



   5A.212   Fire safety



§ 5A.201  BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.



   (A)   Occupancies shall meet the minimum requirements for basic
equipment and facilities as set forth in the Minnesota State Building Code,
Minnesota State Fire Code, and city code for the type of occupancy.



   (B)   No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service,
facility equipment or utility which is required under this chapter to be
removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied premises
except for temporary interruptions as may be necessary while actual repairs
or alterations are made or during temporary emergencies. No premises may use
the utilities, services or facility equipment of another premises after their
utility service or facility equipment has been removed or shut off unless it
is with the permission of the Building Official.



   (C)   Buildings in existence at the time of the adoption of the code
may have their use or occupancy continued, if such use or occupancy was legal
or legal nonconforming at the time of the adoption of the code, provided such
continued use is not dangerous to life. Nonconformities shall follow the
requirements of Chapter 9, Article I of city code.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



§ 5A.202  EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.



   (A)   Sanitation.  All exterior property and premises shall be
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition.



   (B)   Outside storage.  Outside storage of articles including, but
not limited to, equipment, construction materials, excess soil, garbage,
rubbish, yard waste, recyclables, hazardous waste, items not designed for
exterior use, and maintenance equipment shall not be allowed. A weather
tight, rodent-proof storage building or shed must be constructed for storage
of items not storable within the building. Storage containers including, but
not limited to, trailers, semi trailers, cargo containers, PODS, and
dumpsters, are not allowed as permanent storage structures. The use of these
types of storage containers for temporary use, up to 60 consecutive days, is
allowed by meeting all requirements of city code.



   (C)   Grading and drainage.  All premises shall be graded and
maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. Drainage
from a property shall not adversely affect adjoining premises.



   (D)   Ground cover.  All exposed ground area surrounding the
principle structure and accessory structures, which are not devoted to
driveways, parking areas, sidewalks, or patios, shall be sodded or landscaped
with shrubs, trees, gardens, or other ornamental landscape materials. Ground
cover areas shall be maintained free of weeds, trash, yard waste, garbage and
outside storage. No landscaped area shall be used for the parking of
automobiles, trucks, sport utility vehicles, buses, vans, trailers, campers,
motor-homes, boats, motorcycles, personal watercraft, motorized construction
equipment, snowmobiles, all terrain vehicles, and agricultural
tractors/equipment or the storage or display of materials, supplies or
merchandise. Materials used for landscaping, including but not limited to,
stone, brick, wood, edging materials, plastic, weed barriers shall be
maintained. Damaged or deteriorated materials shall be repaired or replaced.



   (E)   Slopes and berms.  Final grades with a slope ratio of greater
than three to one will not be permitted without special approved treatment
such as special ground covers or reforestation, terracing, or retaining
walls. Berating used to provide required screening of parking lots and other
open areas shall not have slopes in excess of three to one.



   (F)   Trees and weeds.  All exterior property and premises shall be
maintained free from diseased, dead and hazardous trees, noxious weeds, and
long grass per Chapter 4, Article II of city code herein adopted by
reference, and this code.



   (G)   Maintenance.  All diseased, dead, and hazardous trees,
shrubs, ground covers, and sod shall be removed and/or replaced in accordance
with this code. All trees, or other vegetation, which spring up in crevices
by foundations and along walls and fences, must be promptly removed to avoid
structural damage. Tall weeds or grass shall not be allowed to grow to a
height greater than allowed in Chapter 4, Article II of city code. Inspectors
may grant an exception for wildlife areas, areas bordering ponds, wildflower
areas, ornamental grasses, other such areas that are part of an orderly
landscape, and other vegetation as the Council shall, from time to time
designate by resolution. These exceptions shall be maintained weed free and
confined to the designated area. Orderly landscape areas do not include
yard/lawn areas that are sodded where other types of vegetation are allowed
to freely grow in it.



   (H)   Tree stumps.  All tree stumps shall be removed to four inches
below the surface of the ground, including root extensions. Stump debris
shall be removed and the hole filled in to match the surrounding area. Stumps
that are to be used for other purposes including, but not limited to, art,
furniture, and landscaping shall be separated from the root system. The
remaining stump/roots shall be removed as outlined above.



   (I)   Fire wood.  The accumulation of twigs, branches, leaves, and
trunk sections are not allowed. Firewood is allowed if it is cut to fireplace
length/split, neatly stacked in rear yards only, and is placed in an area
that does not promote rodent harborage or the deterioration of adjacent
surfaces and does not adversely affect adjoining premises. No more than 400
cubic feet of stored firewood allowed per premises.



   (J)   Placement of plant materials.  No landscaping shall be
allowed within any drainage utility easements, road right-of-way, or
immediately adjacent to any driveway or road intersection if such landscaping
would interfere with a motorist's view of the street or roadway or with the
use of the easement for its intended purpose.



   (K)   Sidewalks, parking, and driveways.  All sidewalks, walkways,
stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper
state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. Hazardous
conditions include, but are not limited to, the accumulation of snow, ice and
debris, deteriorated, broken, uneven and missing pavement and the growth of
vegetation in cracks and crevices. All off-street parking areas, all
driveways leading to such parking areas and all other areas upon which
vehicles may be located shall be hard surfaced and shall conform to Chapter
9, Section I of city code. Driveway and parking areas that are currently hard
surfaced, but do not meet all of the current requirements, can maintain the
legal nonconforming driveway and parking areas until such time as the hard
surface is damaged, deteriorated, or replaced. At which time driveway and
parking areas shall be reconstructed to the current requirements of Chapter
9, Section I of city code. Premises that have handicap accessible parking
shall maintain the required handicap parking per the State Building Code.



   (L)   Infestation.  All structures and exterior property shall be
kept free from insect, bird and rodent infestation. All structures in which
insects, birds or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by
approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After
extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation.
No owner or occupant of a premises shall accumulate or permit the
accumulation of any materials in such a manner that may provide insect, bird
and rodent harborage, or serve as food for same, in or about structures or
premises.



   (M)   Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall
not discharge gases, steam, water, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or
other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public
or private property or that of another tenant.



   (N)   Accessory structures.  All accessory structures, including
detached garages, storage buildings and sheds, shall be maintained
structurally sound and in good repair per § 5A.203.



   (O)   Fences, free standing walls, and retaining walls. All fences,
free standing walls, and retaining walls shall be constructed and regulated
in accordance with Chapter 6, Article IV of the city code and maintained per
§ 5A.203.



   (P)   Junk vehicles and abandoned motor vehicles.  Junk vehicles
and abandoned motor vehicles shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 7,
Article II of city code incorporated herein. Vehicles that are inoperative
and are awaiting repairs on the premises of an approved repair or body shop
occupancy or their storage areas may be inoperative up to seven days. Junk or
abandoned vehicles that are taken, or impounded, due to a legal process may
be stored on a premises that meets city zoning for this type of storage, for
up to two weeks after the legal holding time or process is complete. Painting
of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth. A
vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including
bodywork, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or
similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such occupancy through the
Minnesota State Building Code, Minnesota State Fire Code and meeting city
zoning regulations.



   (Q)   Defacement of property.  No person shall willfully or
wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or
building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking,
carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore
said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair per § 8.204(S)
of city code.



   (R)   Swimming pools.  Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs, including
all required fencing and safety features, shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, and in good repair. Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs
shall conform to Chapter 6, Article V of the city code incorporated herein by
reference.



   (S)   Pets.  Exterior of premises where animals are allowed to
roam, including caged areas and pens, shall be maintained free of an
accumulation of animal waste, bedding materials and food that would attract
insects, rodents, or any other vermin and cause an odor that would adversely
affect adjoining properties.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



§ 5A.203  EXTERIOR STRUCTURE.



   (A)   General.  The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in
good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to
the public health, safety or welfare.



   (B)   Protective treatment.  All exterior surfaces, including but
not limited to, siding, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches,
trim, balconies, signs (including pilon and monument), canopies, lighting,
posts/poles, decks, retaining walls and fences shall be maintained in good
condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be
protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective
covering or treatment. Rotting and deteriorated surfaces shall be replaced.
Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces
repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the
building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be
maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to
rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all
surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit
future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior
surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from
this requirement. If any structure is removed or demolished for any purpose,
all parts of the demolished structure are to be removed, including utilities,
foundations and footings, unless those parts are to be reused for a new
structure and is approved by the Building Official.



   (C)   Premises identification.  Buildings shall have approved
address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from
the street or road fronting the property. Where applicable, buildings shall
also have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible
and visible from streets and alleys to the rear of properties. These numbers
shall be Arabic numerals of a contrasting color to their background. Numbers
shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of
0.5 inch (12.7 mm).



   (D)   Structural members.  All structural members shall be
maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting
the imposed dead and live loads.



   (E)   Foundation walls.  All foundation walls shall be maintained
plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such
condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.



   (F)   Exterior walls.  All exterior walls shall be free from holes,
breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and
properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.



   (G)   Rodent proof.  Each part of every structure shall be rodent
resistant. All openings in exterior walls, foundations, basements, ground or
first floors or roofs shall be rodent-proofed in an approved manner.



   (H)   Roofs and drainage.  The roof and flashing shall be sound,
tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roofing materials that have
deteriorated or are damaged shall be replaced. Roof drainage shall be
adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior
portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be
maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be
discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance, or adversely affects
adjoining premises.



   (I)   Decorative features.  All cornices, belt courses, corbels,
terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be
maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.



   (J)   Overhang extensions.  All overhang extensions including, but
not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes,
standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be
properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and
against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials,
such as paint or similar surface treatment.



   (K)   Stairways, decks, porches and balconies.  Every exterior
stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto,
shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper
anchorage, capable of supporting the imposed loads and to the requirements of
§ 5A.204(D).



   (L)   Chimneys and towers.  All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke
stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and
sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application
of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.



   (M)   Handrails and guards.  Every handrail and guard shall be
installed and maintained per § 5A.204(F).



   (N)   Window, skylight and door frames.  Every window, skylight,
door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather
tight.



   (O)   Glazing.  All glazing materials shall be maintained free from
cracks and holes. Glazing that is replaced shall be replaced with safety
glazing where required by the State Building Code.



   (P)   Openable windows.  Every window, other than a fixed window,
shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window
hardware. Openable windows located in whole or in part within six feet (1828
mm) above ground level or a walking surface below, that provide access to a
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or
let shall be equipped with window sash locking devices.



   (Q)   Insect screens.  During the period from May 1 to September
30, every openable window and other outside openings required for ventilation
shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16
mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm). Screens shall be maintained tight fitting
and free of tears or holes. Screens shall not be required where other
approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
Window units that have a permanent screen as part of the window unit are
required to maintain the screen year round.



   (R)   Doors.  All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware
shall be maintained in good working condition. Doors shall be maintained free
of defects, holes, or damage, shall fit reasonably well within its frame,
shall be capable of being easily opened and closed, and shall be properly and
securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer
of the attachment hardware. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming
units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress
doors shall be in accordance with the State Building Code and State Fire
Code. All rated interior and exterior doors and assemblies, per the Minnesota
State Building Code and Minnesota State Fire Code, shall be maintained at the
intended rating. Doors and assemblies that need to be replaced due to damage
or deterioration shall be replaced with doors and assemblies that meet the
intended rating.



   (S)   Basement hatchways.  Every basement hatchway shall be
maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage
water. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming
unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped
with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry.



   (T)   Guards for basement windows.  Every basement window that is
openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows, screens or
other approved protection against the entry of rodents.



   (U)   Building security.



      (1)   Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, rooming
units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to
provide security for the occupants and property within. Doors providing
access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented,
leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock meeting specifications
set forth herein. Such deadbolt locks shall have a lock throw of not less
than one inch. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be
considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. Such deadbolt locks shall be
installed according to manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good
working order. All deadbolt locks required by this section shall be designed
and installed in such a manner so as to be operable inside of the dwelling
unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit only by the turning of a knob or a
lever and without the use of a key, tool, combination thereof or any other
special knowledge or effort.



      (2)   In buildings of four or more dwelling units, rooming
units or housekeeping units that are rented, leased or let and where access
to the individual dwelling units are gained through a common corridor or
building entrance, an approved security system to control access shall be
installed and maintained. The security system shall consist of locked
building entrance or foyer doors. Dead-latch type door locks shall be
provided with releasable lever knobs (or doorknobs) on the inside of building
entrance doors and with key cylinders on the outside of the building entrance
doors. Building entrance door-latches shall be of the type that is
permanently locked. A communication system or device such as an intercom,
telephone, audible bell or buzzer or other approved means of making contact
with the individual dwelling unit tenants must be provided and maintained.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



§ 5A.204  INTERIOR STRUCTURE.



   (A)   General.  The interior of a structure and equipment therein
shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary
condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure, which they occupy
or control, in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure
containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or
more dwelling units or nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean
and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and
exterior property.



   (B)   Structural members.  All structural members shall be
maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.



   (C)   Interior surfaces.  All interior surfaces, including windows
and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean, sanitary and weatherproofed
condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint or other surface
coverings shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster,
holes, decayed wood and other damaged or defective surface conditions shall
be corrected. Interior surfaces may not be covered wholly or partially by
toxic paint or materials with a lasting toxic effect. All interior surfaces
shall be protected against the passage and harborage of vermin and rodents.
Interior surfaces that are part of a fire rated assembly shall be maintained
to the intended rating. Mold shall be removed from all surfaces and
sub-surfaces. The cause of the mold shall be found and abated to prevent
reoccurrence. Standing water and water damage shall be investigated to find
and abate the source. Surfaces that are wet and/or damaged from water shall
be thoroughly dried, cleaned or replaced.



   (D)   Stairs and walking surfaces.  Every stair, ramp, landing,
balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound
condition, free of hazards, and in good repair. Every stairway or flight of
stairs, whether inside or outside of a dwelling, and every porch or balcony
shall be kept in safe condition, sound repair, and free of deterioration.
Every stairwell and every flight of stairs shall have handrails which conform
to the standards set forth in the Minnesota State Building Code. Every porch,
balcony or deck which is more than 30 inches high shall have a guardrail
installed and maintained to § 5A.205(F). No flight of stairs shall have
settled out of its intended position or have pulled away from the supporting
or adjacent structures enough to cause a hazard. No flight of stairs may have
rotting, loose or deteriorating surfaces and supports. The treads and risers
of every flight of stairs, except spiral or winding stairways, shall be
essentially uniform in width and height.



   (E)   Interior doors.  Interior doors shall be maintained free of
defects, holes, or damage. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well
within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being
properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the
manufacturer of the attachment hardware. Door hardware shall be maintained in
working condition.



   (F)   Guards and handrails.  Every handrail and guard shall be
firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition. Handrails and guards shall be installed and
maintained to the requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code and
Minnesota State Fire Code.



   (G)   Pets.  Interior of structures where animals are allowed to
roam, including cages, caged areas, and litter boxes shall be maintained free
of an accumulation of animal waste that may cause an odor that could affect
the health of the animal and residents and adversely affect adjoining spaces
or dwelling units.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



§ 5A.205  RUBBISH, GARBAGE, RECYCLING, AND COMPOSTING.



   (A)   Accumulation of rubbish or garbage.  All exterior property
and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.



   (B)   Disposal of rubbish.  Every occupant of a structure shall
dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner as established by city
code. Rubbish, garbage, recycling, yard waste, and appliances shall be placed
in accordance with Chapter 8, Article III of the city code.



   (C)   Rubbish, garbage, recycling, and composting. Rubbish, garbage,
recycling, yard waste, and composting shall be regulated in accordance with
Chapter 4, Article VII and Chapter 8, Article III of the city code, which is
incorporated herein by reference. Exposure of unused refrigerators or
containers to children shall meet the requirements of M.S. § 609.675.



   (D)   Container storage.  The storage of garbage and recycling, and
their containers, is not allowed in any public area inside of structures
unless specifically allowed by the Minnesota State Building Code and the
Minnesota State Fire Code.



   (E)   Screening.  Screening shall conform to § 9.106(C)(5) of city
code, which is incorporated herein by reference.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 1578, passed 4-12-10; Am. Ord. 1592,
passed 5-9-11)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



§ 5A.206  OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Occupancy limitations for all nonresidential
properties shall be determined by the type of occupancy and the occupant load
limits set by the Minnesota State Building Code and Minnesota State Fire Code.



      (2)   Permissible occupancy of rental dwelling unit. The
maximum permissible occupancy of any legal or legal non-conforming rental
dwelling unit at the time this code is adopted shall be determined as follows:



         (a)   For the first occupant, 150 square feet of
habitable room floor space and for every additional occupant thereof, at
least 100 square feet of habitable room floor space.



         (b)   The minimum permissible square footage of any new
rental property, initially licensed after the adoption of this code, shall
meet the minimum requirements of § 9.106(D) of city code.



         (c)   In no event shall the total number of occupants
exceed two times the number of bedrooms, in the rental dwelling unit.



         (d)   In no event shall an occupant be allowed to sleep
in a basement, or shall a bed, in a usable position, be present in a basement
unless the space, through the city permit process, meets all requirements of
the Minnesota State Building Code for use as a bedroom.



   (B)   No person shall occupy as an owner-occupant or let to another
for occupancy any dwelling unit for occupancy by more than one family, other
than for temporary guests. Family is defined in § 9.103.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



§ 5A.207  LIGHT.



   (A)   Nonresidential occupancies.  Lighting shall be installed and
maintained to the requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code and city
code.



   (B)   Residential occupancies.



      (1)   Every habitable space shall have at least one window of
approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum
total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8% of the floor area of
such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of
any room and such obstructions are located less than three feet (914 mm) from
the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such
window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court
and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total
window area for the room.



      (2)   Exception.  Where natural light for rooms or spaces
without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the
unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8% of the floor
area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33
m2). The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being
served.



   (C)   Common halls and stairways.  Every common hall and stairway
in residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings,
shall be lighted at all times. Where natural light is not sufficient, common
halls and stairways are to be lighted with at least a 60-watt standard
incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of floor area or
equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall not
be greater than 30 feet (9144 mm). A minimum of one footcandle (11 lux) shall
be provided on the exterior pathway from the structure to the parking areas
and garages. In other than residential occupancies, means of egress,
including exterior means of egress stairways shall be illuminated at all
times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a
minimum of one footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads.



   (D)   Other spaces.  All other spaces shall be provided with
natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary
conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the
appliances, equipment and fixtures.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



§ 5A.208  VENTILATION.



   (A)   Habitable spaces.



      (1)   Every habitable space shall have at least one openable
window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to
at least 45% of the minimum glazed area required in § 5A.207(B).



      (2)   Exception.  Where rooms and spaces without openings to
the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed
opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8% of the floor area of the
interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The
ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area
being ventilated.



   (B)   Non-habitable spaces.  Laundry rooms, utility rooms, or other
nonhabitable rooms shall contain a minimum total of openable window area of
no less than 1.5 square feet, except that no windows shall be required if
such rooms are equipped with a functioning ventilation system which is
approved by the Building Official.



   (C)   Bathrooms and toilet rooms.  Every bathroom and toilet room
shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as
required by § 5A.208(A), except that a window shall not be required in such
spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a
mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge
to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated.



   (D)   Cooking facilities.  Ventilation of cooking facilities shall
meet the requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code. Unless approved
through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any
rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not
be permitted to be present in a rooming unit or dormitory unit unless
specifically approved in writing by the Code Official.



   (E)   Process ventilation.  Where injurious, toxic, irritating or
noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust
ventilation system, meeting the requirements of the Minnesota State Building
Code, shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air
shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.



   (F)   Clothes dryer exhaust.  Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall
be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with
the manufacturer's instructions and the Minnesota State Building Code.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



§ 5A.209  PLUMBING.



   (A)   General.  All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed
and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions,
leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such
plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in
a safe, sanitary and functional condition.



   (B)   Minimum requirements.  Each dwelling unit must contain:



      (1)   A kitchen sink.



      (2)   A counter or table for food preparation, cabinets and/or
shelves for storage or eating, drinking, cooking equipment and utensils, and
of food that does not require refrigeration for safekeeping that shall be of
sound construction covered with surfaces that are easily cleanable and that
will not impart any toxic or deleterious effect to food.



      (3)   An operational and functioning stove for cooking food
and a refrigerator for the safe storage of food which are properly installed
with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation.
Such stove or refrigerator need not be installed when a dwelling unit is not
occupied and when the occupant is required to provide a stove or refrigerator
on occupancy. If the occupant is required to furnish a stove or refrigerator,
sufficient space and adequate functioning connections for the installation
and operation of the stove and refrigerator must exist.



      (4)   A nonhabitable room which is equipped with a flush water
closet in compliance with the Minnesota State Building Code. Such room shall
have an entrance door which affords privacy. Said flush water closet shall be
equipped with easily cleanable surfaces.



      (5)   A lavatory sink. Said lavatory sink may be in the same
room as the flush water closet, or, if located in another room, the lavatory
sink shall be located in close proximity to the door leading directly into
the room in which said water closet is located. Said lavatory sink shall be
equipped with easily cleanable surfaces.



      (6)   A nonhabitable room which is equipped with a bathtub or
shower in good working condition. Such room shall have an entrance door which
affords privacy. Said bathtub or shower shall be equipped with easily
cleanable surfaces.



   (C)   Fixture clearances.  Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate
clearances for usage and cleaning.



   (D)   Plumbing system hazards.  Where it is found that a plumbing
system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure
by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection,
backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar
reasons, the Code Official shall require the defects to be corrected to
eliminate the hazard. If at any time the waste side of the plumbing system
backs up into a structure, thereby causing an unsanitary condition, the cause
of the back up shall be investigated and abated. All surfaces and items
contaminated shall be removed or cleaned and sterilized. The Building
Official shall give final approval prior to occupancy of the contaminated
space.



   (E)   Water.  Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking
fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected
to a public water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities,
bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running
water in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code.



   (F)   Contamination.  The water supply shall be maintained free
from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be
located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets,
janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are
attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved
atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose
connection vacuum breaker.



   (G)   Supply.  The water supply system shall be installed and
maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the
fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.



   (H)   Water heating facilities.  Water heating facilities shall be
properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of
water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and
laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110°F (43°C). A
gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room,
bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate
combustion air is provided per the Minnesota State Building Code. An approved
combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge
pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.



   (I)   Sewer.  All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to
a public sewer system.



   (J)   Maintenance.  Every plumbing stack, vent, waste, storm water
pipes, and sewer lines shall function properly and be kept free from
obstructions, leaks and defects.



   (K)   Storm drainage.  Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and
courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a
manner that creates a public nuisance.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



§ 5A.210  HEATING AND MECHANICAL.



   (A)   Heating facilities required.  Heating facilities shall be
provided in structures as required by this section.



   (B)   Nonresidential occupancies.  All occupiable indoor workspaces
shall be provided with heating facilities as required by the Minnesota State
Building Code.



   (C)   Residential occupancies.  Dwellings shall be provided with
heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Cooking or water heating
appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the
requirements of this section. Portable heating equipment employing flame or
the use of liquid fuel shall not be considered as heating facilities within
the meaning of this section and is prohibited. No owner or occupant shall
install, operate or use a space heater employing a flame that is not vented
outside the structure in an approved manner. No owner shall supply portable
electric heaters to comply with this section.



   (D)   Heat supply.  Every owner and operator of any building who
rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or
guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the
occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to May 1
to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, and toilet rooms. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter
outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is
operating at its full design capacity.



   (E)   Room temperature measurement.  The required room temperatures
shall be measured three feet above the floor level and three feet from
exterior walls.



   (F)   Mechanical appliances.  All mechanical appliances,
fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water
heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe
working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function.



   (G)   Removal of combustion products.  All fuel-burning equipment
and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent unless the
fuel-burning equipment and appliances are labeled for unvented operation.



   (H)   Clearances.  All required clearances to combustible materials
shall be maintained.



   (I)   Safety controls.  All safety controls for fuel-burning
equipment shall be maintained in effective operation.



   (J)   Combustion air.  A supply of air for complete combustion of
the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning
equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.



   (K)   Energy conservation devices.  Devices intended to reduce fuel
consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply
line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefor, shall not be
installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is
specifically approved by the Building Official.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



§ 5A.211  ELECTRICAL.



   (A)   Facilities required.  Every occupied building shall be
provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of
this section.



   (B)   Service.  The size and usage of appliances and equipment
shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in
accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code. As a minimum, existing
dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase
electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes.



   (C)   Electrical system hazards.  Where it is found that the
electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the
structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient
receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation,
deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the Code Official shall
require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.



   (D)   Equipment.  All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances
shall be installed and maintained to the Minnesota State Building Code.



   (E)   Receptacles.  Every habitable space in a dwelling shall
contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every kitchen
and laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a
receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every water closet
compartment and bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle with ground
fault circuit interrupter protection.



   (F)   Lighting fixtures.  Every interior stairway, toilet room,
kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room, furnace room and public hall,
shall contain at least one electric lighting fixture.



   (G)   Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators.  Elevators,
dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained to sustain safely all imposed
loads, to operate properly, and to be free from physical and fire hazards.
The most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at all times
within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter; or the
certificate shall be available for public inspection in the office of the
Building Operator. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least
one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building
is occupied. Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be permitted to
have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing.



   (H)   Duct systems.  Duct systems shall be maintained in a clean
condition, free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the
required function.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



§ 5A.212  FIRE SAFETY.



   (A)   Scope.  The provisions of the Minnesota State Fire Code and
Minnesota State Building Code incorporated herein by reference, and city code
shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to
all premises.



   (B)   Systems.  All systems, devices and equipment to detect a
fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination
thereof shall be installed and maintained in an operable condition at all
times in accordance with the Minnesota State Fire Code.



   (C)   Smoke alarms.  Smoke alarms in dwellings, apartment houses,
hotels, and lodging houses shall be installed and maintained to the
requirements of M.S. § 299F.362.



   (D)   Carbon monoxide alarms.  M.S. § 299F.50 requires approved
carbon monoxide (CO) alarms in all single-family homes and multifamily
apartment units with effective dates as follows.



      (1)   All new construction single-family homes and
multi-family dwellings where building permits were issued on or after January
1, 2007.



      (2)   All existing single-family homes effective August 1,
2008.



      (3)   All existing multi-family or apartment dwelling units
effective August 1, 2009.



   (E)   Carbon monoxide alarm requirements.  The installation,
maintenance, duties and exceptions for carbon monoxide alarms shall be as
required by M.S. §§ 299F.50 and 299F.51.



   (F)   Storage.  All storage in mechanical, utility, boiler, fire
suppression and laundry rooms shall conform to the requirements of the
Minnesota State Fire Code for all nonresidential properties and all
residential properties of three or more dwelling units. In occupancies that
have separate storage rooms, storage shall be maintained in an orderly manner
with aisle ways to all parts of the room. Where storage lockers are provided
no storage is allowed outside of the lockers and the lockers are required to
be locked at all times. In one- and two-family dwellings, storage shall be
maintained in an orderly manner with a minimum 36-inch clearance from all
fuel burning and electrical appliances.



   (G)   Hazardous storage.  Hazardous items such as, but not limited
to, tires, flammable gas/liquid containers, power equipment with fuel, and
explosives are not allowed to be stored in residential occupancies that are
let for occupancy. Storage of these types of items in nonresidential
occupancies shall meet the requirements of the Minnesota State Fire Code.



   (H)   Extension cords.  The use of extension cords and multi-plug
type of adapters shall meet the requirements of the Minnesota State Fire Code.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



ARTICLE III:  INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT



Section



   5A.301   Enforcement and inspection authority



   5A.302   Inspection access



   5A.303   Inspections



   5A.304   Compliance order



   5A.305   Posting to prevent occupancy



   5A.306   Right of appeal



   5A.307   Board of Appeals



§ 5A.301  ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTION AUTHORITY.



   The City Manager and his designated agents shall be the Property
Maintenance Enforcement Officer who shall administer and enforce the
provisions of the chapter. Inspections shall be conducted during reasonable
hours, and, upon request the Property Maintenance Enforcement Officer shall
present evidence of his official capacity to the owner, occupant or person in
charge of a dwelling unit sought to be inspected.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.302  INSPECTION ACCESS.



   If an owner, occupant or other person in charge of a premises fails or
refuses to permit free access and entry to the structure or premises, or any
part thereof, for an inspection authorized by this article, the Property
Maintenance Enforcement Officer may, upon a showing that probable cause
exists for the inspection or for the issuance of an order directing
compliance with the inspection requirements of this section with respect to
such premises, petition and obtain an order to inspect and/or search warrant
from a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.303  INSPECTIONS.



   Premises shall be inspected in accordance with the city's "Property
Maintenance Inspection Policy."



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.304  COMPLIANCE ORDER.



   (A)   Whenever the Property Maintenance Enforcement Officer
determines that any premises fails to meet the provisions of this chapter, he
may issue a compliance order setting forth the violations of the chapter and
ordering the owner, occupant, operator, or agent to correct such violations.
The compliance order shall:



      (1)   Be in writing;



      (2)   Describe the location and nature of the violations of
this code;



      (3)   Establish a reasonable time, per the Property
Maintenance Inspection Policy, for the correction of such violation;



      (4)   Advise the person to whom the notice is directed of the
right to appeal; and



      (5)   Be served upon the owner, agent or the occupant, as the
case may require. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such
owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is:



         (a)   Served upon them personally;



         (b)   Sent by mail to the address given in the most
recent occupancy license application on file;



         (c)   Sent by mail to their last known address; or



         (d)   Upon failure to effect notice through subdivisions
(a) through (c) as set out in this section, posted at a conspicuous place in
or about the premises which is affected by the notice.



   (B)   Upon correction of all Property Maintenance Code violations as
set forth in the compliance order, the Property Maintenance Enforcement
Officer shall, upon request of the owner or landlord, occupant, operator or
agent issue a written statement that all violations have been corrected in
accordance with the Property Maintenance Code.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.305  POSTING TO PREVENT OCCUPANCY.



   The Property Maintenance Enforcement Officer may post any building,
structure or premises covered by this article as being in direct violation of
the chapter preventing further occupancy. Posting will occur if any owner,
agent, licensee or other responsible person has been notified by inspection
report of the items which must be corrected within a certain stated period of
time and that the corrections have not been made. Current occupants shall
have not more than 45 days to vacate a posted property. Current occupants
shall vacate posted property immediately if such occupancy will cause
imminent danger to the health or safety of the occupants. No person, other
than the Property Maintenance Enforcement Officer or his representative,
shall remove or tamper with any placard used for posting. No person shall
reside in, occupy or cause to be occupied any building, structure or dwelling
which has been posted to prevent occupancy.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.306  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   When a person to whom a compliance order is directed alleges that such
compliance order is based upon erroneous interpretation of the chapter or
upon a misstatement or mistake of fact, such person may appeal.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.307  BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code
Official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to
appeal to the Board of Appeals, provided that a written application for
appeal is filed within the time given, on the original violation notice, for
the correction of violations. An application for appeal shall be based on a
claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do
not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by
other means.



   (B)   If proper application is made and fees paid, a hearing will be
scheduled with the Board of Appeals.



   (C)   All hearings before the Board shall be open to the public. The
appellant, the appellant's representative, the Code Official and any person
whose interests are affected shall be properly notified of the public hearing
and shall be given an opportunity to be heard.



   (D)   Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger
notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal
is heard by the Appeals Board.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



ARTICLE IV:  OCCUPANCY LICENSING



Section



   5A.401   Occupancy license required



   5A.402   Occupancy license procedures



   5A.403   Application and inspection



   5A.404   Issuance of occupancy license



   5A.405   Occupancy license display



   5A.406   Occupancy license transfer



   5A.407   Occupancy license renewal



   5A.408   Suspension or revocation



   5A.409   License fees



   5A.410   Conduct on licensed premises/crime free/drug free and
disorderly use lease requirements



   5A.411   Background checks



§ 5A.401  OCCUPANCY LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person, firm, government agency or corporation shall own a
premises that is rented, leased, let, or used for any type of occupancy in
the city without having first obtained an occupancy license (license) as
hereinafter provided and outlined in the Property Maintenance Inspection
Policy. Each such licensee shall register annually with the city. If the
license is denied, no occupancy of a premises, then vacant or which become
vacant, is permitted until a license has been issued. Apartment units within
an unlicensed apartment building for which a license application has been
made and which units are in compliance with this chapter may be occupied
provided that the unlicensed units within the apartment building do not
create a hazard to the health and safety of persons in occupied units.



   (B)   Exception.  Owner occupied single-family home occupancies.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



§ 5A.402  OCCUPANCY LICENSE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Thirty days after the passage of this chapter, the owner of
any premises within the city not previously licensed, or, the owner of any
premises whose license expires subsequent to said 30 days shall apply to the
Property Maintenance Enforcement Officer for an occupancy license in the
manner hereafter prescribed.



   (B)   Application shall be made on forms provided by the city and
accompanied by the initial fee in an amount set by resolution of the City
Council. The owner of a premises constructed after the date of passage of
this chapter shall obtain a license prior to actual occupancy of the premises.



   (C)   Applicants shall provide requested information on license
applications which may include, but is not limited to:



      (1)   Name and address of owner of the premises. The owner
must identify a designated property manager responsible for operation and
maintenance of each licensed property. The owner may be the designated
property manager.



      (2)   If the property is owned by a corporation, the name and
address of a corporate officer and a copy of the most recent Articles of
Incorporation is required. The property address or a P.O. box cannot be used
to fulfill this requirement.



      (3)   The name and address of the vendee if the property is
being sold in a contract for deed.



      (4)   The address of the property to be licensed.



      (5)   In residential property the number of dwelling units,
and the number of bedrooms in each dwelling unit. In nonresidential property
the square footage of the building (if wholly used by one occupant), or the
square footage of the individual tenant spaces.



      (6)   The number of paved off-street parking spaces available.



      (7)   Name and address of person to whom owner/applicant
wishes a letters/notices to be sent for purposes of § 5A.304(A).



      (8)   All owners of a premises shall provide contact
information for the owner and property manager, including telephone access
numbers to be used in emergency situations and emergency maintenance and
repair. The owner must provide the city with any contact information changes
occurring within the license period. This requirement shall be a condition
precedent to the issuance of any occupancy license.



      (9)   Such other information as the administrative service
shall require. The information may include, but is not limited to tenant
lists which include tenant's name, unit, and identifying information (such as
date of birth and driver's license number).



      (10)   The owner must submit verification that the crime
free/drug free and disorderly use language required by § 5A.410 is contained
in the licensed property tenant lease or leases.



   (D)   Failure to complete, in full, the required license application
shall be grounds for denial of the license.



   (E)   Dwellings for hire where all units are occupied by the owner
or persons who are the owner's child, stepchild, daughter-in-law, son-in-law,
parent, stepparent, parent-in-law, grandchild, grandparent, brother, brother-
in-law, sister, sister-in-law, aunt or uncle are eligible for a family
exemption per the Property Maintenance Code Inspection Policy.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 1592, passed 5-9-11)



§ 5A.403  APPLICATION AND INSPECTION.



   When required in accordance with the city's "Property Maintenance
Inspection Policy" the Property Maintenance Enforcement Officer shall cause
an inspection to be made of the premises to ensure that the structure is in
compliance with the requirement of the code prior to issuance of an occupancy
license.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.404  ISSUANCE OF OCCUPANCY LICENSE.



   If the premises is in compliance with the requirements of the code, a
license shall be issued to the present owner, occupant or agent and shall
state that the structure/space has been inspected and is in compliance with
the requirements of the code. If the city finds that the circumstances of
occupancy following the issuance of the license involve an occupancy change,
complaint, possible code violations, substandard maintenance or abnormal wear
and tear, the city may again inspect the premises during the licensing period.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.405  OCCUPANCY LICENSE DISPLAY.



   A license issued under this chapter may be conspicuously displayed on
the premises wherever feasible. The licensee shall promptly produce the
license upon demand of a prospective tenant, current tenant or the Property
Maintenance Enforcement Officer or his authorized representative.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.406  OCCUPANCY LICENSE TRANSFER.



   (A)   The license is transferable upon application to the Property
Maintenance Enforcement Officer and payment of the license transfer fee by
the prospective owner if the licensed premises is in compliance with the
code. The license shall terminate if renewal or application for transfer is
not made within 30 days after transfer of ownership of the premises. The
amount of the transfer fee shall be set by resolution of the Council.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises who has
received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been
served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such
premises to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of
violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish
the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance
order or notice of violation issued by the Code Official and shall furnish to
the Code Official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance
order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without
condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance
order or notice of violation.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



§ 5A.407  OCCUPANCY LICENSE RENEWAL.



   (A)   All occupancy licenses shall be effective for a period of one
year. However, renewal of licenses, as required annually by this code, may be
made by:



      (1)   Completing the renewal application furnished to the
owner, operator, or agent of the premises, by the Property Maintenance
Enforcement Officer;



      (2)   Mailing the renewal application and the required fees to
the Property Maintenance Enforcement Officer; and



      (3)   Successful completion of the Property Maintenance Code
inspection as required by § 5A.303.



   (B)   Such renewal shall only be effective upon successful
completion of all the above set forth requirements. Further, said renewal or
registration may be made only when no change in ownership, operation, agency
or type of occupancy of the premises has occurred in the last licensing year.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.408  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)    A license issued or renewed under this section may be revoked
or suspended upon a finding of noncompliance with the provisions of this
chapter. Reinstatement of a suspended or revoked license shall be accompanied
by a fee in an amount set by Council Resolution. Issuance of a new license
after suspension or revocation shall be made in the manner provided for
obtaining an initial license.



   (B)   The Council may, for cause, revoke or suspend a license, or
take other action restricting the privileges of a license subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   The city, through its Property Maintenance Enforcement
Officer, provides the licensee with a written statement or reasons or causes
for the proposed Council action together with a notice for public hearing.



      (2)   The Council shall conduct a public hearing on the
proposed action and provide findings of fact and citations to any ordinances
or regulations that have been violated, together with a statement of action
taken and the conditions of any resulting revocation, suspension, or other
action restricting the privileges of the licensee.



      (3)   The Property Maintenance Enforcement Officer shall
forward the findings and statement of action taken to the person in whose
name said license was issued by mailing the same to the mailing address
indicated on the license application.



   (C)   A violation of any provision of this chapter or of state law,
prescribing standards of conduct or regulations governing a licensee; the
particular type of business or commercial activity or trade or occupation
that is licensed; or the premises where the licensed activity is conducted;
shall be a prima facie showing of cause for revocation, suspension, or other
action restricting the privileges of a licensee as the Council may determine.



   (D)   Nondisclosure, misrepresentation or misstatement of a material
fact in any application for a license under this chapter shall be a prima
facie showing of cause for revocation, suspension, or other such action
restricting the privileges of a licensee as the Council may determine.



   (E)   Any person or owner who has had an interest in two or more
licenses revoked pursuant to this code shall be ineligible to hold or have an
interest in an occupancy license for a period of five years.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.409  LICENSE FEES.



   License fees, license transfer fees, license reinstatement fees,
inspection fees and reinspection fees shall be established by Council
Resolution.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.410  CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES/CRIME FREE/DRUG FREE AND DISORDERLY
USE LEASE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All residential tenant leases, except for state licensed
residential facilities and subject to all preemptory state and federal laws,
shall contain the following, or substantially comparable to, crime free/drug
free and disorderly use language:



      (1)   Crime free/drug free.



         (a)   Resident, any members of the resident's household
or a guest or other person affiliated with resident shall not engage in
criminal activity, including drug-related criminal activity, on or near the
premises.



         (b)   Resident, any member of the resident's household
or a guest or other person affiliated with resident shall not engage in any
act intended to facilitate criminal activity, including drug-related criminal
activity, on or near the premises.



         (c)   Resident or members of the household will not
permit the dwelling unit to be used for, or to facilitate criminal activity,
including drug-related criminal activity, regardless of whether the
individual engaging in such activity is a member of the household, or a guest.



         (d)   Resident, any member of the resident's household
or a guest, or other person affiliated with the resident shall not engage in
the unlawful manufacturing, selling, using, storing, keeping, or giving of a
controlled substance at any locations, whether on or near the premises or
otherwise.



         (e)   Violation of any one of the above provisions shall
be a material and irreparable violation of the lease and good cause for
immediate termination of tenancy.



      (2)   Disorderly use.



         (a)   Resident, members of the resident's household,
guests, or other persons under the resident's control shall not engage in the
following disorderly use activities: violations of state law relating to
alcoholic beverages, trespassing or disorderly conduct, and violations of the
city code relating to prohibited noise.



         (b)   Three disorderly use violations involving the same
tenancy within a continuous 12-month period shall be a substantial and
material violation of the lease and good cause for termination of the tenancy.



      (3)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.  Prostitution, gambling, maintaining or
conducting a disorderly house, unlawful possession, transportation, sale or
use of a weapon, domestic assault, delinquency of a minor, criminal street
gang activity, threatening, intimidating or assaultive behavior, the unlawful
discharge of firearms, or any other criminal activity on or near the premises
that jeopardizes the health, safety and welfare of the landlord, his agent,
other resident, neighbor or other third party, or involving imminent or
actual serious property damage.



         DRUG RELATED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.  The illegal manufacture,
sale, distribution, use or possession with intent to manufacture, sell,
distribute, or use of a controlled substance or any substance represented to
be drugs (as defined in § 102 of the Controlled Substance Act [21 U.S.C.
802]).



      (4)   Non-exclusive remedies.



         (a)   The crime free/drug free and disorderly use
provisions are in addition to all other terms of the lease and do not limit
or replace any other provisions.



   (B)   These lease provisions shall be incorporated into every new
lease for a tenancy beginning January 1, 2008 and all renewed leases by
January 1, 2009.



   (C)   Upon determination by the Police Department that a licensed
premises or unit within a licensed premises was used in violation of the
crime free/drug free provisions of subdivision (A)(1) herein, the Police
Department shall cause notice to be made to the owner and property manager of
the violation. The owner or property manager shall notify the tenant or
tenants within ten days of the notice of violation of the crime free/drug
free lease language and proceed with termination of the tenancy of all
tenants occupying the unit. The owner shall not enter into a new lease for a
unit located in any licensed property within the city with an evicted tenant
for a period of one year after the eviction.



   (D)   Upon determination by the Police Department that a licensed
premises or unit within a licensed premises was used for disorderly use
activities as set forth in subdivision (A)(2) herein, the Police Department
shall cause notice to be made to the owner and property manager of the
violation and direct the owner and property manager to take steps to prevent
further disorderly use violations.



   (E)   If a second disorderly use violation as determined by the
Police Department occurs within a continuous 12-month period involving the
same tenancy, the Police Department shall cause notice to be made to the
owner and property manager of the second violation. The owner or property
manager shall respond in writing within ten days of receipt of the notice
with an action plan to prevent further disorderly use violations.



   (F)   If a third disorderly use violation as determined by the
Police Department occurs within a continuous 12-month period involving the
same tenancy, the Police Department shall cause notice to be made to the
owner and property manager of the third violation. The owner or property
manager shall notify the tenant or tenants within ten days of the notice of
disorderly use violation of the crime free/drug free lease language within
the lease and proceed with termination of the tenancy of all tenants
occupying the unit. The owner shall not enter into a new lease for a unit
located in any licensed property with an evicted tenant within the city for a
period of one year after the eviction.



   (G)   The provisions of divisions (C), (D), (E) and (F) herein do
not apply if the determination that the premises have been used in violation
of the crime free/drug free provisions of subdivisions (A)(1) and (A)(2)
herein originates from a call from or at the request of one or more tenants
occupying the premises for police or emergency assistance, or in the case of
domestic abuse, from a call for assistance from any source. The term DOMESTIC
ABUSE has the meaning given in M.S. § 518B.01, subd. 2.



   (H)   If the licensee fails to comply with the requirements of this
section, the rental dwelling license for the premises may be denied, revoked,
suspended, or not renewed. An action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a
license under this section shall be initiated by the City Council at the
request of the Police Department in the manner described in § 5A.408.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 1592, passed 5-9-11)



§ 5A.411  BACKGROUND CHECKS.



   (A)   Criminal background check required.  The city is interested
in rental property owners being well informed about a prospective renter's
past criminal history, regardless of whether or not the owner decides to
enter into a lease with the prospective tenant.  Therefore, the licensee
shall conduct criminal background checks on all prospective tenants.  The
criminal background check must include the following:



      (1)   A statewide (Minnesota) criminal history check of all
prospective tenants covering at least the last seven years.  The checks must
be done by utilizing the most recent update of the Minnesota Bureau of
Criminal Apprehension's criminal history files;



      (2)   A statewide criminal history check from the prospective
tenant's previous state of residence shall be conducted if the tenant is
moving directly from the previous state;



      (3)   A criminal history check of any prospective tenant in
their previous states of residence shall be conducted covering the last seven
years if they have not resided in Minnesota for three years or longer;



      (4)   A statewide (Minnesota) court history check of all
prospective tenants covering at least the last seven years.  This check,
which includes Unlawful Detainer actions, can be done utilizing the most
recent update of the Minnesota Judicial Branch Trial Court Public Access
database.



   (B)   Any company that the licensee contract with to conduct
criminal history checks must meet the same standards as established above.



   (C)   Documentation of the criminal background checks must be kept
on file by the property owner for the length of the tenant’s lease.  The
lessor must display documentation of the background check upon request by the
Police Department.



   (D)   If the licensee fails to comply with the requirements of this
section, the rental dwelling license for the premises may be denied, revoked,
suspended, or not renewed.  An action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew
a license under this section shall be initiated by the City Council at the
request of the Police Department in the manner described in § 5A.408.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 1592, passed 5-9-11)



ARTICLE V:  REMEDIES



Section



   5A.501   Hazardous building declaration



   5A.502   Secure unfit and vacated structures



   5A.503   Demolition



   5A.504   Failure to comply



   5A.505   Remedies cumulative



   5A.506   Cost recovery



§ 5A.501  HAZARDOUS BUILDING DECLARATION.



   In the event that a premises has been declared unfit for human
habitation and the owner/tenant has not remedied the effects within a
prescribed reasonable time, the premises may be declared hazardous and
treated in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes.



   (A)   Unsafe structures.  An unsafe structure is one that is found
to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or
warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains
unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe
or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or
complete collapse is possible.



   (B)   Unsafe equipment.  Unsafe equipment includes any boiler,
heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device,
flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the
structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a
hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the
premises or structure.



   (C)   Structure unfit for human occupancy.  A structure is unfit
for human occupancy whenever the Code Official finds that such structure is
unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in
disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, contains a large accumulation
of storage or debris which causes a dangerous increase to the fire load and
prevents the normal use of equipment within the structure, vermin infested,
contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination,
sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this
code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the
occupants of the structure or to the public.



   (D)   Unlawful structure.  An unlawful structure is one found in
whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this
code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to city code.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.502  SECURE UNFIT AND VACATED STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Closing of vacant structures.  If the structure is vacant and
unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural
collapse, the Code Official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation
on the premises and notify the owner, to order the structure closed up so as
not to constitute a public nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up
the premises within the time specified in the order, the Code Official shall
cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public
agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons. Cost to close and
secure structures shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.



   (B)   Notice.  Whenever the Code Official has condemned a structure
or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in
a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and
served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or
equipment.



   (C)   Placarding.  Upon failure of the owner or person responsible
to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the Code Official
shall post on the  premises or on defective equipment a placard condemning
the structure or equipment and a statement of the penalties provided for
occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.



   (D)   Placard removal.  The Code Official shall remove the
condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any
person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of
the Code Official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.



   (E)   Prohibited occupancy.  Any occupied structure condemned and
placarded by the Code Official shall be vacated as ordered by the Code
Official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate
placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises
who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded
equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



§ 5A.503  DEMOLITION.



   The demolition of hazardous structures shall be in accordance with M.S.
§ 463.00.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.504  FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   Upon failure to comply with a compliance order within the time set
therein, and no appeal having been taken, or upon failure to comply with a
modified compliance order within the time set therein, the criminal penalty
established hereunder notwithstanding, the City Council, after due notice to
the owner, may by resolution declare the condition to constitute a public
nuisance and cause the cited deficiency to be remedied as set forth in the
compliance order. The cost of such remedy shall be a lien against the subject
real estate and may be levied and collected as a special assessment in
accordance with M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time, for
abatement of nuisances and specifically for the removal or elimination of
public health or safety hazards from private property. Any assessment levied
thereunder shall be payable in a single installment unless a different
payment schedule is authorized by Council resolution. The intent of this
section is to authorize the city to utilize all of the provisions of this
code and of Minnesota law to protect the public's health, safety and general
welfare.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.505  REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.



   Any remedies pursued under §§ 5A.501 to 5A.503, are in addition to
the remedies or penalties prescribed under §§ 5A.601 to 5A.602.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



§ 5A.506  COST RECOVERY.



   (A)   The Council hereby authorizes the assessment of unpaid fees,
fines, charges or expenses authorized by the Property Maintenance Code
pursuant to the provisions of the Columbia Heights City Charter.



   (B)   The Treasurer shall establish an improvement fund for the
administration of Residential Maintenance Code charges. The costs related to
the Residential Maintenance Code shall be certified annually by the Housing
Enforcement Officer to the Treasurer for billing, including a statement
describing the land, lots, or parcels involved and the amount chargeable to
each.



   (C)   On or before October 1 of each year, or as required by
statute, the Treasurer shall bill each property owner of each affected lot or
parcel for their portion of the charges authorized hereunder plus the
reasonable cost of administering the billings and collection procedures.



   (D)   The Treasurer shall list the total unpaid charges against each
separate lot or parcel to which such charges are attributable on or before
November 1 of each year, or as required by statute, for Council action
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07; Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



ARTICLE VI:  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES



Section



   5A.601   Violations



   5A.602   Penalty



§ 5A.601  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or licensee shall own and
maintain or operate or rent to any other person for occupancy any premises,
or any part of a premises, which is in violation of Chapter 5A, Article II
(§§ 5A.201et seq.), maintenance standard.



   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall operate a premises
without a license issued pursuant to this chapter or accept payments from a
tenant of any unlicensed premises which payment is for occupancy for a period
during which the premises is not licensed pursuant to this chapter.



   (C)   No person, firm, corporation or licensee shall refuse or fail
to allow the Property Maintenance Enforcement Officer to enter a premises
pursuant to an administrative search warrant for the purposes of inspection
when authorized by this chapter.



   (D)   No person, firm, corporation or licensee shall fail or refuse
to obey a compliance order validly issued under this code.



   (E)   No person, firm or corporation shall give or submit false
information on a license application or any renewal thereof.



   (F)   No person who is an occupant of an occupancy shall cause the
premises on which an occupancy is located to become in violation of any of
the maintenance standards set forth in Chapter 5A, Article II (§§ 5A.201et
seq.), normal wear and tear excepted.



   (G)   No person shall occupy a premises if such premises is required
to be licensed under this chapter.



   (H)   No person may occupy a premises posted pursuant to § 5A.304.



   (I)   No person, firm or corporation, including an owner, licensee
or occupant, shall remove or tamper with a placard used for posting property
pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 5A.602



§ 5A.602  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, unless
herein specifically noted. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute
a separate offense.



(Ord. 1532, passed 11-26-07)



CHAPTER 5B:  ABANDONED PROPERTY



   Article



      I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      II.   DETERMINATION OF ABANDONED PROPERTY



      III.   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY



      IV.   ADMINISTRATION



      V.   APPEALS



      VI.   VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY



ARTICLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   5B.101   Purpose



   5B.102   Intent; relation to other code provisions



   5B.103   Definitions



§ 5B.101  PURPOSE.



   Abandoned buildings that are not maintained contribute to the detriment
of neighborhoods, increase crime, and diminish property values of a city. For
the benefit of the community, the City of Columbia Heights has deemed it
necessary and appropriate to maintain, preserve and improve housing by
providing an orderly and effective way to ensure compliance with housing
codes and provide a system to increase concerns for health, safety and
protection of the community. 



(Ord. 1559, passed 11-24-08)



§ 5B.102  INTENT; RELATION TO OTHER CODE PROVISIONS.



   The City Council intends that this chapter be an integral part of the
city’s program of health, safety, fire, building and land use regulation.
It shall be a portion of this code, to be construed liberally in conjunction
with other provisions of this code to give effect to the policy, purpose, and
objectives in this chapter, but is not to be construed to modify, amend or
otherwise alter the provisions of this code relating to health, safety, or
building and land use regulations.



(Ord. 1559, passed 11-24-08)



§ 5B.103  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED PROPERTY. The discontinued use or activity of a property for
any reason, but excluding temporary interruptions during periods of building
or remodeling where a valid building permit has been issued or during periods
of routine seasonal closure.



   BOARD OF APPEALS. The Columbia Heights City Council.



   BUILDING. Any roofed structure that may provide shelter.



   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A document issued by the Building Official
allowing for occupancy or use of a building, and certifying that the
structure or use has been constructed or will be used in compliance with all
the applicable codes and ordinances.



   CODE OFFICIAL.  The current city Building Official or designee.



   COMPLIANCE ORDER.  A document issued to the owner of a property after
a Building Code inspection that requires the correction of identified
deficiencies or hazardous items. 



   IMMEDIATE HAZARD. A condition, structural failure, or defect that is
likely to cause immediate injury to a person or property if not corrected.



   PROPERTY. Real estate, including any improvements therein.



   RENEWAL FEE. Fee paid for new certificate of occupancy, which includes
related inspections.



   VANDALIZE. To destroy or damage (property) maliciously.



(Ord. 1559, passed 11-24-08)



ARTICLE II:  DETERMINATION OF ABANDONED PROPERTY



Section



   5B.201   Investigation



   5B.202   Declaration of abandoned property



§ 5B.201  INVESTIGATION.



   The Code Official, or designee, shall be responsible for the
investigation of all properties or complaints concerning vacant or abandoned
property.



(Ord. 1559, passed 11-24-08)



§ 5B.202  DECLARATION OF ABANDONED PROPERTY.



   The Code Official shall declare a property abandoned if the property is
vacant and there is evidence of one or more of the following:



   (A)   Reoccurring city abatement processes.



   (B)   Building has been declared uninhabitable.



   (C)   Vandalized structures.



   (D)   Lack of exterior maintenance per Housing Maintenance Code
standards.



   (E)   Repeated calls for service (police, fire, and the like).



   (F)   Structural damage.



   (G)   Utility service shut off pursuant to delinquent
billing/payments.



   (H)   Property abandoned through M.S. § 582.032, subd.2.



(Ord. 1559, passed 11-24-08)



ARTICLE III:  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY



Section



   5B.301   Revocation of certificate of occupancy



   5B.302   Notification of revocation



   5B.303   Building Code inspection



   5B.304   Issuance of temporary certificate of occupancy with
financial guarantee



§ 5B.301  REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   If a property is declared abandoned as defined in § 5B.103, the
property’s certificate of occupancy will be revoked, and the property will
be posted to prevent occupancy.



(Ord. 1559, passed 11-24-08)



§ 5B.302  NOTIFICATION OF REVOCATION.



   The city will make every effort to notify the current property owner;
real estate agent; asset manager; or any other individual known to the city
that is involved in the transaction for sale of the property of these actions
by way of U.S. mail and by posting the same on the property.



(Ord. 1559, passed 11-24-08)



§ 5B.303  BUILDING CODE INSPECTION.



   Once the certificate of occupancy has been revoked for a property, a
Building Code inspection must take place prior to a new certificate of
occupancy being issued.



   (A)   The Building Code inspection may result in corrective actions.
A compliance order may be issued to the owner when deficiencies, unsafe
conditions, or hazardous items have been identified during a housing
inspection as described in the Columbia Heights Property Maintenance Code
(Chapter 5A) and the Minnesota State Building Code provisions.



   (B)   The corrective actions must be completed and pass inspection
by the Code Official in order to have a new certificate of occupancy issued
for the property.



   (C)   If corrective actions are not warranted a new certificate of
occupancy will be issued by the Code Official.



(Ord. 1559, passed 11-24-08)  Penalty, see § 5B.601



§ 5B.304  ISSUANCE OF TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY WITH FINANCIAL
GUARANTEE.



   For corrective actions the city may issue a temporary certificate of
occupancy if the buyer, seller or other responsible person has:



   (A)   Executed an agreement with the city to complete the correction
actions in a timely manner; and



   (B)   Deposited with the city a cash escrow, bond, letter of credit,
proof of construction loan or similar financial guarantee equivalent to 110%
of the estimated cost of corrections.



      (1)   If escrowed items contain immediate hazardous items, the
temporary certificate of occupancy will be withheld from the new property
owner until these items are satisfactorily completed and inspected by the
Code Official; until that time the building may not be occupied.



      (2)   Once the correction items have been completed and are in
compliance with the Property Maintenance Code as approved by the Code
Official, a new certificate of occupancy can be issued replacing the
temporary certificate.



(Ord. 1559, passed 11-24-08)  Penalty, see § 5B.601



ARTICLE IV:  ADMINISTRATION



Section



   5B.401   Application and inspection



§ 5B.401  APPLICATION AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   Application required.  The owner or owner’s representative
is required to make application for the issuance of a new certificate of
occupancy, which would include the inspection by the Code Official.



   (B)   Fee. At the time of issuance, the applicant for a new
certificate of occupancy must pay a fee appropriate for the type of building
as set forth by annual City Council resolution.



   (C)   Inspection. Upon receipt of a properly executed application
and payment of the fee, the Code Official will cause a property maintenance
inspection to be made of the premises to ensure the property is in compliance
with applicable provisions of the City of Columbia Heights Property
Maintenance Code (Chapter 5A) and the Minnesota State Building Code.



   (D)   Final inspection. Upon completion of repairs or corrections
made to the property per the compliance order, the property owner shall
request the Code Official to conduct a final inspection, which may be
combined with final building permit inspection, where required.



(Ord. 1559, passed 11-24-08)  Penalty, see § 5B.601



ARTICLE V:  APPEALS



Section



   5B.501   Appeals



§ 5B.501  APPEALS.



   A person aggrieved by a declaration of abandoned property or compliance
order may appeal for relief from the action of the Code Official to the City
of Columbia Heights Board of Appeals. The decision and order of the Board of
Appeals shall be binding to all parties. A hearing shall be set within 30
days after receipt to the city of a written appeal.



(Ord. 1559, passed 11-24-08)



ARTICLE VI:  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY



Section



   5B.601   Violations and penalty



§ 5B.601  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in § 1.999.  Each day that a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 1559, passed 11-24-08)



CHAPTER 6:  BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION



   Article



      I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      II.   CONSTRUCTION CODES



      III.   USE OF PUBLIC WAYS



      IV.   RESERVED



      V.   SWIMMING POOLS



      VI.   SEPTIC TANKS



      VII.   RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS IN COMMERCIAL AREAS



      VIII.   COMPLIANCE



      IX.   PRIVATE WELLS



      X.   SNOW HAULING AND DUMPING



ARTICLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   6.101   Administrative duties



§ 6.101  ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES.



   (A)   At least one copy of every code, ordinance and regulation
adopted herein by reference shall be on file and available for public
inspection at the City Clerk’s Office.



   (B)   The Building Official for the city shall exercise all duties
and functions pertaining to inspections as may be prescribed for persons of a
similar title description in codes or ordinances adopted and contained herein
by reference.



   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided, permits required under
this chapter shall be issued by the city official charged with the
responsibility for enforcement of the particular section under which the
permit is required, after processing of the applications.



      (2)   Where a fee is prescribed for any such permit, the
permit applicant shall pay said fee to the Clerk and obtain a receipt to be
shown to the issuing official.



   (D)   The Council shall prescribe fees for permits required under
this chapter by annual resolution.  Fees shall be considered as continuing
in force in the event of failure to pass such resolution in any year.  Such
annual resolution may be amended from time to time.



   (E)   The Building Official, before issuing any certificate of code
compliance or making any prerequisite inspection, shall first require the
payment by the applicant of such fees as are prescribed by resolution of the
Council.  No code compliance inspections may be made unless the applicant
first agrees that the city, the Building Official, or their employees,
servants, and agents shall assume no liability whatsoever for errors and
omissions arising out of such inspections.



(`77 Code, § 6.101)  (Am. Ord. 921, passed 10-14-80; Am. Ord. 1535, passed
9-8-08)



ARTICLE II:  CONSTRUCTION CODES



Section



   6.201   Minnesota State Building Code adopted



   6.202   Housing Code adopted



   6.203   Electrical Inspector



   6.204   Plumbing Inspector



   6.205   Gas Piping Inspector



   6.206   Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning, or Refrigeration
Inspector



   6.207   Manufactured homes



§ 6.201  MINNESOTA STATE BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   Codes adopted by reference.  The Minnesota State Building
Code, as adopted by the Commissioner of Labor and Industry pursuant to M.S.
§§ 16B.59 to 16B.75, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations
established, adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota
Commissioner of Labor and Industry, through the Building Codes and Standards
Unit is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the optional
chapters, unless specifically adopted in this section.  The Minnesota State
Building Code is hereby incorporated in this section as if fully set out
herein.



   (B)   Application, administration and enforcement.



       (1)   The application, administration and enforcement of the
code shall be in accordance with Minnesota State Building Code.  The code
shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. §
16B.62, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time, when so established
by this section.



      (2)   The code enforcement agency of the city is called the
Protective Inspections Department.



      (3)   This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified
Building Official designated by the city to administer the code (M.S. §
16B.65, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time).



   (C)   Permits and fees.



      (1)   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall
be as authorized in M.S. § 16B.62, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time
to time.



      (2)   Permit fees.  The issuance of permits and the
collection of fees shall be as authorized in M.S. § 326B.153,  Therefore,
fees for permits and plan reviews will be assessed in accordance with the fee
schedule adopted by reference.  In addition, a surcharge fee shall be
collected on all permits issued for work governed by the Minnesota State
Building Code in accordance with M.S. § 326B.148.



   (D)   Violations and penalties.  A violation of the code is a
misdemeanor (M.S. § 16B.69, as it may be amended from time to time).



   (E)   Building code optional chapters.



      (1)   The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant
to M.S. §§ 16B.59 to 16B.75, as they many be amended from time to time,
allows the municipality to adopt by reference and enforce certain optional
chapters of the most current edition of the Minnesota State Building Code.



      (2)   The following optional provisions identified in the most
current edition of the State Building Code are hereby adopted and
incorporated as part of the building code for this municipality:



         (a)   Chapter 1306 with option subpart 2;



         (b)   Appendix J.



(`77 Code, § 6.201)  (Am. Ord. 921, passed 10-14-80; Am. Ord. 1172, passed
9-26-88; Am. Ord. 1216, passed 4-13-92; Am. Ord. 1309, passed 11-13-95; Am.
Ord. 1344, passed 5-12-97; Am. Ord. 1378, passed 11-23-98; Am. Ord. 1456,
passed 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 1528, passed 8-13-07; Am. Ord. 1574, passed 6-14-10)



§ 6.202  HOUSING CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   The Uniform Housing Code, most recent edition, as amended,
International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted by
reference to regulate housing construction and maintenance standards within
the city.  Every provision contained in the Uniform Housing Code is hereby
adopted and made a part of this code as if fully set forth herein, except as
hereinafter provided.  The short title of the Uniform Housing Code shall be
the "Housing Code."  Three copies of the Housing Code shall be on file and
available for inspection at the office of the City Building Official.



   (B)   (1)   Section H-203 of the Housing Code is hereby deleted
and the following words shall be substituted:



         In order to provide for final interpretation of the
provisions of this code and to hear appeals provided for hereunder, a Housing
Advisory and Appeals Board is hereby established.  The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall serve as and exercise all powers of the Housing Advisory and
Appeal Board, as provided in the Housing Code.  The Building Official shall
also be an ex-officio member of the Housing Advisory and Appeals Board.



      (2)   The Board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for
conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appellant with a copy to the Building Official.  Appeals to
the Board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in
Section H-1201 of the Housing Code.  Copies of all rules or regulations
adopted by the Board shall be delivered to the Building Official who shall
make them freely accessible to the public.



   (C)   In Section 401 of the Housing Code, the definition of Building
Code is amended to provide that the Building Code is the Minnesota State
Building Code.



   (D)   In Section 401 of the Housing Code, the definition of
Mechanical Code is amended to provided that the Mechanical Code is the
Minnesota Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning, and Refrigeration Code.



(`77 Code, § 6.202)  (Am. Ord. 1059, passed 10-11-83; Am. Ord. 1172, passed
9-26-88)



§ 6.203  ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.



   The Electrical Inspector for the city shall exercise all duties and
functions pertaining to inspections as may be prescribed by the code for
persons of a similar title description.  Where the city has engaged an
Electrical Inspector to work under the Building Official, the Building
Official shall exercise all supervisory duties and functions pertaining to
inspections as may be prescribed by the code for persons of a similar title
description.



(`77 Code, § 6.203)  (Am. Ord. 921, passed 10-14-80)



§ 6.204  PLUMBING INSPECTOR.



   The Plumbing Inspector for the city shall exercise all duties and
functions pertaining to inspections as may be prescribed by the code for
persons of a similar title description.  Where the city has engaged a
Plumbing Inspector to work under the Building Official, the Building Official
shall exercise all supervisory duties and functions pertaining to inspections
as may be prescribed by the code for persons of a similar title description.



(`77 Code, § 6.204)  (Am. Ord. 921, passed 10-14-80)



§ 6.205  GAS PIPING INSPECTOR.



   The Gas Piping Inspector for the city shall exercise all duties and
functions pertaining to inspections as may be prescribed by the code for
persons of a similar title description.  Where the city has engaged a Gas
Piping Inspector to work under the Building Official, the Building Official
shall exercise all supervisory duties and functions pertaining to inspections
as may be prescribed by the code for persons of a similar title description.



(`77 Code, § 6.205)  (Am. Ord. 921, passed 10-14-80)



§ 6.206  HEATING, VENTILATION, AIR CONDITIONING, OR REFRIGERATION INSPECTOR.



   The Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning, or Refrigeration Inspector
for the city shall exercise all duties and functions pertaining to
inspections as may be prescribed by the code for persons of a similar title
description.  Where the city has engaged a Heating, Ventilation, Air
Conditioning, or Refrigeration Inspector to work under the Building Official,
the Building Official shall exercise all supervisory duties and functions
pertaining to inspections as may be prescribed by the code for persons of a
similar title description.



(`77 Code, § 6.206)  (Am. Ord. 921, passed 10-14-80)



§ 6.207  MANUFACTURED HOMES.



   (A)   Definitions in this section shall be those contained in M.S.
§§ 327.31 to 327.36, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   All lot area, lot width, yard sizes, and setbacks for
manufactured homes shall be the same as for other residential dwellings
within the appropriate zone.



   (C)   All minimum square footage requirements pertaining to dwelling
size for manufactured homes shall be the same as for other residential
dwellings within the appropriate zone, and each home shall have a width of
not less than 24 feet.



   (D)   (1)   All manufactured homes must be attached to a
continuous perimeter foundation extending below frost depth that meets the
requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code.



      (2)   No manufactured home shall be constructed or occupied
within the city unless the Building Official has first approved the method of
attachment or "tie downs" of the home to the perimeter footings.



   (E)   All roofs on manufactured homes shall have a minimum roof
slope of 3:1 (three inch rise per one foot run) and shall be covered with
approved roofing material excluding metal panels.



   (F)   All manufactured homes shall have eaves extending a minimum of
16 inches beyond the perimeter of the home.



   (G)   All manufactured homes must have finished exterior walls made
of approved materials excluding metal panels.



   (H)   No manufactured home may be constructed or occupied unless it
first meets the standards set by the manufactured home building code.



(`77 Code, § 6.207)  (Am. Ord. 1010, passed 9-27-82)



ARTICLE III:  USE OF PUBLIC WAYS



Section



   6.301   Right-of-way management



   6.302   Transportation of buildings



   6.303   Courtesy benches



   6.304   Newsstands



§ 6.301  RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The city holds the right-of-way within its geographical
boundaries as an asset in trust for its citizens. The city and other public
entities have invested substantial dollars in public funds to build and
maintain the right-of-way. The city also recognizes that by placing other
utility equipment in the right-of-way for the purpose of delivering services
to the citizens of the city also is a public use of this property for the
public good. Although such services are necessary or convenient for the
citizens, other persons or entities receive revenue and/or profit through
their use of public property. Although the installation of such service
delivery facilities are in most cases a necessary and proper use of
right-of-way, the city must regulate and manage such uses.



      (2)   To provide for the health, safety and well-being of its
citizens, and to ensure the structural integrity of its streets and the
appropriate use of the rights-of-way, the city strives to keep its
right-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary
encumbrances. Although the general population bears the financial burden for
the upkeep of the right-of-way, one of the causes for the early and excessive
deterioration of its right-of-way is frequent excavation.



      (3)   This section imposes reasonable regulations on the
placement and maintenance of equipment currently within its right-of-way or
to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to complement the
regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this section, persons
disturbing and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear a fair share of the
financial responsibility for their integrity.



      (4)   This section shall be interpreted consistently with 1997
Session Laws, Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16,
237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the "Act"), as they may be
amended from time to time, and the other laws governing applicable rights of
the city and users of the right-of-way. This chapter shall also be
interpreted consistent with Minn. Rules parts 7819.0050 through 7819.9950, as
they may be amended from time to time, where possible. To the extent any
provision of this section cannot be interpreted consistently with the
Minnesota Rules, that interpretation most consistent with the Act and other
applicable statutory and case law is intended. This section shall not be
interpreted to limit regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and
enforce general ordinance necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the public.



   (B)   Election to manage the public rights-of-way.  Pursuant to the
authority granted to the city under state and federal statutory
administrative and common law, the city hereby elects pursuant M.S. §
237.163, subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, to manage
right-of-way within its jurisdiction.



   (C)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      APPLICANT.  Is the person or entity requesting permission to
excavate or obstruct a right-of-way.



      CITY.  For purposes of this section, CITY means the City of
Columbia Heights and its elected officials, officers, employees, agents or
any commission, committee or sub-division acting pursuant to lawfully
delegated authority.



      CITY COST.  The actual cost incurred by the city for public
rights-of-way management; including but not limited to costs associated with
registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way
permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving facilities during public
right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration;
restoring work inadequately performed; mapping of "as built" locations of
facilities located in rights-of-way; and revoking right-of-way permits and
performing all other tasks required by this section, including other costs
the city may incur in managing the provisions of this section.



      DEGRADATION.  The accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way
caused by excavation or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the
need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the
excavation did not occur.



      DEGRADATION COST.  Money paid to the city to cover the cost
associated with a decrease in the useful life of a public right-of-way caused
by excavation.



      EMERGENCY.  A condition that 1) poses a clear and immediate
danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property; or 2)
requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore service to a
customer.



      EQUIPMENT.  Any tangible thing or asset used to install, repair
or maintain facilities in any right-of-way; but shall not include boulevard
plantings or gardens planted or maintained in the right-of-way between a
person's property and the street curb.



      EXCAVATE.  To dig into or in any way remove or physically
disturb or penetrate any part of a right-of-way.



      PERMIT.  A permit issued pursuant to this section.



      PERMIT HOLDER. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or place
equipment or facilities in a right-of-way has been granted by the city under
this section.



      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, cart way, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which
the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel
purposes and utility easements of the city. It shall also include utility
easements along side and rear lot lines. A right-of-way does not include the
airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other non-wire
telecommunications or broadcast service.



      REGISTRANT.  Any person who has or seeks to have its facilities
or equipment located in any right-of-way.



      RESTORE or RESTORATION.  The process by which the right-of-way
and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the
condition that existed before the commencement of the work.



      RESTORATION COST.  Money paid to the city by a permittee to
cover the cost of restoration.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The surface and space above and below a public
roadway, highway, street, cart way, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which
the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel
purposes and utility easements owned by the city for city utility purposes.



      SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE.  Includes but is not limited to 1)
those services provided by a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02,
subds. 4 and 6. as they may be amended from time to time; 2)
telecommunications, pipeline, community antenna television, fire and alarm
communications, water, sewer, electricity, light, heat, cooling energy, or
power services; 3) the services provided by a corporation organized for the
purposes set forth in M.S. § 300.03, as it may be amended from time to time;
4) the services provided by a district heating or cooling system; and 5)
cable communications systems as defined in M.S. Chapter 238, as it may be
amended from time to time.



      TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.  A person owning or
controlling a facility in the public rights-of-way, or seeking to own or
control a facility in the public right-of-way, that is used or is intended to
be used for transporting telecommunication or other voice or data
information. For purposes of this section, a cable communication system
defined and regulated under M.S. Chapter 238, as it may be amended from time
to times, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas
or electric energy services are not telecommunications right-of-way users.



   (D)   Administration.  The Public Works Director is the principal
city official responsible for the administration of the right-of-way permits,
and the ordinances related thereto. The Public Works Director may delegate
any or all of the duties hereunder.



      (1)   Registration requirements.



         (a)   Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy
or use the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the
right-of-way, including persons with installations and maintenance
responsibilities by lease, sublease, or assignment, must register with the
city. Registration will consist of providing application information and
paying a registration fee.



         (b)   No person shall construct, install, repair,
remove, relocate or perform any work within any right-of-way without first
being registered pursuant to this division. Such registration shall be made
on an application form provided by the city and shall be accompanied by the
registration fee required by the city. All right-of-way registration fees
shall be set forth in the City of Columbia Heights licensing fee section.



      (2)   Registration information.  The registrant shall provide
the following information at the time of registration and shall promptly
notify the city of changes in such information:



         (a)   Registrant's name, address, telephone number,
facsimile number and Gopher One-Call registration certificate number if
required by state law.



         (b)   Name, address, e-mail address, telephone number,
and facsimile number of the person responsible for fulfilling the obligations
of the registrant.



         (c)   A certificate of insurance from a company licensed
to do business in the State of Minnesota providing coverage in the following
amounts:



            1.   Public liability, including premises,
products and complete operations.



 


Bodily injury liability

 

$1,000,000 each person



$2,000,000 each occurrence




Property damage liability

 

$2,000,000 each occurrence




Bodily injury and property and damage combined

 

$2,000,000 single limit




 



            2.   Automobile liability insurance, including
owned, non-owned and hired vehicles.



 


Bodily injury liability

 

$1,000,000 each person



$2,000,000 each occurrence




Property damage liability

 

$2,000,000 each occurrence




In lieu of the above bodily injury and property damage combined

 

$2,000,000 single limit




 



            3.   Such certificate shall verify that the
registrant is insured against claims for personal injury, including death, as
well as claims for property damage arising out of the (i) use and occupancy
of the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and
permittees, and (ii) placement and use of equipment or facilities in the
rights-of-way by the registrant its officers, agents, employees and
permittees, including but not limited to, protection against liability
arising from completed operations, damage of underground equipment and
collapse of property. Such certificate shall also indicate the registrant's
insurance is the primary coverage, shall name the city as an additional
insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable
and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages. Such
certificate shall require that the city be notified 30 days prior to
cancellation or non-renewal of the policy.



         (d)   Twenty-four-hour emergency number.



         (e)   An acknowledgment by the registrant of the
indemnification.



         (f)   Such other information the city may require.



      (3)   Exceptions.  The following are not subject to the
requirements of this division:



         (a)   Persons planting or maintaining boulevard
plantings or gardens.



         (b)   Persons or individual erecting fences, installing
driveways, sidewalks, curb and gutter, or parking lots.



         (c)   Persons engaged in snow removal activities.



         (d)   Federal, state, county, and city agencies.



         (e)   Persons installing pet containment systems.



         (f)   Plumbers licensed in accordance with city code.



         (g)   Persons acting as agents, contractors or
subcontractors for a registrant who has properly registered in accordance
with this division.



      (4)   Term.  Registrations issued pursuant to this section
shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year.



   (E)   Reporting obligations.



      (1)   Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and
by December l of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan
for underground facilities with the city. Such plan shall be submitted using
a format designated by the city and shall contain the information determined
by the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in
the frequency of excavations and obstructions of right-of-way.



      (2)   The plan should include, but not be limited to, the
following information:



         (a)   The locations and the estimated beginning and
ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year;
and



         (b)   To the extent known, the tentative locations and
estimated beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the
five years following the next calendar year. The term "project" in this
section shall include both next-year projects and five-year projects.



      (3)   By January 1 of each year the city will have available
for inspection in the city's office a composite list of all projects for
which the city has been informed of the annual plans. All registrants are
responsible for keeping themselves informed on the current status of this
list.



      (4)   Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change
any projects in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and
all other registrants of all such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of
another registrant listed by the other registrant.



      (5)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city will not deny an
application for a rights-of-way permit for failure to include a project in a
plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used commercially reasonable
efforts to anticipate and plan for a project.



   (F)   Permit required; bond; exceptions.  No person shall excavate,
dig, tunnel, trench, or install any facilities, equipment or improvements
above, on, or beneath the surface of any right-of-way in the city or any
property owned by the city without first obtaining a permit pursuant to this
subsection.



      (a)   Permit-excavation.  An excavation permit is required by
a registrant to excavate any part of the right-of-way described in such
permit to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of
rights-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for
the duration specified therein.



      (b)   Permit-obstruction.  A permit is also required by a
registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of
right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on or above the
right-of-way to the extent and for the duration of the permit.



   (G)   Application fee.  An application for a permit shall be made
on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by the fees set forth
by the city which are established to reimburse the city for associated costs.
If the work is to be performed by an agent, contractor or subcontractor on
behalf of a registrant, the registrant shall sign such application. The
application shall also be accompanied by the following:



      (1)   Scaled drawings showing the location of all facilities
and improvements proposed by the applicant.



      (2)   A description of the methods that will be used for
installation.



      (3)   A proposed schedule for all work.



      (4)   The location of any public streets, sidewalks or alleys
that will be temporarily closed to traffic during the work.



      (5)   The location of any public streets, sidewalks or alleys
that will be disrupted by the work.



      (6)   A description of methods for restoring any public
improvements disrupted by the work.



      (7)   Any other information reasonably required by the Public
Works Director or City Engineer.



      (8)   Residents over the age of 62 will be required to pay a
permit fee of $35 per excavation.



   (H)   Security.  A surety bond, letter of credit or cash deposit in
the amount determined by the Public Works Director or City Manager but not
less than $5,000, shall be required from each applicant. A surety bond shall
be from a corporate surety authorized to do business in the state. Security
required pursuant to this division shall be conditioned that the holder will
perform the work in accordance with this section and applicable regulations,
will pay to the city any costs incurred by the city in performing work
pursuant to this section; and will indemnify and save the city and its
officers, agents and employees harmless against any and all claims, judgment
or other costs arising from any excavation and other work covered by the
permit or for which the city, Council or any city officer may be liable by
reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of
the permit holder, either in improperly guarding the excavation or for any
other injury resulting from the negligence of the permit holder. The bond,
letter of credit or cash deposit shall be released by the city upon
completion of the work and compliance with all conditions imposed by the
permit. For permits allowing excavations within public streets, such bond,
letter of credit or cash deposit shall be held for a period of 24 months to
guaranty the adequacy of all restoration work.



   (I)   Permit issuance; conditions.  The Public Works Director or
City Manager shall grant a permit upon finding that the work will comply with
applicable divisions of this section. The permit shall be kept on the site of
the work while it is in progress, in the custody of the individual in charge
of the work. The permit shall be exhibited upon request made by any city
official or police officer. The Public Works Director or City Manager may
impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the
performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the public health, safety
and welfare, to ensure the structural integrity of the right-of-way, to
protect the property and safety of other users of the right-of-way, and to
minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public. An
excavation permit is required for work that involves excavation and boulevard
right-of-way repairs. Where excavations disturb both a street and boulevard
area, the permit holder will be charged for one street excavation permit per
right-of-way excavation. No permit shall be issued to anyone who has failed
to register in accordance with this section.



   (J)   Exceptions.  No permit shall be required for the following:



      (1)   Landscaping work permitted by the city pursuant to site
improvement or developer agreements.



      (2)   Driveways, sidewalks, curb and gutter, and other
facilities permitted by the city pursuant to the public improvement process.



      (3)   Snow removal activities.



      (4)   Restoration due to maintenance activities of the city.
(Minimum restoration standards still apply.)



   (K)   Diligence in performing work.  Work shall progress in an
expeditious manner as reasonably permitted by weather conditions until
completion in order to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to traffic. In the
event that the work is not performed in accordance with applicable
regulations pertaining to excavations and utility connections, or the work is
not done in an expeditious manner, or shall cease or be abandoned without due
cause, the city may, after 72-hour notice to the permit holder, correct the
work and fill the excavation or repair the street. The entire cost of such
work shall be paid by the permit holder upon demand made by the city. The
financial guarantees may be used by the city to reimburse itself for costs
incurred through private engineering consulting fees and attorney fees to
complete the work under this section.



   (L)   Standards during construction or installation.  The permit
holder shall comply with the following standards when engaging in the work:



      (1)   Take such precautions as are necessary to avoid creating
unsanitary conditions. Observe and comply with all laws, rules and
regulations of the state, county, and city.



      (2)   Conduct the operations and perform the work in a manner
as to ensure the least obstruction and interference to traffic.



      (3)   Take adequate precautions to ensure the safety of the
general public and those who require access to abutting property.



      (4)   If required by the Public Works Director or City
Engineer, notify adjoining property owners prior to the commencement of work
which may disrupt the use of and access to such adjoining properties.



      (5)   In all cases where construction work interferes with the
normal use of the construction area, provide for closing the construction
area to traffic or to afford it restricted use of the area and comply with
MMUTCD traffic safety signing requirements.



      (6)   Exercise precaution at all times for the protection of
persons, including employees and property.



      (7)   Protect and identify excavations and work operations
with barricade flags, and if required, by flagmen in the daytime, and by
warning lights at night.



      (8)   Provide proper trench protection as required by O.S.H.A.
when necessary and depending upon the type of soil, in order to prevent
cave-ins endangering life or tending to enlarge the excavation.



      (9)   Protect the root growth of trees and shrubbery.



      (10)   Installation of pipe (utility conductors) under
Portland cement concrete, asphalt concrete, or other high-type bituminous
pavements shall be done by jacking, auguring or tunneling as directed by the
Engineer unless otherwise authorized. HDPE sleeving shall be an acceptable
casing or sleeving material for telecommunications installations.



      (11)   When removing pavement of Portland cement concrete,
asphalt concrete or high-type built-up bituminous surfacing, the pavement
shall be removed on each side of the trench or excavation a distance of nine
inches beyond the trench width and length, in order to provide a shoulder and
solid foundation for the surface restoration.



      (12)   To obtain a straight edge and neat-appearing opening in
pavement surfaces, the following procedure is required:



         (a)   Portland cement concrete pavement.  The surface
shall be saw-cut scored two inches deep and the concrete broken out by sledge
or pneumatic hammer chisel.



         (b)   Asphalt concrete.  The surface shall be cut full
depth by pneumatic hammer chisel.



      (13)   Excavations, trenches and jacking pits off the roadway
or adjacent to the roadway or curbing shall be sheathed and braced depending
upon location and soil stability, and as directed by the city.



      (14)   Excavations, trenches and jacking pits shall be
protected when unattended to prevent entrance of surface drainage.



      (15)   All backfilling must be placed in six-inch layers at
optimum moisture and compacted with the objective of attaining 100% of AASHTO
density. Compaction shall be accomplished with hand, pneumatic or vibrating
compactors as appropriate.



      (16)   Backfill material shall be Class 5, or better at the
judgment of the Public Works Director. Backfilling with the material from the
excavation may be permitted provided such material is granular in nature and
acceptable to the Public Works Director or Assistant City Engineer.



      (17)   Compacted backfill shall be brought to street grade and
crowned at the center not more than one inch. Backfill procedures shall
provide for no settlements. Settlements, which occur within a two-year
warranty period, shall be repaired in a timely manner. The city may authorize
another contractor to make the repair if it is not done in a timely manner.
Reimbursement may be made from the surety bond, letter of credit or cash
deposit with city.



      (18)   Street and pedestrian traffic shall be maintained
throughout construction unless provided otherwise by the permit.



      (19)   No lugs damaging to roadway surfaces may be used.



      (20)   Dirt or debris must be periodically removed during
construction.



      (21)   Other reasonable standards and requirements of the
Public Works Director or Assistant City Engineer.



   (M)   Repair and restoration.



      (1)   Schedule.  The work to be done under the permit, and
the repair and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of extraordinary circumstances beyond the
control of the permit holder, when work was prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable or when extended by the Public Works Director. In addition to
repairing its own work, the permit holder must restore the general area of
the work, and the surrounding areas, including the paving and its
foundations, to the condition that existed before the commencement of the
work but only to the extent the permit holder disturbed such surrounding
areas.



      (2)   General standards.  The permit holder shall perform
repairs and restoration according to the standards and with the materials
specified by the Public Works Director or Assistant City Engineer. Both
individuals shall have the authority to prescribe the manner and extent of
the restoration, and may do so in written procedures of general application
or on a case-by-case basis. In exercising this authority, the Public Works
Director or Assistant City Engineer shall be guided by the following
standards and consideration:



         (a)   Minimum pavement restoration standards are set
forth in the "Standard Plates," attached to Ordinance 1446 as Plate Numbers
1-13.



         (b)   The number, size, depth and duration of the
excavations, disruptions or damage to the right-of-way.



         (c)   The traffic volume carried by the right-of-way;
the character of the neighborhood surrounding the right-of-way;



         (d)   The pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way;
the remaining life-expectancy of the right-of-way affected by the excavation;



         (e)   Whether the relative cost of the method of
restoration to the permit holder is in reasonable balance with the prevention
of an accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise
result from the excavation, disturbance or damage to the right-of-way; and



         (f)   The likelihood that the particular method of
restoration would be effective in slowing the depreciation of the
right-of-way that would otherwise take place.



      (3)   City restoration.  Only upon prior written approval of
the Public Works Director, the permit holder may request restoration
assistance through the Public Works Department. If the city agrees to perform
the work, the permit holder shall pay to the city, in advance; a cash deposit
equaling 150% of the estimated restoration cost. The restoration cost shall
be estimated by the Public Works Director or designee shall include an
estimate of the degradation cost. The estimate of the degradation cost shall
be based upon criteria adopted by the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission
and found on the ROW Permit Fee Schedule. Following completion of the
restoration, any funds in excess of the actual restoration cost and the
degradation cost shall be returned to the permit holder. Notwithstanding this
section, the city shall have no obligation to honor the permittee's
restoration request.



      (4)   Guarantees.  The permit holder shall guarantee its work
and shall maintain it for 24 months following its completion. During this
24-month period it shall, upon notification from the Public Works Director or
Assistant City Engineer, promptly correct all restoration work to the extent
necessary, using the method required by the Engineering Department.



      (5)   Permit limitations.  Permits issued pursuant to this
section are valid only for the area of the right-of-way specified in the
application and the permit and only for the dates so specified. No work shall
be extended beyond the permitted area or dates without a new permit being
procured therefor, provided the Public Works Director may extend the
completion date of the work in accordance with division (M).



   (N)   Denial of permit.  The Public Works Director may deny a
permit due to the following:



      (1)   Failure to register pursuant to this section.



      (2)   A proposed excavation within a street or sidewalk
surface that has been constructed or reconstructed within the preceding five
years unless the Public Works Director or City Manager determines that no
other locations are feasible or when necessitated by an emergency.



      (3)   The applicant is subject to revocation of a prior permit
issued pursuant to this section.



      (4)   The proposed schedule for the work would conflict or
interfere with an exhibition, celebration, festival or any other similar
event.



      (5)   The right-of-way would become unduly congested due to
the proposed facilities and equipment when combined with other uses in the
right-of-way.



      (6)   Businesses or residences in the vicinity will be
unreasonably disrupted by the work.



      (7)   The proposed schedule conflicts with scheduled total or
partial reconstruction of the right-of-way.



      (8)   The applicant fails to comply with the requirements of
this section or other sections of this code.



   (O)   Emergency work.



      (1)   A registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are
necessary to respond to an emergency. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency the registrant shall apply for the necessary
permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this section for
the actions it took in response to the emergency.



      (2)   If the Public Works Director becomes aware of an
emergency, the Director shall attempt to contact the local representative of
each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any
event, the Public Works Director may take whatever action deemed necessary to
respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant
whose facilities or equipment occasioned the emergency.



   (P)   Revocation of permits.  The Public Works Director or City
Manager may revoke any permit, without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, this code,
rule or regulation, or any condition of the permit which substantial breach
shall continue uncured for ten calendar days after the issuance of a written
order of the Public Works Director. A substantial breach of a permit holder
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the permit;



      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of
the permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;



      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a permit;



      (4)   The failure to maintain the required bonds and insurance;



      (5)   Failure to complete the work in a timely manner;



      (6)   The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order
issued by the Engineering Department.



   (Q)   Appeal.



      (1)   Filing of appeal.  Any person aggrieved by, (i) the
denial of a permit application, (ii) the denial of a registration, (iii) the
revocation of a permit or, (iv) the application of the fee schedule imposed
by the city may appeal to the Council by filing a written notice of appeal
with the Administrative Secretary. Said notice must be filed within 20 days
of the action causing the appeal.



      (2)   Notice of hearing. The Council shall hear the appeal no
later than 30 days after the date the appeal is filed. Notice of the date,
time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be mailed to the appellant not
less than 10 days before the date of the hearing.



      (3)   Hearing and decision.  The Council shall, at such
hearing, hear and consider any evidence offered by the appellant, the Public
Works Director or Engineering Department, and anyone else wishing to be
heard. After hearing the oral and written views of all interested persons,
the Council shall make its decision at the same meeting or at a specified
future meeting.



   (R)   Mapping.  Within 120 days following completion of any work
pursuant to a permit, the registrant shall provide the Public Works Director
accurate maps and drawings certifying the "as-built" location of all
facilities and equipment installed, owned and maintained by the registrant.
Such maps and drawings shall indicate both the horizontal and vertical
location of all facilities and equipment and shall be provided in a format
consistent with the city's electronic mapping system. Failure to provide maps
and drawings in accordance with this subsection shall be grounds for revoking
the permit holder's registration.



   (S)   Location of facilities and equipment.



      (1)   Under grounding by telecommunications right-of-way
users.  Any new construction and the installation of new equipment and
replacement of old equipment of telecommunication right-of-way users shall be
underground or contained within buildings or other structures in conformity
with applicable codes. Provided, telecommunications right-of-way users may
attach equipment and facilities to existing poles and structures maintained
by a service or utility service.



      (2)   Corridors.  The Public Works Director may assign
specific corridors within the right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof
as may be necessary, for each type of equipment that is or, pursuant to
current technology, the Public Works Director expects will someday be located
within the right-of-way. All permits issued by the Public Works Director
involving the installation or replacement of equipment shall designate the
proper corridor for the equipment at issue.



      (3)   Limitation of space. To protect health and safety, the
Public Works Director shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement
of new or additional equipment within the right-of-way if there is
insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests of registrants or
persons to occupy and use the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the
Public Works Director shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all
existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided
primarily by considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for
the particular utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time
of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing
equipment in the right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements
and development projects which have been determined to be in the public
interest.



   (T)   Relocation.



      (1)   Relocation for city purposes.  A registrant shall
promptly but in no event more than 120 days of the city's request,
permanently remove and relocate at no charge to the city, any facilities or
equipment if and when made necessary by a change in the grade, alignment or
width of any right-of-way, by the construction, maintenance or operation of
any city facilities or to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The
registrant shall restore any right-of-way to the condition it was in prior to
removal and relocation.



      (2)   Under grounding of relocated telecommunications
facilities. A telecommunications right-of-way user shall relocate all above
ground facilities and equipment to underground locations at its own cost and
expense at the city's request when, (i) the city requires the relocation of
all telecommunications facilities and equipment to underground locations or
ii) structures or poles to which the registrant's facilities or equipment is
attached are abandoned or removed by the owner of such structures or poles.



   (U)   Right-of-way vacation.



      (1)   Reservation of right.  If the city vacates a
right-of-way which contains the equipment of a registrant, and if the
vacation does not require the relocation of registrant facilities and
equipment, the city shall reserve, to and for itself and all registrants
having facilities and equipment in the vacated right-of-way, the right to
install, maintain and operate any facilities and equipment in the vacated
right-of-way and to enter upon such right-of-way at any time for the purpose
of reconstruction, inspecting, maintaining or repairing the same.



      (2)   Relocation of equipment.  If the vacation requires the
relocation of registrant facilities and equipment; and (a) if the vacation
proceedings are initiated by the registrant, the registrant must pay the
relocation costs; or (b) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by the
city, the registrant must pay the relocation costs unless otherwise agreed to
by the city and the registrant; or (c) if the vacation proceedings are
initiated by a person or persons other than the registrant or permit holder,
such other person or persons must pay the relocation costs.



   (V)   Abandoned and unusable equipment.



      (1)   Discontinued operations.  A registrant who has
determined to discontinue its operations in the city must either:



         (a)   Provide information satisfactory to the Public
Works Director that the registrant's obligations for its equipment in the
right-of-way under this section have been lawfully assumed by another
registrant; or



         (b)   Submit to the Public Works Director an action plan
for the removal or abandonment of equipment and facilities. The Public Works
Director shall require removal of such facilities and equipment if the Public
Works Director determines such removal is necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare. The Public Works Director may require the
registrant to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for
reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities and
equipment.



      (2)   Abandoned facilities equipment.  Facilities and
equipment of a registrant located on the surface of or above a right-of-way
or on city property that, for two years, remains unused shall be deemed to be
abandoned. Such abandoned equipment is deemed to be a nuisance. The city may
exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but
not limited to, (i) abating the nuisance, or (ii) requiring removal of the
equipment or facilities by the registrant, or the registrant's successor in
interest.



      (3)   Removal of underground equipment.  Any registrant who
has unusable and abandoned underground facilities or equipment in any
right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way during the next scheduled
excavation, to the extent such facilities or equipment is uncovered by such
excavation unless this requirement is waived by the Public Works Director or
City Manager.



   (W)   Indemnification and liability.



      (1)   Limitation of liability.  By reason of the acceptance
of a registration or the grant of a right-of-way permit, the city does not
assume any liability (a) for injuries to persons, damage to property, or loss
of service claims by parties other than the registrant or the city, or (b)
for claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the installation,
presence, maintenance, or operation of equipment by registrants or activities
of registrants.



      (2)   Indemnification.  By registering with the city, a
registrant agrees, or by accepting a permit under this section, a permit
holder is required, to defend, indemnify, and hold the city whole and
harmless from all costs, liabilities, and claims for damages of any kind
including the city's reasonable attorney fees and costs arising out of the
construction, presence, installation, maintenance, repair or operation of its
equipment, or out of any activity undertaken in or near a right-of-way,
whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or
prohibited by a right-of-way permit. It further agrees that it will not
bring, nor cause to be brought, any action, suit or other proceeding claiming
damages, or seeking any other relief against the city for any claim nor for
any award arising out of the presence, installation, maintenance or operation
of its equipment, or any activity undertaken in or near a right-of-way,
whether or not the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or
prohibited by a right-of-way permit. The foregoing does not indemnify the
city for its own negligence except for claims arising out of or alleging the
city's negligence where such negligence arises out of or is primarily related
to the presence, installation, construction, operation, maintenance or repair
of said equipment by the registrant or on the registrant's behalf, including
but not limited to, the issuance of permits and inspection of plans or work.
This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity
otherwise available to the registrant or to the city and the registrant, in
defending any action on behalf of the city, shall be entitled to assert in
any action every defense or immunity that the city could assert in its own
behalf.



   (X)   Right-of-way management regulation fees.  Permit and
degradation fees are found on the Right-of-Way Permit Fee Schedule on file in
the Clerk's office. Registration fees are found on the permit form.



(`77 Code, § 6.301)  (Am. Ord. 1446, passed 4-22-02)  Penalty, see § 6.802



§ 6.302  TRANSPORTATION OF BUILDINGS.



   (A)   No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall move any
building of any nature or type over the streets and highways of the city
without a permit therefore.



   (B)   An application shall be filed with the Clerk and indicate:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   The type of structure to be moved;



      (3)   The route over which the building will be moved;



      (4)   The date and time that said building will be within the
city; and



      (5)   The final destination of the building.



   (C)   The application shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police, who
may approve the granting of a permit subject to such conditions as are
necessary and appropriate to prevent disruption or create a hazard to traffic.



   (D)   The permit shall not be issued by the Clerk until the
applicant has posted a bond with the Clerk in the amount of $50,000.  Such
bond shall guarantee reimbursement for damages caused by the permittee in
moving the said building regardless of whether or not the permittee was
negligent.  The amount of the required bond may be lessened in certain
instances by Council resolution.



   (E)   The permit shall not be issued by the Clerk until the
applicant has filed with the Clerk a certificate of insurance duly issued by
an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota, in
the minimum amount of $300,000 per person for bodily injury and $300,000 per
accident, and $30,000 for property damage.



   (F)   A fee may be set by Council resolution for permits to move
buildings over streets and highways exclusively under the jurisdiction of the
city.



(`77 Code, § 6.302)  Penalty, see § 6.802



§ 6.303  COURTESY BENCHES.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to regulate the
placement and maintenance of courtesy benches for public transit in public
rights-of-way and on private property if the bench is within three feet of
the public right-of-way. Benches without advertising signs that are located
on private property and more than three feet from the public right-of-way are
exempt from the provisions set forth in the advertisement restriction
division of this section, but are subject to all other applicable sections of
this code.



   (B)   Permit required.  It is unlawful for a person to place a
courtesy bench in a public right-of-way or on private property within three
feet of the public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit as provided
in this section.



      (1)   This section shall apply to all existing and future
courtesy benches installed within said city. The courtesy bench owner shall
renew the permit once issued annually.



      (2)   The permit period shall be from April 1 to March 31
annually.



      (3)   Permits for courtesy benches will be granted only on
existing and approved Metro Transit bus routes within the city, on the
condition that the bench locations satisfy the location requirements set
forth by the city.



   (C)   Permits and applications.  Application for permits shall be
made to the Community Development License/Permit Clerk or designee of the
City Manager. The application shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Scale drawing showing the size and location of the
courtesy bench relative to all other objects on the property including the
layout of applicable adjacent roadways, intersections, traffic signage,
sidewalks, trails, utility poles, fences and other objects within the
vicinity;



      (2)   Name, address and phone number of applicant;



      (3)   Detailed plans and specifications of each proposed
bench, if any, to be posted thereon and total surface area intended as
signage not to exceed 12 square feet using only the front, or seating side
surface of the bench rest. Advertising material may not exceed the length of
the bench;



      (4)   A current general liability certificate of insurance
from an insurance company that is rated "A" or better by A.M. Best Company
and authorized to conduct business in the State of Minnesota, naming the city
as additional insured in the minimum amounts as follows:



 


Number of Bench Permits

 

Limit of Liability




1-10 benches

 

$250,000




11-50 benches

 

$500,000




50 or more

 

$1,000,000




 



for any and all claims arising out of the use or existence of the courtesy
bench(s) and approved by the City Manager or designee of City Manager. The
certificate shall provide for automatic notification of the city with a
minimum 30 days' advance notice in the event of cancellation;



      (5)   A graphic showing the public transportation bus service
that serves the proposed courtesy bench and the specific bus stop location
and number, if applicable;



      (6)   An executed hold harmless agreement from the permittee,
approved by the City Manager or designee, protecting the city from any and
all claims arising out of the use and existence of the courtesy bench;



      (7)   Written consent from the abutting property owner for
placement of any bench on private property within three feet of the public
right-of-way. The abutting property owners shall be deemed to be the person
or entity shown as such on the Anoka County tax records;



      (8)   The application shall be forwarded to the City Engineer
for review and recommendation;



      (9)   Such other information that the City Manager may require



   (D)   Conditions governing issuance of permits.  This section
governs the issuance of a permit for a courtesy bench.



      (1)   Permit for each bench.  A separate permit is required
for each courtesy bench, but renewals may be granted for more than one
location on the basis of a single application, provided that the City Manager
or city designee is satisfied that all the information required by this
section has been supplied for each proposed courtesy bench.



      (2)   Transfer: new permit.  If a courtesy bench for which a
permit has been issued is sold or title or control thereof is transferred or
assigned, a new permit shall be required.



      (3)   Location.  No permit may be issued for the installation
of courtesy benches, on approved transit routes in the following places:



         (a)   On a transit route upon which the city has
constructed or has let a contract to construct a public street beautification
(streetscaping) project.



         (b)   On a public sidewalk where the right-of-way is
less than nine feet in width or on any private sidewalk or trail without the
written consent of the abutting property owner;



         (c)   In an alley;



         (d)   At any location more than 50 feet from the nearest
point of intersections with a street, unless the City Manager so authorizes;



         (e)   Within 15 feet of any intersection or other
locations as the City Manager may determine which impedes safety by
obstructing the vision of pedestrians or motorists;



         (f)   Other locations, which the City Manager or staff
member determines would potentially restrict pedestrians' traffic, pose a
snow and ice control problem, obstruct vehicular traffic or otherwise be
detrimental to the public safety, convenience or welfare.



   (E)   Permit fees.  Fees for courtesy benches shall be as set forth
in the City of Columbia Heights Licensing Fee section.



   (F)   Insurance requirements.  Permit holders shall deliver to and
keep on file with the City's Finance Department a current general liability
certificate of insurance meeting the requirements of this section, naming the
city as an additional insured. The insurance shall be maintained in its
original amount by the permit holder at his expense at all times during the
period for which the permit is in effect. When two or more permits are issued
to one person one insurance policy may be furnished to cover two or more
courtesy benches, and the policy shall be of a type which coverage is
automatically restored upon occurrence or any accident or loss from which
liability may hereafter accrue.



   (G)   Permits: approval and issuance.  If the City Manager is
satisfied that all of the conditions stated in this section have been met and
that the creation and maintenance of the courtesy bench at the proposed
location will not restrict pedestrian traffic or otherwise be detrimental to
public safety, he shall approve the application. The License/Permit Clerk
shall not issue a permit until the insurance and hold harmless agreement are
provided and approved by the city.



   (H)   Revocation of permit.



      (1)   The City Manager may revoke or deny renewal of any
permit for failure to comply with the provision of this section, the zoning
code, for misrepresentation of material facts in the original application,
for failure to maintain the courtesy bench, because the bench is considered a
safety hazard, because the bench location is no longer served by the public
transportation, because the transit route on which the bench is located has
or will be included in a streetscaping project or for any reason which would
have been grounds for denial of the original application.



      (2)   All courtesy bench locations are subject to a site plan
review by the City's Engineering Department. If the courtesy bench location
is deemed unsuitable by the Engineering Department, the permit will be
revoked by the City Manager or appointed designee.



   (I)   Installation and maintenance.



      (1)   Location. 



         (a)   Courtesy bench shall be installed parallel with
the curb, sidewalk or trail, and set back at least three feet from the back
of the curb. Further, there shall be a minimum clearance of six feet from the
back of the bench to any structure or landscaping along or near any sidewalk
to provide for sidewalk snowplow clearance. Any bench installed on a sidewalk
or trail nine feet or more in width must also provide a minimum clearance of
six feet between the back of the curb and front of the bench.



         (b)   Where existing conditions are such that the
three-foot setback from curb provision cannot be met, at the City Engineer's
discretion, the permit may be evaluated for other distances, but never less
than 18 inches.



      (2)   Size.  Size limitations on courtesy benches are as
follows:



         (a)   Height-42 inches maximum.



         (b)   Width-30 inches maximum.



         (c)   Length-7 feet maximum.



      (3)   Construction.  A courtesy bench shall be installed and
maintained on a durable level surface including, but not limited to,
concrete, bomanite or decorative brick. The durable surface shall extend six
inches on both ends and in back of the bench. Further, the durable surface in
front of the bench must extend to the back of the curb. The courtesy bench
shall be of sufficient weight or shall be secured in a manner to minimize the
potential of accidental tipping or vandalism. No courtesy bench shall be
fastened, secured, or anchored to city property.



      (4)   Materials.  A courtesy bench shall be constructed of
durable materials including but not limited to concrete, wood, steel,
plastic, or combination thereof, with colors limited to whites, earth tones
of subdued greens, grays, browns, reddish-browns, and golds.



      (5)   Permit display.  Each courtesy bench shall display the
permit number in a



conspicuous place.



      (6)   Conditions.  It is the responsibility of the permittee
to maintain each bench in a safe condition and to keep benches neat, clean
and in usable condition. The permittee shall keep the courtesy bench and
bench base free of ice and snow and accessible.



      (7)   Advertising matter. Advertising matter may be displayed
only on the front (roadway side) surface of the backrest of a courtesy bench
and shall not exceed 12 square feet in surface area. No advertising matter on
any courtesy bench may display any word, phrase or symbol, reflective
material or illumination device which might interfere with, mislead or
distract traffic. Any political advertising displayed on a courtesy bench
shall be subject to the time restriction for such advertising or political
signs as set forth elsewhere in the city code and state statue.



   (J)   Removal of benches.



      (1)   Notice.  Upon the revocation or expiration of any
permit without renewal, the permittee shall remove the courtesy bench
promptly. The permittee shall also be required to remove the concrete slab
and reseed the slab area at its cost if so directed by the City Manager. The
City Manager may remove the bench after 30 days' mailed notice to the
permittee and the cost of removal, including removal of the slab and
resodding of the slab area, shall be paid by the permittee. If the permittee
fails to pay the cost within 60 days after receiving notice from the City
Manager, the bench shall become the property of the city, but the permittee
will remain liable for the cost of removal, restoration and storage of the
bench. No permit or renewal shall be granted to the permittee until all such
costs are paid in full.



      (2)   Summary removal.  A courtesy bench placed in the public
right-of-way in the city, contrary to the provisions of this section, may be
summarily removed by the City Manager, pursuant to M.S. § 160.27, subd. 6,
as it may be amended from time to time.



   (K)   Registration of permits obtained from other road
authorities.  When a courtesy bench is placed in the city within the limits
of a street or roadway subject to the control of a road authority other than
the city as defined in M.S. § 160.02, as it may be amended from time to
time, the person placing the bench shall file proof of permission from the
other road authority with the City Manager.



(`77 Code, § 6.303)  (Am. Ord. 1377, passed 10-12-98; Am. Ord. 1444, passed
2-11-02)  Penalty, see § 6.802



§ 6.304  NEWSSTANDS.



   (A)   Definition.  Employment advertising stands, realty
advertising stands and other advertising stands or racks used for the free
distribution of material are herein referred to as NEWSSTANDS. Excluded from
this definition are newspaper racks, used for the sale of daily newspapers
such as the Minneapolis Star Tribune, St. Paul Pioneer Press, or a local city
newspaper.



   (B)   General operation. 



      (1)   The purpose of this section is to regulate the placing
and maintenance of newsstands in public rights-of-way. This section was
created to promote the public health, safety and welfare through the
regulation of placement, type, appearance and servicing of newsstands on
public rights-of-way so as to:



         (a)   Provide for pedestrian and driving safety,
convenience, and comply with local, state, or federal handicapped
accessibility regulations.



         (b)   Restrict unreasonable interference with the public
use of the public right-of-way and with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic from any residence or business, or from the street to the sidewalk by
persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles.



         (c)   Provide for the safety of people and property
during periods of heavy snow, storms, and other adverse weather conditions,
and for the proper functioning of the city's safety and sanitation forces.



         (d)   Provide reasonable access: For the use and
maintenance of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, utility
openings, delivery chutes, trash receptacles, bus or plaza benches, United
States postal services mailboxes, parking meters and other public fixtures;
and to locations used for public transportation purposes.



         (e)   Relocate and/or replace newsstands that result in
a visual blight and/or excessive space allocation on the public
rights-of-ways of which unreasonably detract from the aesthetics of store
window displays, adjacent landscaping and other improvements, both public and
private, as well as to remove abandoned newsstands.



         (f)   Maintain and protect the values of surrounding
properties, and protect and preserve public property.



         (g)   Reduce unnecessary exposure of the public to
personal injury or property damage.



         (h)   Treat all publications equally regardless of their
size, content, circulation, or frequency of publication.



         (i)   Maintain and preserve freedom of speech and
freedom of the press.



         (j)   Protect and enhance the city's attraction to
residents, tourists and visitors, and serve as a support to stimulus to
business and industry, by enhancing the visual and aesthetic character and
interest of the city.



      (2)   Newsstands may not be attached in any way to courtesy
benches permitted by the City of Columbia Heights. Furthermore, newsstands
may only be placed in enclosed spaces, such as private building corridors or
bus shelters, provided trash receptacles are available.



   (C)   Installation and maintenance



      (1)   Newsstands shall not exceed 60 inches in height, 30
inches in width, or 24 inches in depth.



      (2)    No advertising signs or materials, other than those
advertising the name of the publications contained within the newsstand,
shall be displayed on the outside of any stand, rack or corral.



      (3)   Each newsstand shall have stenciled or otherwise
permanently affixed to it, in a readily visible place, a notice setting forth
the name, address, and telephone number of the newsstand owner.



      (4)   Each newsstand shall be maintained in a neat and clean
condition and in good repair at all times. Each newsstand shall be serviced
and maintained and/or replaced if necessary, so that:



         (a)   It is reasonably free of dirt and grease;



         (b)   It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling
and cracked paint in the visible painted area thereof;



         (c)   If it is free of graffiti or other writing or
pictures added without the permission of the owner;



         (d)   It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the
visible metal areas;



         (e)   The clear plastic or glass parts, if any, through
which the publication therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of
cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration;



         (f)   The structural and solid parts thereof are not
broken, do not contain holes;



         (g)   The dispensing portion of each box shall be fully
enclosed and weatherproof so as to keep publications dry and free of snow and
dirt;



         (h)   All surfaces shall be of sturdy impact resistant
materials; and



         (i)   It shall contain no sharp corners or sharp
protrusions.



      (5)   Newsstands for free publications may omit the coin box
and may have a pull bar attached to the door in order to produce an "honor
rack."



   (D)   Enforcement procedures.



      (1)    Any newsstand installed in violation of the provisions
of this section shall be tagged with an administrative tag stating the
violation, date of tagging, and notice of intention to remove the newsstand
if the violation is not corrected within ten days. The City Manager may
remove the newsstand ten days after notifying the newsstand owner by mail. If
the permittee fails to remove the newsstand after receiving notice from the
City Manager, the newsstand shall become the property of the city, but the
permittee will remain liable for the cost of removal, restoration and storage
of the newsstand. No permit or renewal shall be granted to the permittee
until all such costs are paid in full.



      (2)   Any newsstand in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, which violation creates an immediate and substantial danger to the
health, safety, or welfare of the public, which violation cannot be quickly
and easily corrected by moving or otherwise repositioning the news rack, may
be removed and stored in a secure location so as to eliminate the danger to
the health, safety and welfare of the public.



      (3)   Newsstands placed in the public right-of-way in the
city, contrary to the provisions of this section, may be summarily removed by
the City Manager, pursuant to M.S. § 160.27, subd. 6, as it may be amended
from time to time.



   (E)   Abandoned newsstands.



      (1)   A newsstand shall be deemed abandoned when no
publications provided by registered newsstand owner is in the newsstand for a
period of more than 30 consecutive days, or when the newsstand and location
have not been included on a master list as required under this section.



      (2)   In the event a newsstand is found abandoned on the
public right-of-way within the city, the City Manager or designee shall cause
the removal of said newsstand.



   (F)   Registration of permits obtained from other road
authorities.  When a newsstand is placed in the city within the limits of a
street or roadway subject to the control of a road authority other than the
city as defined in M.S. § 160.02, as it may be amended from time to time,
then the person placing the newsstand shall file proof of permission from the
other road authority with the City Manager.



(Ord. 1444, passed 2-11-02)



ARTICLE IV:  RESERVED



 



ARTICLE V:  SWIMMING POOLS



Section



   6.501   General plans and construction



   6.502   Miscellaneous



   6.503   Operations



§ 6.501  GENERAL PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   No person shall construct, alter or renovate a swimming pool
without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.  No
permits to construct, alter or renovate shall be issued by the Building
Official until approval is granted as is hereinafter set forth.



      (1)   Prior to issuance of such permit, plans and
specifications, including a site plan, shall be submitted in duplicate to the
Building Official.  He shall arrange for a review of the plans and
specifications by the Health Authority and other appropriate departments of
the city.



      (2)   The application for a permit to construct or remodel a
swimming pool shall be on such forms as may be prescribed by the Building
Official and Health Authority, together with any supporting data as may be
required by such officials for the proper review of the plans.



   (B)   The criteria to be followed by the Health Authority in review
and approval of plans shall be set forth in "Regulations on the Design,
Construction and Operation of Public Swimming Pools" being pages 14 to 36 of
"Suggested Ordinance and Regulations Covering Public Swimming Pools" prepared
by the Joint Committee on Swimming Pools in cooperation with the United
States Public Health Service, approved by the Conference of State Sanitary
Engineers, Conference of Municipal Public Health Engineers and the
Engineering and Sanitation Section, the Committee of Evaluation and Standards
and the Governing Council of the American Public Health Association,
published by the American Public Health Association, 1964, three copies of
which are on file and available for inspection in the Office of the Clerk of
the city.  The same are hereby adopted by reference, and all terms of said
regulations are made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this chapter.



   (C)   The application for a building permit shall describe the type
and size of pool; and the site plan shall show the:



      (1)   Location of pool.



      (2)   Location of house, garage, fencing, and other features
and structures of and on the lot.



      (3)   Location of structures on all adjacent lots.



      (4)   Location and type of filter unit, pump, and wiring
involved.



      (5)   Location of back-flush and drainage outlet.



      (6)   Grading plan, finished elevations, and final treatment
(decking, landscaping, and the like) around pool.



      (7)   Location of existing overhead or underground wiring,
utility easements, trees, and similar features.



      (8)   Location of any water heating unit.



   (D)   The plans submitted by a permit applicant shall be drawn to
scale and accompanied by proper specifications so as to permit comprehensive
engineering review of the plans including the piping and hydraulic details
and shall include:



      (1)   Plan and sectional view with all necessary dimensions of
both the pool and surrounding area.



      (2)   A piping diagram showing all appurtenances including
treatment facilities in sufficient detail, as well as pertinent elevation
data to permit a hydraulic analysis of the system.



      (3)   The specifications shall contain details of all
treatment equipment, including catalog identification of pumps, chlorinators,
and related equipment.



   (E)   The Building Official shall deny the application for a permit
which does not comply with any of the provisions of this code, including the
zoning code and building code.  Any person denied a permit to build a
swimming pool may appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission.  The
Planning and Zoning Commission may then either recommend that the permit be
issued or recommend that the permit be denied.  The Council shall act upon
such recommendation within 30 days after the Planning and Zoning Commission
makes such a recommendation.



      (1)   When the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends
denial of the permit, the permit may only be granted upon a vote of
four-fifths of the members of the Council.  Upon recommendation for issuance
of the permit, a simple majority of the Council may grant issuance of the
permit.



      (2)   Should any person appeal from a denial by the Building
Official of an application for a permit to build, construct, or substantially
alter a swimming pool, the Zoning Administrator shall notify all property
owners within 150 feet of the proposed pool by written notice stating the
time, place and purpose of any hearing upon the application before the
Planning and Zoning Commission or the Council.  Failure to give such notice
shall not invalidate any proceedings by the Planning and Zoning Commission or
the Council.



   (F)   No person shall build, alter, or reconstruct a swimming pool
which deviates from the approved plans without first obtaining prior written
approval for such deviation from the Building Official.



   (G)   (1)   The owner or his agent shall notify the Health
Authority and Building Official at specific stages of construction as the
Building Official may require and at the time of completion of the pool to
permit adequate inspection of the pool and related equipment during and after
construction.



      (2)   In the case of in-ground or underground pools, due
precautions shall be taken during the construction period to assure that
proper care in stock piling excavated material to avoid erosion, dust or
other infringement onto adjacent property.



   (H)   No person may use or operate such a pool until such time as
the Building Official and Health Authority indicate in writing that each of
the requirements of this chapter has been satisfied.



(`77 Code, § 6.501)  Penalty, see § 6.802



§ 6.502  MISCELLANEOUS.



   (A)   All outdoor swimming pools existing and hereafter constructed
shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall of the non-climbing type. 
Construction of swimming pools may not be commenced until such time as the
fencing required by this section is completed, with the exception of an
approved area to be left open to allow access only for the equipment and
materials used for the construction of the pool.  No pool shall be filled or
partially filled until such fencing is completely installed.



      (1)   All fence openings or points of entry into the pool area
enclosure shall be equipped with gates.  The fence and gates shall be at
least five feet in height and shall be constructed of a minimum number
11-gauge woven wire mesh corrosion-resistant material, or other material
approved by the Building Official.



      (2)   All gates shall be equipped with self-closing and
self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate, at least five feet above
the base of the gate, or, in the judgment of the Building Official, equally
inaccessible to small children.  All fence posts shall be decay or
corrosion-resistant and shall be set in concrete bases or, alternatively,
three and one-half by three and one-half creosote soaked posts buried to a
depth of at least three feet tamped soil.  The opening between the bottom of
the fence and the ground or other surface shall not be more than four inches.



   (B)   Lighting for a pool may not be directed into or onto adjacent
property and shall measure no more than one foot candle of illumination at
any point on the boundary line of any adjacent property.



   (C)   (1)   No person shall build, situate, or install a filter
unit, pump, heating unit, or any other noise-making mechanical equipment
within 50 feet of any residential structure not situated on the same lot as
the pool and not closer than ten feet to any lot line.  No person shall
build, situate or operate any electric equipment emitting sound in excess of
N.E.M.A. standards, nor operate, build, or construct mechanical equipment
emitting sound in excess of three decibels A-weighted less than the
electrical machinery used in conjunction with said pool.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the above, no pump, filter, heating
units, or other apparatus used in connection with or to service a public
swimming pool shall be located less than 50 feet from any adjacent property
owner's lot line.  No part of the water surface of any public swimming pool
shall be less than 50 feet from any adjacent property owner's lot line.



   (D)   Pools shall not be located beneath utility lines nor over
underground utility lines of any type.



   (E)   No person shall build, situate or install a swimming pool
within ten feet of any side or rear lot line, nor within six feet of any
principal structure or frost footing unless part of the principal structure,
nor within any required front yard; nor any public swimming pool; within a
residential zone.



   (F)   All deck areas, adjacent patios, or other similar areas used
in conjunction with a swimming pool shall be located not closer than 10 feet
in residential districts, or 30 feet in all other areas, to any adjacent
property owner's lot line.  Adequate screening, including both fencing and
landscape treatment shall be placed between said areas and adjacent
residential lot lines.  This section shall not serve to reduce front, rear
and side yard requirements under this chapter or the zoning code.



   (G)   No person owning or having control of a swimming pool shall
allow drainage onto property other than that of the owner of the pool nor
allow drainage into other than sanitary sewer approved for such purpose.  No
person owning or having control of a swimming pool shall allow water to drain
onto adjacent or nearby land.



   (H)   Safety ropes suitably anchored shall be provided at the water
line when the designed pool operating water level is 4 1/2 feet or more. 
Every swimming pool shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys
not more than 15 inches in diameter and having 60 feet of 3/16-inch manila
line attached, and shall have one or more light but strong poles with blunted
ends not less than 12 feet in length for making reach rescues or assists. 
Diving board height above the pool water level shall be in accordance with
approval by the Health Authority.



(`77 Code, § 6.502)  (Am. Ord. 940, passed 11-24-80)  Penalty, see § 6.802



§ 6.503  OPERATIONS.



   (A)   The owner or operator of a private pool may be required to
keep such records as are specified by the Health Authority, in his
discretion, in order to maintain the healthy, safe and sanitary condition of
the pool.



   (B)   Any person seeking a proposed deviation from the standards and
requirements of this chapter may apply for a variance in accordance with
normal zoning procedures.  Such a variance may only be granted by the
Council upon a four-fifths vote of said Council and may only be granted when
carrying out the strict letter of this chapter would cause an undue hardship
upon the applicant.



   (C)   No person shall use or permit any swimming pool in the city to
be used in excess of the maximum design bather load.



(`77 Code, § 6.503)  Penalty, see § 6.802



ARTICLE VI:  SEPTIC TANKS



Section



   6.601   General provisions



§ 6.601  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   No septic system shall be allowed where public sanitary sewer
service is available.



   (B)   If deemed necessary by the city, installation of septic
systems shall be constructed in accordance with Minn. Rules, Chapter 7080,
Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Program, as it may be amended from time
to time.



(`77 Code, § 6.601)  Penalty, see § 6.802



ARTICLE VII:  RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS IN COMMERCIAL AREAS



Section



   6.701   General provisions



§ 6.701  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall remove, reconstruct, add
to, or otherwise alter any residential building now existing in any
commercial zone for commercial use except as permitted by the zoning code. 
No person, firm or corporation may occupy such building for other than
dwelling purposes until all the applicable requirements of the zoning code
have been met and an occupancy permit shall have been granted.



   (B)   The City Building Official, City Manager, City Planner, or
City Attorney shall have the power to apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction on behalf of the city to abate, restrain, or enjoin any such
violation of division (A) of this section without prior Council approval.



(`77 Code, § 6.701)  Penalty, see § 6.802



ARTICLE VIII:  COMPLIANCE



Section



   6.801   Violations



   6.802   Penalty



§ 6.801  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in any building
or construction nor shall any person having a superior possessory interest in
or owning real estate allow any building or construction to occur upon such
real estate within the city without having first obtained a permit therefor
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in any building
or construction nor shall any person having a superior possessory interest in
or owning real estate allow any building or construction to occur upon such
real estate within the city except in conformance with the standards for work
performed and materials contained in this chapter.



   (C)   No person, firm, or corporation engaging in building or
construction or having any superior possessory interest in or owning real
estate which is the site of such building or construction within the city
shall refuse to allow an inspection by the Building Official or his agent or
designated representative.



   (D)   No person, firm or corporation owning or having a superior
possessory interest in real estate within the city shall maintain any
building or condition not in conformance with the provisions of this code.



   (E)   No person, firm, or corporation engaging in any building or
construction or owning or having a superior possessory interest in the site
of such building or construction shall refuse to comply with a lawful order
of the Building Official or his agent or designated representative under this
chapter.



   (F)   No person, firm, or corporation shall construct, or cause to
be constructed or erected within the city any fence or swimming pool without
first having secured a permit therefor from the Building Official.



   (G)   No person, firm, or corporation owning or having a superior
possessory interest in real estate on which a fence or swimming pool exists
shall allow such fence or swimming pool to be other than in a condition of
reasonable repair and shall not allow such fence or swimming pool to become
or remain in a condition of disrepair or danger.



   (H)   All exterior improvements of a structure, or portion thereof,
including final grading to single family dwellings, multiple family dwelling
of 12 units or less or any structure accessory to a residential use shall be
completed in accordance with city-approved plans within 180 days after the
date the city issued the building permit.  Significant progress, as deemed
by the Building Official, shall be shown within the first 90 days.



   (I)   All exterior improvements of a structure, or portion thereof,
including final grading to multiple family dwellings of more than 12 units or
any commercial, industrial, office, institutional or non- residential
structure shall be completed in accordance with city-approved plans within
one year after the date the city issued the building permit.



   (J)   In all cases, the compliance deadline for exterior
improvements shall be upheld unless a written request for an extension is
submitted and approved by the Building Official.  An extension may only be
granted in the event that a natural disaster or a calamitous event occurs
which unavoidably delays the completion of the building project.  Examples
would include a flood, fire, tornado, loss of job, prolonged illness or
accident.  The decision of the Building Official may be appealed to the
Planning Commission, who acts as the Board of Appeals.



(`77 Code, § 6.801)  (Ord. 1501, passed 12-12-05)  Penalty, see § 6.802



§ 6.802  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in § 1.999.  Each day that a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.



(`77 Code, § 6.801)



ARTICLE IX:  PRIVATE WELLS



Section



   6.901   General provisions



§ 6.901  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   Private wells are not allowed in the city without prior approval from
the Building Official and City Engineer.  Where approval is granted, the
following shall pertain:



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in digging,
installing, constructing, reconstructing, maintaining or abandoning a well
without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.  No
permits to engage in such activity shall be issued by the Building Official
until approval is granted as is hereinafter set forth.



      (1)   Prior to issuance of such permit, plans and
specifications, including a site plan, shall be submitted in duplicate to the
Building Official.  He shall arrange for a review of the plans and
specifications by the City Engineer and other appropriate departments of the
city.



      (2)   The application for a permit to construct or reconstruct
a private well shall be on such forms as may be prescribed by the Building
Official and Minnesota Department of Health, together with any supporting
data as may be required by such officials for the proper review of the plans.



   (B)   The criteria to be followed by the Health Authority in review
and approval of plans shall be set forth in Minn. Rules, Chapter 4725, Wells
and Borings, as it may be amended from time to time, a copy of which is on
file and available for inspection in the Community Development Department of
the city.  The same is hereby adopted by reference, and all terms of said
code are made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this chapter.



   (C)   All non-potable wells shall be constructed to the same
criteria and meet the same standards as potable wells.



   (D)   Any well producing water showing evidence of contamination by
organisms of the coliform group, or containing surfactants in concentrations
greater than concentrations allowed by state and federal standards shall be
immediately abandoned for further use.  The piping equipment shall be
removed from such a well and the well shall be filled in accordance with
reasonable requirements of the Building Official.  The Building Official
shall be allowed access to private wells at all reasonable times and after
reasonable notice, for the purpose of inspecting wells and testing the water
produced by such wells.



   (E)   No well may be drilled in any location to which the municipal
water system is reasonably and readily accessible, except by special permit
from the City Council based upon a recommendation by the City Engineer and
Building Official.



(`77 Code, § 6.901) (Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)  Penalty, see § 6.802



ARTICLE X:  SNOW HAULING AND DUMPING



Section



   6.1001   General provisions



§ 6.1001  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the hauling
and dumping of snow without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.  No permits to engage in such activity shall be issued by the
Building Official unless approval is granted as is hereinafter set forth.



      (1)   Prior to the issuance of such permit, a statement from
the applicant stating the amount of snow to be hauled and dumped and a
description of the property on which the snow will be deposited must be
submitted in duplicate to the Building Official.  He shall arrange for a
review of the information by the City Engineer and other appropriate
departments of the city.



      (2)   The application for a permit to haul and dump snow shall
be on forms as may be prescribed by the Building Official and City
Engineer.  The applicant shall furnish any other supporting data as may be
required by such officials for the proper review of the plans.



   (B)   The factors to be considered by such officials in deciding
whether or not to issue a permit shall be the following:



      (1)   The amount of the snow to be hauled and dumped;



      (2)   The location where the snow would be deposited;



      (3)   The density of the snow to be dumped;



      (4)   The effect of such deposit on the storm water drainage
system of the city;



      (5)   The effect of such deposit on adjoining or downstream
private or public properties; and



      (6)   The effect on the drainage system on adjoining
downstream private or public properties in first removing the snow to be
dumped to the extent that this effect is beneficial to the drainage system of
the city on lands located within the City of Columbia Heights.



   (C)   The following activity shall be exempt from the requirements
of this section and shall require no permit:



      (1)   Hauling snow from or through the city if the subject
snow is not deposited in the city;



      (2)   Depositing or dumping snow in the city when such snow is
not hauled by means of a wheeled vehicle;



      (3)   Hauling and dumping of snow in such small quantities
that the total amount hauled and dumped within any one-year period is less
than one cubic yard.



   (D)   No person shall haul or dump snow other than in the manner or
amount prescribed in the permit.



   (E)   The hauling and dumping of snow shall constitute a building
and construction activity for purposes of this chapter.



(`77 Code, § 6.1001)  (Am. Ord. 1024, passed 11-8-82)  Penalty, see §
6.802



CHAPTER 7:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Article



      I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      II.   CITY REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS



      III.   VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT



      IV.   BICYCLES



      V.   SNOWMOBILES



      VI.   COMPLIANCE



ARTICLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   7.101   State Highway Regulation Act



   7.102   Local regulation powers



   7.103   Traffic code violations



§ 7.101  STATE HIGHWAY REGULATION ACT.



   (A)   The Minnesota Highway Traffic Regulation Act, enacted as M.S.
Chapter 169, together with all amendments thereto through 1981, is hereby
adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set forth herein. 
M.S. Chapter 171, Driver’s Licenses and Driver Training Schools, together
with all amendments thereto through 1981, is hereby adopted by reference as
if fully set forth herein.  M.S. Chapter 168, Motor Vehicles, together with
all amendments thereto through 1981, is hereby adopted by reference as if
fully set forth herein.



   (B)   Any term used hereafter in this chapter that is defined in
M.S. § 169.01, as it may be amended from time to time, shall have the
meaning ascribed to it therein, except as otherwise provided below:



   IDENTIFYING CERTIFICATE.  The certificate or insignia issued to
physically handicapped persons by the Minnesota Department of Public Safety
pursuant to M.S. § 169.345, as it may be amended from time to time.



   PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED.  Any person who has sustained an amputation or
permanent material disability of either or both arms or legs, or who has been
otherwise permanently disabled in any manner rendering it difficult and
burdensome to walk.



(`77 Code, § 7.101)  (Am. Ord. 890, passed 8-15-78; Am. Ord. 904, passed
7-9-79; Am. Ord. 960, passed 7-27-81)



§ 7.102  LOCAL REGULATION POWERS.



   (A)   The Council may regulate the use of streets, alleys, municipal
parking lots, and public ways by the owner of, by persons operating, or by
persons in control of any vehicle or bicycle, provided that such regulations
are not in conflict with § 7.101 of this chapter.  The provisions of §
7.101 of this chapter shall be considered controlling over any other
provisions of this chapter that are inconsistent therewith or in conflict
thereto.



   (B)   Regulations may be adopted directly by Council action, or by
delegation to administrative officials, as hereinafter provided, subject to
the following conditions:



      (1)   The Manager may not refer any matter directly to the
Traffic Commission; nor directly to the administrative service to act on any
recommendations of said Commission for any matter not specifically so
authorized by this chapter.



      (2)   Any public street, alley, municipal parking lot or
portion thereof is subject to regulation by the Council or by the
administrative service, as is necessary to prevent accidents, to eliminate
traffic congestion, to provide public access to adequate parking facilities,
or to otherwise promote the safety and welfare of the city.



      (3)   No regulation or restriction pertaining to a particular
designated street or portion thereof shall become effective until necessary
and appropriate signs and/or curb markings have been posted or painted yellow.



   (C)   (1)   The Manager shall have the delegated duty under this
section to post signs and/or provide markings upon passage by motion of a
Council regulation or restriction, or upon administrative establishment of a
regulation or restriction pertaining to a particular street or portion
thereof.



      (2)   The cost for signs or markings posted at the request of
property owners, or directly benefitting property owners, may be charged
directly to said persons by Council action.



(`77 Code, § 7.102)  (Am. Ord. 914, passed 5-12-80; Am. Ord. 1458, passed
6-30-03)



§ 7.103  TRAFFIC CODE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall operate, park or stop a vehicle in such a
manner as to constitute or result in a violation of any regulation, street
designation or prohibition established pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   The presence of any stopped or parked and unattended vehicle
in such a manner as to constitute a violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle
committed said violation, or authorized the commission of said violation by
allowing another person to operate said vehicle.



   (C)   A tag may be placed on the windshield of any unattended
vehicle providing the following information describing an observed violation
as is appropriate:



      (1)   The applicable section of this code and chapter;



      (2)   The date and hour of the violation;



      (3)   The make and license number of the vehicle;



      (4)   The location of the observed violation, or parking meter
number; and



      (5)   Instructions to the owner or operator of the vehicle to
report to the designated public authority regarding said violation; and that
payment of the sum of $3 within 24 hours of the time of the violation will be
accepted as full satisfaction for such violation.



(`77 Code, § 7.103)  Penalty, see § 7.601



ARTICLE II:  CITY REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS



Section



   7.201   Street designations



   7.202   Parking and stopping zones



   7.203   Temporary and emergency orders



   7.204   Prohibited moving operations



   7.205   Prohibited non-moving violations



   7.206   Non-vehicular prohibitions



§ 7.201  STREET DESIGNATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The Council may regulate the movement of traffic in
the city by designation of any street or portion of a street as a through
street or a one-way street.  The Council may also designate any intersection
as a STOP intersection, or may designate any intersection as one where the
turning of vehicles and bicycles to the left or to the right or both is to be
restricted at all times or during specified hours.



      (2)   The Manager shall have the delegated authority to
designate any intersection as a STOP intersection in the manner prescribed by
§ 3.308.



   (B)   (1)   The Council may regulate the use of streets by
vehicles in excess of 15,000 pounds gross weight as follows:  The Council
may designate truck routes and require such vehicles to use said routes at
all times, except as otherwise provided hereinafter.



      (2)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed as
prohibiting any vehicle in excess of 15,000 pounds gross weight from using
any city street where absolutely necessary to reach a particular destination
within the city.



   (C)   No regulation or designation under this section shall be made
for any state trunk highway or portion thereof without consent of the State
Commissioner of Highways.



   (D)   (1)   The Council may provide for the establishment of
safety zones and order installation of such warning signs, signals, lane or
pavement markings, or other devices as are appropriate to assist in the
direction and control of traffic, to improve safe driving conditions, and to
warn of dangerous conditions or hazards.



      (2)   The Manager shall have the direct authority to provide
for any of the foregoing under this division upon consultation with the City
Engineer and Chief of Police.



(`77 Code, § 7.201)



§ 7.202  PARKING AND STOPPING ZONES.



   (A)   The Council may regulate traffic flow and prevent traffic
congestion by designation of certain streets or portions thereof as “no
parking, no stopping, or no standing” zones and may limit the hours in
which the restrictions apply.



      (1)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
vehicle parked or stopped temporarily in such zone for the purpose of forming
a funeral procession.



      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
truck parked or stopped temporarily in such zone between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon for the purpose of loading or unloading, where access to
the premises is not otherwise available.



      (3)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
truck parked or stopped temporarily in an industrial zone for the purpose of
loading or unloading, where access to the premises is not otherwise available.



   (B)   The Council may regulate access to public parking areas by
designating areas where the right to park is limited to a specified duration
of time.  The Council may limit such restrictions to specified hours of the
day.  The Manager shall have the delegated authority to designate areas of
limited parking in the manner prescribed by § 3.308.



   (C)   (1)   The Council may regulate public access to commercial
and business establishments by designating areas or portions of streets as
“loading zones” for exclusive use by trucks or other vehicles loading or
unloading merchandise, goods, or other property.  The Council may specify
limitations as to the hours and days during which such zones shall be in
force.



      (2)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed as
prohibiting any person operating a vehicle from utilizing a designated
loading zone for temporarily stopping or standing to receive or discharge
passengers, provided that such vehicle remains occupied at all times and
remains in the loading zone for a period not to exceed five minutes.



   (D)   The Council may designate areas or portions of streets as a
“bus stop” or as a “taxi stand” to provide for the public convenience
and minimize disruption of traffic by operation of such vehicles.



      (1)   A designated “bus stop” may only be used by vehicles
engaged in carrying passengers for hire, except that said bus stop may be
used by any vehicle for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers.



      (2)   A designated “taxi stand” may only be used by
taxicabs, as defined in Chapter 5 of this code, except that said “taxi
stand” may be used by any vehicle for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers.



   (E)   The Council may designate streets or portions of streets as
“metered parking zones” in order to regulate the public availability of
parking facilities.  Meters shall be installed at or near the curb and
immediately adjacent to the individual parking spaces which shall be
delineated by lines or markings painted upon the curb or street.



      (1)   Parking meters shall be installed and adjusted so that
when properly operated a timing mechanism will indicate a period of time upon
and after the deposit therein of certain United States coins.  Said meters
shall show a signal reflecting the expiration of time from the previous
deposit of coins.



      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a
commercial vehicle during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., provided that
the vehicle is parked in a metered parking zone for the sole purpose of
making deliveries.



      (3)   Money accumulated in the meters shall be collected
periodically by a designated person who shall be bonded in an amount
determined by the Council.  The money shall be placed in a “Parking Meter
Fund" to be used exclusively to defray the costs incident to traffic and
parking regulation including installing and maintaining parking meters.



      (4)   The tag placed on the windshield of any unattended
vehicle parked in violation of § 7.205(A)(1) shall also contain instructions
to the owner or operator of the vehicle to report to the designated public
authority regarding said violation; and that payment of the sum of $3 within
24 hours of the violation will be accepted as full satisfaction of such
violation.



   (F)   No person shall park or stand any vehicle on a boulevard or
allow a vehicle to remain on a boulevard within the city, except:



      (1)   When authorized by the Chief of Police on an emergency
basis;



      (2)   When permitted by action of the Council during repairs
of adjacent streets;



      (3)   When issued a permit by the Chief of Police.  The Chief
of Police may only issue such permits to applicants meeting the following
conditions:



         (a)   The Chief of Police, upon advice of the Zoning
Administrator, determines that the applicant cannot park at any other place
on the property on which his residence is located without violating the
zoning laws relating to permitted off-street parking;



         (b)   The Chief of Police determines that permitting
such parking will not impede the plowing, removal or storage of any snow, ice
or waste from the public right-of-way;



         (c)   The Chief of Police determines that permitting
such parking will not obstruct the normal flow of pedestrian traffic from
adjoining properties and will not obstruct the delivery of emergency services
to the affected property or any other property;



         (d)   The permit will only allow the parking of vehicles
at such location as is designed by the Chief of Police;



         (e)   The permit may be revoked by the Chief of Police
if the Chief of Police later discovers that the subject vehicle will impede
the plowing, storage or removal of snow, ice or waste from or at the location
of the vehicle; provided, however, that the Chief of Police shall give notice
of such revocation by posting a notice to that effect on the subject vehicle
for not less than two hours;



         (f)   No permit shall be valid for a period in excess of
ten hours in any 24-hour period;



         (g)   No permit shall be valid unless clearly displayed
upon the permitted vehicle;



         (h)   No permit shall be valid except between November 1
of any year and March 31 of the next succeeding year;



         (i)   Any act of the designated representative of the
Chief of Police shall be construed as the act of the Chief of Police for
purposes of this division.



         (j)   All permits shall expire on March 31 of each year.



   (G)   The administrative service, through the Fire Chief and City
Engineer, shall have the delegated authority to establish fire lanes on any
public street; on any private road servicing a business, commercial, or
industrial establishment, or a multiple-dwelling residence, for ready access
of emergency vehicles, wherein parking shall be prohibited at all times.



   (H)   With Council approval any property owner may post signs
regulating or prohibiting traffic on his property.



      (1)   The signs shall conform to the standards of the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways of the State of
Minnesota.



      (2)   The signs shall serve as authorization and consent for
any police officer to enter upon the private property to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and the prescribed traffic regulations.



   (I)   (1)   Any person, corporation, or governmental subdivision
may designate, and reserve for use by physically handicapped persons parking
spaces upon public or private property owned or controlled by the party
taking such designation and reservation; provided, however, that:



         (a)   Parking spaces hereafter designated and reserved
for the physically handicapped shall not be less than 12 feet in width and
located as near as practicable to the entrance of the building that is most
easily usable by physically handicapped persons;



         (b)   Designation and reservation of such parking spaces
hereafter shall be made by the posting of permanent, nonportable signs
conforming to the requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways as adopted by the Minnesota Commissioner of
Highways; and



         (c)   No person shall hereafter erect or cause to be
erected signs designating and reserving parking spaces for physically
handicapped persons unless the location, number, and method of signing of
such spaces is first approved by the Chief of Police or an appointed
representative.



      (2)   No person shall park a motor vehicle in parking spaces
designated and reserved for the physically handicapped unless:



         (a)   That person is physically handicapped or is
operating a vehicle under the direction and for the use of a physically
handicapped person; and



         (b)   Such vehicle has displayed prominently upon it a
duly issued and valid identifying certificate.



(`77 Code, § 7.202)  (Am. Ord. 929, passed 10-27-80)  Penalty, see § 7.601



§ 7.203  TEMPORARY AND EMERGENCY ORDERS.



   (A)   The administrative service, through the Police Department and
Public Works Department shall have the delegated authority to make temporary
or emergency orders not otherwise provided for herein, imposing restrictions
on parking or traffic flow, or closing streets, as are necessary for:



      (1)   Street maintenance and repairs;



      (2)   Tree trimming and removal services;



      (3)   Repairs to utility services;



      (4)   Fire fighting or control of any criminal or civil
disturbance;



      (5)   Snow plowing or snow removal services in addition to
those prescribed by § 7.202(F);



      (6)   Parades, marches, transportation of buildings, or street
excavations;



      (7)   Any other circumstance in which such restrictions are
reasonably necessary for the public health, safety or welfare.



   (B)   The administrative service shall have the delegated authority
to issue permits for street excavations and transportation of buildings which
will interfere with or obstruct the normal use of any city street.



   (C)   The Police Department shall have the authority to issue
permits, with Council approval, for parades, marches, or any other assembly
of people reasonably anticipated to interfere with or obstruct the normal
flow of traffic on public streets, provided, that:



      (1)   No permit shall be arbitrarily or unreasonably denied
for reasons unrelated to a lawful concern for the public safety and welfare.



      (2)   No permit shall be issued for a parade or march during
the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. or 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.



      (3)   The Council and/or Chief of Police may impose reasonable
restrictions and conditions for the issuance of the permit for the public
safety and welfare.



   (D)   Any person may request establishment of such regulations,
conditions or restrictions in any part of the city by making written
application therefore to the Council. The application shall specify the
address and the nature of any commercial or business activity conducted at
said premises, or as a condition of each such application, the Council may
require the applicant to pay the Treasurer the estimated cost of erecting
signs and painting the curb.



(`77 Code, § 7.203) (Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)  Penalty, see § 7.601



§ 7.204  PROHIBITED MOVING OPERATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any public or
private street or highway within the city, or on any public or private
parking lot, in such a manner as to cause it to unreasonably accelerate,
which, as defined herein, shall constitute a public nuisance.



      (1)   Unreasonable acceleration of a motor vehicle is hereby
defined as acceleration without apparent reason, and accomplished in such
manner as to cause either or both of the following:  squealing or screeching
sounds by the tires or the throwing of sand, gravel or loose rocks and
material by the tires of said vehicle.



      (2)   Prima facie evidence of such necessary and unreasonable
acceleration shall be squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires or
the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires of said vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall turn around a vehicle by taking a turn upon
any street or highway in the city unless such vehicle shall first proceed to
an intersecting street and said “U” turn shall be made at the
intersecting street, provided, however, that a “U” turn at any
intersection on any street or highway in the City of Columbia Heights where a
police officer is stationed, or where a “stop and go” or illuminated
“slow” signal or “school stop sign” or “stop” sign is located at
the intersection is prohibited.



   (C)   (1)   No person shall drive a vehicle on any public alley
or private roadway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under
the circumstances and conditions, and in no event at a speed greater than 10
miles per hour in an alley, or 15 miles per hour on a private roadway.



      (2)   No person may operate a motor vehicle on a public alley
unless directed to do so by a peace officer, authorized community service
officer, reserve police officer, or authorized traffic control device, except
abutting property owners, tenants, their guests and invitees, operating a
motor vehicle in an otherwise lawful manner.  This section shall not be
interpreted to preclude use of alleys by persons performing authorized
activities on behalf of any law enforcement agency.



   (D)   No person shall operate or park a vehicle of any kind on park
lands not designed or designated for traffic or parking purposes, on ice of
city lakes or flooded skating or hockey rinks, except such vehicles and
machines operated by the Public Works Department for the purpose of
maintaining skating rinks and performing necessary work on said ice; provided
that the Council may authorize by resolution the use of a certain portion of
any park area or lake for ice racing or snowmobiling.



   (E)   No person operating a vehicle shall tow or push a toboggan,
sled, ice skater, bicycle or any other sliding or coasting device, nor permit
any other person to board or alight from or hang onto said vehicle while said
vehicle is in motion.



   (F)   (1)   No person shall drive or operate a stock car or
racing car upon the streets and alleys or elsewhere within the limits of the
city.



      (2)   For purposes of this chapter:



         RACING CAR.  Any motor vehicle designed or intended for
operation on a speedway, racetrack, or other facility used or designed for
high speed contests between two or more vehicles or for timing of speed.



         STOCK CAR.  Any motor vehicle of standard design and
construction which is modified, adapted or altered in any manner to increase
its speed or safety, and designed or intended for operation on a speedway,
racetrack, or other facility used or designed for high speed contests between
two or more vehicles or for timing of speed.



   (G)   No person shall drive, operate or be in actual physical
control of a motor vehicle upon private property without the consent of the
owner or occupant of the premises, if signs are posted prohibiting the
operation of motor vehicles thereon.



   (H)   No person shall drive, operate, or park a motor vehicle
weighing in excess of 15,000 pounds gross weight upon any city street within
the City of Columbia Heights except as authorized by § 7.201(B).



   (I)   No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle, including
motorcycles, motorized bicycles, or motor scooters, upon any sidewalk at any
time within the city except when such operation is necessary for the most
direct access to a roadway from a driveway, alley or building.



   (J)   No person shall drive, operate or be in actual physical
control of a motor vehicle upon private property of another not intended for
vehicular use without the consent of the owner of said property.



(`77 Code, § 7.204)  (Am. Ord. 878, passed 9-26-77; Am. Ord. 960, passed
7-27-81; Am. Ord. 1011, passed 9-27-82; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 7-26-99) 
Penalty, see § 7.601



§ 7.205  PROHIBITED NON-MOVING VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle in his custody or control in
any one place upon any street or roadway for a continuous period longer than
six hours or:



      (1)   In a metered parking zone as indicated by the location
of installed meters, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day
except Sundays and legal holidays, at any time when said meter indicates that
the time has expired since the last deposit of coins therein; or



      (2)   In a metered parking zone during the aforementioned
times in such a position that said vehicle is not entirely within the space
designated for a particular meter, unless the length of said vehicle exceeds
the length of the space provided.



   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle in his custody or control in
such a manner as to protrude into or obstruct a lane designed for moving
traffic or a fire lane, or park a vehicle on a residential street where
parking is prohibited, or park a vehicle in any alley except for the purpose
of loading or unloading.



   (C)   (1)   No person with title or custody of a motor vehicle
shall abandon such vehicle as defined herein, anywhere within the city.  For
purposes of this chapter, an ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE shall consist of:



         (a)   A motor vehicle which has remained in any one
place on public property for a continuous period of 48 hours and lacks vital
component parts that are essential to the mechanical functioning of the
vehicle, or is otherwise in inoperable condition; or



         (b)   A motor vehicle which has remained on private
property for a continuous period of 48 hours without the consent of the
person in control of such property.



      (2)   Provided, however, that a classic car or pioneer car as
defined in M.S. § 168.10, as it may be amended from time to time, shall not
be considered as an abandoned motor vehicle within the meaning of subdivision
(1)(a) of this division.



   (D)   No person shall operate, park, stop or stand a vehicle in his
custody or control in such a manner as to violate the parking restrictions
prescribed by § 7.202(G), or any other restrictions of a temporary or
emergency order, pursuant to § 7.203, whether such order is posted or not.



   (E)   No person shall wash, grease, or repair any vehicle on any
park, boulevard, or parkway, except to perform necessary emergency repairs.



   (F)   No person operating a bus shall allow the same to remain
stopped or parked upon any street at a place not designated as a “bus
stop.”  No person operating a taxicab shall allow the same to remain
stopped or parked upon any street at a place not designated as a
“taxistand” for a period in excess of five minutes while occupying said
taxicab; provided, however, that such operator may temporarily stop or park
such taxicab at any location when so instructed in order to pick up
passengers.



   (G)   No person shall park, keep, place, store or permit the parking
or storage of any stock car, racing car, or junk vehicle on a public street
or alley, or any private lands or premises which he owns, occupies or
controls for a period of longer than 96 hours, unless it shall be within a
building on such private premises.  Said person shall be given a notice of
violation by the city to take corrective action.  CORRECTIVE ACTION shall be
defined as follows:



      (1)   When the vehicle is legally parked and in compliance
with all applicable city ordinances and state requirements for an operable
vehicle on public roads.  In the event corrective action is not taken within
96 hours from the notice of the violation, the city may take the vehicle into
custody, impound it, and the vehicle is eligible for disposal or sale as an
unauthorized vehicle under M.S. § 168B.08, 45 days after notice to the owner.



      (2)   For purposes of divisions (G), (H) and (I) of this
section:



         BUS.  A vehicle designed for carrying passengers and
having a seating capacity of more than nine persons, but not to include any
such vehicle which has been altered for use for camping purposes exclusively.



         JUNK VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle which is not in operable
condition, or which is partially dismantled, or which is used for sale of
parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other vehicles, or
which is kept for scrapping, dismantling, or salvage of any kind.  Failure
to prominently display a motor vehicle registration license for the current
year shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle is a junk vehicle.



         MOTOR TRUCK, TRUCK TRACTOR or COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.  A
vehicle having either a capacity of more than one ton or weight of more than
5,000 pounds or both, but not to include vehicles which are designed
exclusively for recreation purposes.



   (H)   No person owning, driving or in charge of any bus, motor
truck, truck tractor, or commercial vehicle shall permit the same to be
parked or stand longer than 24 hours continuously on, in front of, or beside
any property in a residential district, except for the purpose of loading or
unloading.



   (I)   No person owning, driving, or in charge of any bus, motor
truck, truck tractor, or commercial vehicle designed exclusively for
recreation or camping purposes, shall permit more than two of the same to
stand longer than 24 hours continuously on, in front of, or beside any
property in a residential district except for the purpose of loading or
unloading.



   (J)   No person shall service, repair, replace parts or do
maintenance work on a stock car, racing car, or junk car on a public street,
nor on any private lands or premises unless it shall be within a building on
such private premises.



   (K)   No person shall park or stop his vehicle in a private parking
lot in such a manner as to interfere with or obstruct the movement of traffic
therein.



   (L)   No person parking or stopping his vehicle in a private parking
lot shall allow the same to remain in such lot for longer than the posted
limit.



   (M)   No automobile, motor vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer
may be parked or left unattended on any public road or parkway within the
City of Columbia Heights at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. without a parking permit issued by the Chief of Police or his designated
representative.  The Chief of Police may only issue such permits to
applicants only upon the following conditions:



      (1)   Permits in excess of five in any calendar month shall
not be granted unless the Chief of Police determines that the applicant
cannot park on the property upon which his residence is located without
violating the zoning laws relating to permitted off-street parking areas or
that the applicant cannot reasonably or legally drive the subject vehicle to
any other place on the property where his residence is located without
violating the zoning laws relating to off-street parking.



      (2)   The Chief of Police determines that the issuance of such
permit will not impede the plowing or removal of any snow, ice or waste from
such public road or parkway.



      (3)   The permit will only allow the parking of vehicles at
such location as is designed by the Chief of Police.



      (4)   The permit may be revoked by the Chief of Police if the
Chief of Police later discovers that the subject vehicle will impede the
plowing or removal of snow, ice, or waste from the location of the vehicle;
provided, however, that the Chief of Police shall give notice of such
revocation by posting a notice to that effect on the subject vehicle for not
less than two hours.



      (5)   No permit shall be valid for a period in excess of four
hours.



      (6)   No permit shall be valid unless clearly displayed upon
the permitted vehicle.



      (7)   Any act of the designated representative of the Chief of
Police shall be construed as the act of the Chief of Police for purposes of
this division.



      (8)   All permits granted hereunder shall expire on March 31
of each year.



   (N)   Division (M) of this section shall not be effective between
the dates of April 1 of each year and October 31 of the same year, said dates
being inclusive; provided, however, that division (M) of this section shall
be applicable between April 1 of each year and May 1 of each year, said dates
being inclusive, to any subject vehicle when snow has accumulated to a depth
of three and one-half inches or more within the traveled portion of any
roadway that lies within six feet of the said vehicle.



   (O)   No person shall park or stop a vehicle which is wider than 68
inches at its widest point in any designated compact car parking space within
the city.



   (P)   No person, firm or corporation owning or having a superior
possessory interest in a parking lot containing designated compact parking
spaces shall allow or permit any vehicle which is wider than 68 inches at its
widest point to be parked within any designated compact car parking space
within the city.  The existence of two or more vehicles remaining parked in
violation of division (O) of this section for a period of more than two hours
shall be prima facie evidence that the person, firm or corporation owning or
having the superior possessory interest in such lot is allowing or permitting
such activity in violation of this section.  In addition to the penalties
prescribed for misdemeanor violations by this code, the city may take such
action as it deems appropriate in law or equity to enforce the owner’s
responsibility to enforce the proper use of compact parking spaces.



(`77 Code, § 7.205)  (Am. Ord. 1063, passed 11-14-83; Am. Ord. 1343, passed
4-28-97; Am. Ord. 1364, passed 11-24-97; Am. Ord. 1485, passed 6-13-05) 
Penalty, see § 7.601



§ 7.206  NON-VEHICULAR PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall deposit in any parking meter a slug, device,
or metallic substitute for a United States coin, nor shall any person deface,
tamper with, or willfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any
parking meter installed pursuant to this section.



   (B)   No person shall post any sign regulating the operation of
vehicles or bicycles or establishing conditions and restrictions regarding
parking or stopping of vehicles on any public street, alley, or public
parking area, without prior authorization of the Council.



   (C)   No person shall organize, conduct or participate in a parade,
march, or other assembly of persons or vehicles, that interferes with or
obstructs traffic, without a permit approved by the Council and issued by the
Chief of Police.



      (1)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a
funeral procession.



      (2)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed as limiting
the right of any individual to freedom of speech, or assembly.



      (3)   Permit applications shall include information as to the
date, time and place of the requested parade, the anticipated number of
participants, the sponsoring individuals or organization, the purpose or
reason for the parade, and such other information as requested by the Council
or Chief of Police.



(`77 Code, § 7.206)  Penalty, see § 7.601



ARTICLE III:  VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT



Section



   7.301   Authority for impoundment



   7.302   Procedures



§ 7.301  AUTHORITY FOR IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   A vehicle may be impounded by the Police Department, or by a
commercial towing service pursuant to a contract with the city, where such
vehicle:



      (1)   Is parked in such a manner as to constitute a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter and thereby cause an obstruction to
the free flow of traffic or interferes with the performance of municipal
services; or



      (2)   Is abandoned, whether on public or private property; or



      (3)   Unlawfully blocks a water hydrant or is parked in a fire
lane, whether on public or private property.



   (B)   No vehicle shall be impounded unless a tag is affixed to the
windshield ordering that said vehicle be towed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.



   (C)   No vehicle may be impounded solely because it is parked in
such a manner as to constitute a violation of § 7.205(M) except:



      (1)   Between 2:00 a.m. on November 1 and 6:00 a.m. on March
31 of the next succeeding year; and



      (2)   At least three and one-half inches of snow has
accumulated within the traveled portion of any roadway at any point not
greater than 15 feet from any part of the subject vehicle.



(`77 Code, § 7.301)  (Am. Ord. 871, passed 4-9-79)



§ 7.302  PROCEDURES.



   (A)   If the owner of a vehicle appears before said vehicle is
hooked to the tow-truck and the wheels are hoisted from the ground, the
operator shall release the vehicle without charging a fee.



      (1)   If the vehicle is already hooked to the truck and the
wheels hoisted, then a fee as set periodically by resolution of the Council
shall be charged prior to release of said vehicle.



      (2)   The operator shall provide a receipt when the vehicle is
released upon payment of the aforesaid fee.



   (B)   The Police Department shall provide the record owner, if any,
of the towed vehicle written notification by certified mail of the following
information:



      (1)   Identification of vehicle, including make, model and
license number;



      (2)   Location of vehicle at time of impoundment;



      (3)   Traffic code violation;



      (4)   Storage location of vehicle;



      (5)   A statement that the vehicle may be reclaimed within 30
days, or it will be sold to the highest bidder;



      (6)   A statement that the owner would be responsible for
towing and storage charges.



   (C)   (1)   Said notification shall be provided within 72 hours
of the time of impoundment and mailed to the last known address of the record
owner, with copies mailed to all identifiable lien holders of record within
ten days.



      (2)   If it is impossible to determine with reasonable
certainty the identity and address of an owner of record, or of any lien
holders, the notice shall be published once in the legal newspaper of general
circulation for the city within 15 days from the date of impoundment.



   (D)   The vehicle shall be stored until the record owner has
provided identification, paid all towing and storage charges incurred and
reclaimed said vehicle, or until the expiration of 30 days if said vehicle is
not claimed.



      (1)   After the expiration of 13 days, the vehicle may be
reclaimed by any lien holder with proper identification, upon payment of all
towing and storage charges.



      (2)   Upon the expiration of 30 days, the vehicle may be sold
to the highest bidder at a public auction.  A memorandum bill of sale shall
be sent to the last known address of the owner of record, if any.



   (E)   The Police Department or commercial towing service shall
comply with the following procedures:



      (1)   The tow-truck operator shall have in his possession an
identification card indicating his authority to tow the vehicle.



      (2)   Upon arrival at the storage facilities, the vehicle
shall be inventoried.



      (3)   Towing and storage rates shall be subject to approval of
the Council.



   (F)   The net proceeds of all sales, after deduction of towing and
storage costs, and administrative costs of conducting a public sale, shall be
forwarded to the Treasurer.



   (G)   A record shall be kept by the Police Department or the towing
service stating the following information:



      (1)   The make, model and license number of each vehicle
towed, and of each vehicle for which a fee was collected.



      (2)   The date, time and place where each vehicle was picked
up.



      (3)   The record owner of each vehicle impounded.



      (4)   The duration of time for storage of each vehicle.



      (5)   The disposition of each vehicle, including charges
collected upon pickup, or proceeds derived from the sale of said vehicle.



      (6)   The name and address of the person claiming each
vehicle, or the name and address of the purchaser of any vehicle disposed of
by public sale.



   (H)   Any commercial towing service contracted by the city pursuant
to this section shall obtain and keep in full force liability insurance for
property damage to impounded vehicles resulting from accident, theft, or
other catastrophe in the sum of $20,000 per vehicle.



(`77 Code, § 7.302) (Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



ARTICLE IV:  BICYCLES



Section



   7.401   Registration



   7.402   Regulation



§ 7.401  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   No person may use, ride, operate, own, or be in actual
physical control of a bicycle upon any highway, street, alley, sidewalk, or
other public property within the city unless such bicycle shall have been
registered in accordance with M.S. § 168C.03, as it may be amended from time
to time, and with the registration conspicuously displayed on the bicycle. 
Provided, however, that any person who has previously registered a bicycle
with the City of Columbia Heights shall not be required to register that
bicycle pursuant to M.S. § 168C.03, as it may be amended from time to time,
prior to March 1, 1980.



   (B)   No person, who is an owner of record of any bicycle registered
with the City of Columbia Heights on or before March 1, 1977 may sell or
otherwise transfer ownership of the bicycle without notifying the City of
Columbia Heights in writing within ten days thereof of such sale or transfer
of ownership.



   (C)   The Columbia Heights Police Department may impound any bicycle
which is used, ridden, operated, owned or possessed, or otherwise exists upon
any public property within the city if such bicycle has not been registered
pursuant to M.S. Chapter 168C, as it may be amended from time to time, or if
registration is not conspicuously displayed on the bicycle.  The bicycle may
be surrendered upon proof of ownership and proof that said bicycle is
properly registered.



   (D)   Any bicycle impounded by the city and which remains unclaimed
by the owner for a period of 60 days may be sold at public sale or auction
following published notice.



(`77 Code, § 7.401)  (Am. Ord. 991, passed 4-26-82)  Penalty, see § 7.601



§ 7.402  REGULATION.



   (A)   The owner of any registered bicycle shall report any theft or
loss of said bicycle to the Police Department, including a description of the
last observed location of said bicycle.



   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle within the period from
sunset to sunrise without utilization of a headlight that is visible from the
front thereof under normal atmospheric conditions for a distance of not less
than 300 feet, nor without a red light or reflector attached to the rear
which is clearly visible in the headlight beam of a motor vehicle for a
distance of not less than 200 feet to the rear of the bicycle.



   (C)   No person shall operate a bicycle in violation of any of the
below-listed regulations:



      (1)   Extra passengers shall not be carried on the handlebars
or on any other part of the bicycle unless a seat specifically designed to
carry such passengers is attached thereto.



      (2)   No bicycle shall be operated while attached to any other
moving vehicle, or while the operator of such bicycle is clinging to such
vehicle.



      (3)   Bicycles shall be operated in single file and the
operator shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians.  When approaching or
passing a pedestrian while riding on a sidewalk, the speed of a bicycle shall
be reduced to a speed no greater than necessary to continue the operation of
the bicycle without the rider dismounting.



      (4)   All traffic signals and signs, and rules and regulations
enacted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which are applicable to
bicycles shall be adhered to and obeyed by the bicycle operator.



(`77 Code, § 7.402)  Penalty, see § 7.601



ARTICLE V:  SNOWMOBILES



Section



   7.501   General



   7.502   Use on public property



   7.503   Use on private property



   7.504   Prohibited operations



§ 7.501  GENERAL.



   (A)   No person shall operate a snowmobile as defined below, in
violation of any of the conditions or restrictions as hereinafter described.



      OPERATE.  To ride in or on and control the operation of a
snowmobile.



      OPERATION.  Every person who operates or is in actual physical
control of a snowmobile.



      SNOWMOBILE.  A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on
snow or ice and steered by skis or runners.



   (B)   No person shall operate a snowmobile that has not been
registered in accordance with the provisions of M.S. § 84.82, as it may be
amended from time to time.



(`77 Code, § 7.501)  Penalty, see § 7.601



§ 7.502  USE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a snowmobile upon publicly
owned properties in the city unless such property is specifically posted
“Snowmobiles Allowed.”



      (2)   No person shall leave a snowmobile on public property
while unattended unless the motor of such vehicle shall be off and the
ignition locked in a manner which will prevent an unauthorized person from
starting said vehicle.  This provision shall apply when the vehicle is
located in a public parking area.  The snowmobile shall not be left
unattended on other public property.



   (B)   No person shall operate a snowmobile upon the roadway,
shoulder or inside bank slope of any street or highway within the city, and
in the case of a divided highway, on the right-of-way between the opposing
lanes of traffic; except that a person may operate a snowmobile upon those
roads authorized by, and in the manner of operation prescribed by M.S. §
84.87, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   No person shall operate a snowmobile upon lakes within the
city after 10:00 p.m. and before 8:00 a.m. on the following day, nor shall
any person operate a snowmobile on a lake within the city in any manner which
would bring it within 100 feet of any fisherman, pedestrian, skating rink, or
sliding area or in any other area where the operation would conflict with use
or endanger other persons or property.  In those areas where the city has
posted portions of the lake restricting the use of snowmobiles therein, no
person shall operate snowmobiles contrary to the regulations so posted.



(`77 Code, § 7.502)  Penalty, see § 7.601



§ 7.503  USE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   Snowmobiles may be operated on privately owned properties by
the owner of said property provided all noise requirements of the city
nuisance ordinance are met.  No person shall operate a snowmobile on any
privately owned property unless he has received the express permission of the
owner of said property.



   (B)   It shall be a sufficient defense to a prosecution for
violation of this section that the defendant has written unrevoked permission
from the owner or lawful occupant of the land or of the public board, body,
or commission which is authorized by law to hold and exercise dominion over
such land.



(`77 Code, § 7.503)  Penalty, see § 7.601



§ 7.504  PROHIBITED OPERATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall operate any snowmobile in the following unsafe
or harassing ways:



      (1)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper
under all surrounding circumstances.



      (2)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to
endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury or damage
thereto.



      (3)   While under the influence of alcoholic beverage or
narcotics or habit forming drugs.



      (4)   Without a lighted head and tail light when required for
safety.



      (5)   On any tree nursery or planting in a manner which
damages or destroys growing stock.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the prohibitions of this section, the city
shall have authority to authorize its officials or employees to supervise and
regulate events and programs under which exceptions to this section may be
made to include use on otherwise prohibited areas and use without certain
otherwise required equipment for snowmobile racing, derbies and other
competitive events; providing that no such exception shall be made in the
event it conflicts with the provisions of M.S. §§ 84.82 through 84.872, as
they may be amended from time to time.



(`77 Code, § 7.504)  Penalty, see § 7.601



ARTICLE VI:  COMPLIANCE



Section



   7.601   Penalty



§ 7.601  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates the provisions of this
chapter or who drives, operates, halts, or parks a vehicle in violation of
this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
1.999.



(`77 Code, § 7.601)



CHAPTER 8:  PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



   Article



      I.   ANIMALS



      II.   PUBLIC NUISANCES



      III.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH



      IV.   FIRE SAFETY



      V.   PUBLIC SAFETY



      VI.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



      VII.   SURFACE DRAINAGE CONNECTIONS AND DISCHARGES



      VIII.   REPEAT NUISANCE CALL SERVICE FEE



ARTICLE I:  ANIMALS



Section



   8.101   Dog and cat license



   8.102   Regulations



   8.103   Impoundment



   8.104   Destruction



   8.105   Quarantine



   8.106   Penalty



§ 8.101  DOG AND CAT LICENSE.



   (A)   No person shall own, keep, harbor or have custody of any dog
or cat over six months of age within the city unless such dog or cat is
currently licensed as is provided hereunder.



   (B)   License applications shall include the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the owner of the animal, and the
name and address of the applicant if other than the owner.



      (2)   The breed, sex and age of the dog or cat for which a
license is sought.



      (3)   A statement shall accompany any application for a spayed
female animal from a qualified veterinarian that such animal has been spayed
or otherwise rendered sterile.



      (4)   Such other information as the Council shall reasonably
require to determine animal census information or in compiling other records.



   (C)   Licenses shall be issued for such period of time and upon
payment of such fees as the Council shall determine by resolution. 
Provided, however, that:



      (1)   The Council may, in its discretion, provide for a pro
rata payment of license fees where the applicant provides written evidence
indicating immunity from rabies will terminate prior to the normal expiration
date of any license hereunder.



      (2)   The Council may by resolution provide for a lower fee
for spayed female and neutered male dogs and cats than for unspayed female
and unneutered male dogs or cats.



         (a)   The owner, keeper, or custodian of any dog or cat
shall pay the license fee for an unspayed or unneutered dog or cat unless
said applicant provides a veterinarian’s certificate verifying that said
animal has been spayed or neutered. Presentation of the dog or cat for
inspection shall not constitute adequate proof that the said dog or cat has
been spayed or neutered in accordance with this section.



         (b)   Any owner, keeper, or custodian who shall pay the
license fee for an unspayed or unneutered dog or cat as provided above may be
refunded the difference between that license fee and the fee for a spayed or
neutered dog or cat if he shall provide, within 30 days of the issuance of
said license, a veterinarian’s certificate verifying that the said licensed
dog or cat has been spayed or neutered.



   (D)   The licensing requirements of this section shall not apply to
non-residents of the city, provided that animals belonging to non-residents
shall not be kept in the city longer than 30 days without a license.



   (E)   Upon payment of the prescribed license fee to the Treasurer, a
written license and a metallic tag shall be issued for the licensed animal.
The tag shall indicate the registration number for such animal, and be of
such design so as to be worn or attached to a collar for said animal. A
duplicate metallic tag may be obtained to replace a lost or stolen tag in the
following prescribed manner:



      (1)   The owner of the animal shall present the original
license together with an affidavit reciting the fact that such tag has been
lost or stolen and not in the possession of the applicant.



      (2)   A duplicate tag shall be issued upon payment of a
duplicate tag fee in an amount set by resolution of the Council.



   (F)   The owner or person having custody of any animal licensed
under this chapter shall ensure that the metallic tag license shall be worn
by such animal at all times.



   (G)   No license may be issued for any dog or cat unless the owner
or keeper thereof shall furnish a veterinarian’s certificate showing that
the said dog or cat has been inoculated for the prevention of rabies and
showing the estimated termination date of immunity from rabies of such dog or
cat as a result of its inoculation for the prevention of rabies. Should such
certificate disclose that the said rabies inoculation shall cease to become
effective prior to the expiration of the licensing period, the license may be
issued with a license expiration date which coincides with the termination of
the effective immune period from rabies of such dog or cat.



(`77 Code, § 8.101)  (Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)  Penalty, see § 8.106



§ 8.102  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The owner or custodian of any animal permanently or
temporarily in the city shall have the obligation and responsibility to
prevent such animal from committing any act which constitutes a public
nuisance, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following acts:



      (1)   Habitually or frequently bark or cry to the annoyance of
neighbors or the general public.



      (2)   Molest or annoy any person if such person is not on the
property of the owner or custodian of such animal.



      (3)   Molest, defile, or destroy any public or private
property not belonging to the owner or custodian of such animal.



      (4)   Chase vehicles or otherwise run at large within the city.



   (B)   No person who owns or has custody of an animal exhibiting
ferocious or vicious propensities shall allow such animal to be kept, stored,
or to run at large within the city, either on public or private property,
including property that is owned or in possession of such person.



   (C)   (1)   No person who is the owner or has custody of any
animal shall beat, treat cruelly, torment or otherwise abuse or abandon such
animal.



      (2)   No person who is the owner or has custody of any animal
shall fail to provide such animal with sufficient good and wholesome food and
water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when
needed to prevent suffering, or with humane care and treatment.



(`77 Code, § 8.102)  (Am. Ord. 1005, passed 7-12-82)  Penalty, see § 8.106



§ 8.103  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   The city shall have the authority to impound any animal in
such manner and under such conditions and circumstances as prescribed by this
section:



      (1)   The Council may enter into a contract with any qualified
person, firm or corporation to be designated as the City Poundmaster, whose
duties shall be to enforce the provisions of this section.



      (2)   The city shall provide an adequate facility within or in
close proximity to the city, where all animals taken into custody shall be
kept and cared for until disposed of according to the provisions of this
section.



   (B)   The City Poundmaster may impound any animal where there is
reasonable cause to believe said animal:



      (1)   Exhibits ferocious or vicious tendencies;



      (2)   Constitutes a public nuisance as defined in § 8.102(A);



      (3)   Has bitten a person; or



      (4)   Is unlicensed in contravention of the provisions of §
8.101.



   (C)   The Poundmaster shall provide notice of any impounded animal,
as follows:



      (1)   For an animal wearing a license tag as described by this
chapter, the owner of such animal shall be notified in writing within 24
hours of such impoundment.



      (2)   For an animal not bearing a license tag as described by
this chapter, written notice of such impoundment shall be posted at City Hall
in a conspicuous place, and notice shall be provided to the City Pound and to
the Police Department.



      (3)   Notice shall be in the following form:




NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING ANIMAL




                                       �
�  Date:          



To Whom It May Concern:



I have this day taken up and impounded in the pound of the City at      
                  an animal answering the following description:



Type                   ,  Sex                 ,  Color  
                ,



Breed                   ,  Approximate Age                
  , Name of Owner                                      
    .



Notice is hereby given that unless said animal is claimed and redeemed within
ten (10) days, and before           o'clock     .m. on the      
day of                   , 19    , the same will be sold or killed
as provided by ordinance.



Signed:                              



Poundmaster



   (D)   Any animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall be kept for not less than five regular business days unless
reclaimed prior to that time by their owner as provided hereafter. The owner
of any impounded animal may reclaim the same upon payment to the Treasurer or
Poundmaster of an impounding fee as set by resolution of the Council, and the
payment of such daily boarding fees as shall be determined by the Council for
such time as the animal has been confined. The Poundmaster shall not release
any animal unless the owner thereof shall first purchase a license for the
said animal as provided in § 8.101.



   (E)   Any animal which is unclaimed by the rightful owner within the
prescribed time may be sold to anyone desiring to purchase said animal, if
not requested by a licensed educational or scientific institution under state
law.



      (1)   All sums received in excess of costs shall be held by
the Treasurer for the benefit of the owner.  If not claimed within one year,
such funds shall be placed in the general fund of the city.



      (2)   Any animal which is not disposed of as provided above
shall be painlessly killed and buried by the Poundmaster.



   (F)   Nothing in this code shall prevent the Poundmaster from
disposing of any animal in less than the prescribed time if such animal is
injured and, in the opinion of the Poundmaster, the only humane act would be
disposing of the animal.



(`77 Code, § 8.103) (Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



§ 8.104  DESTRUCTION.



   (A)   A court of proper jurisdiction may order the destruction of
any animal, or may order the owner or custodian to keep said animal confined
to a designated place, upon a hearing as hereinafter provided.



      (1)   A summons shall be issued to the owner of said animal
commanding him to appear before said court and show cause why said animal
should not be seized by the Poundmaster or otherwise disposed of in the
manner authorized by this chapter.  Said summons shall issue upon sworn
complaint that any of the following facts exist:



         (a)   That the animal has destroyed property or
habitually trespassed in a damaging manner on the property of persons other
than the owner.



         (b)   That the animal has attacked or bitten a person
outside the owner's or custodian's premises.



         (c)   That the animal is vicious or exhibits vicious or
ferocious tendencies, or molests pedestrians, or interferes with vehicles on
public streets or highways.



         (d)   That the animal is a public nuisance as heretofore
defined; or



         (e)   That the animal is running at large in violation
of this chapter.



      (2)   Such summons shall be returnable not less than two, nor
more than six days from the date thereof and shall be served at least two
days before the time of appearance mentioned therein.



      (3)   The court shall make findings of fact regarding the
allegations of the sworn complaint.



   (B)   The costs of any proceeding brought pursuant to this section
shall be assessed against the prevailing party.  The remedies provided by
this section are supplemental to other provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Any animal which presents a clear and immediate danger to city
residents because it is infected with rabies (hydrophobin) or because it is
of a clearly demonstrated vicious or ferocious nature, may be summarily
destroyed after the Poundmaster has made reasonable attempts to impound such
animal.



(`77 Code, § 8.104)



§ 8.105  QUARANTINE.



   (A)   Whenever the prevalence of rabies renders such action
necessary, the City Health Officer shall issue a proclamation to be published
twice and posted at City Hall ordering every person owning or having custody
of an animal to muzzle said animal securely so that it cannot bite.



      (1)   Any animal unmuzzled when so required shall be subject
to impoundment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   No person shall own, keep, harbor or have custody of any
animal over six months of age within the city which has not been vaccinated
against rabies within the previous two years by a qualified veterinarian.



   (B)   (1)   The City Health Officer may quarantine any animal
which bites a person for such time as is directed.  During the quarantine,
the animal shall be securely confined and kept from contact with any other
animal.



      (2)   The place of quarantine may be on the premises of the
owner in the discretion of the Health Officer.  Confinement shall otherwise
be at an animal shelter or a veterinary hospital, at the expense of the owner
of such animal.



(`77 Code, § 8.105)  Penalty, see § 8.106



§ 8.106  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall own, keep, harbor, or have
custody of any dog or cat which is not currently licensed, does not wear a
metallic license tag, which commits any of the acts described in § 8.102,
inclusive, of this code or who fails to obey an order of the City Health
Officer under § 8.105 of this code, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in § 1.999.



(`77 Code, § 8.106)



ARTICLE II:  PUBLIC NUISANCES



Section



   8.201   Public nuisance defined



   8.202   Public nuisances affecting health



   8.203   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency



   8.204   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety



   8.205   Duties of city officers



   8.206   Abatement



   8.207   Recovery of cost



§ 8.201  PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED.



   Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty
intentionally does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public
nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:



   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys,
injures or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any
considerable number of members of the public;



   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage
any public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or



   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or this
subchapter to be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically
provided.



(Am. Ord. 1520, passed 2-12-07)  Penalty, see § 1.999



Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.S. § 609.74



§ 8.202  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.



   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:



   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or
vegetable matter;



   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;



   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;



   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours
after death;



   (E)   Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;



   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or
fly-tight or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to
emit foul and disagreeable odors;



   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake,
canal or body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;



   (H)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon
public or private property;



   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities;



   (J)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and



   (K)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not
operating under local license.



(Am. Ord. 1520, passed 2-12-07)  Penalty, see § 1.999



§ 8.203  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.



   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public
morals and decency:



   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except
as otherwise authorized by federal, state or local law;



   (B)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in such occupations;



   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous
sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;



   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or
disposed of in violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are
permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where
intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of
law, and all liquor and other property used for maintaining such a place;



   (E)   Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of
intoxicating liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other
immoral or illegal purpose.



(Am. Ord. 1520, passed 2-12-07)  Penalty, see § 1.999



§ 8.204  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.



   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:



   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours
after the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to
fall;



   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which
prevent people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an
intersection;



   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface
of a sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;



   (D)   All unnecessary noises, odors and annoying vibrations;



   (E)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use
of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under such conditions
as are permitted by this code or other applicable law;



   (F)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in
a dangerous manner;



   (G)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or
any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to
gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;



   (H)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over
streets and sidewalks, or so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not
constructed and maintained as provided by ordinance;



   (I)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any
building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any
sidewalk;



   (J)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and
within three feet of a public sidewalk or way;



   (K)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so
situated or operated on private property as to attract the public;



   (L)   Wastewater cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or
other public properties;



   (M)   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery,
household appliances, automobile bodies or other material in a manner
conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or the rank
growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating
fire, health or safety hazards from such accumulation;



   (N)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered
or in such other condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other
person coming on the premises where it is located;



   (O)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or
a public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash of other materials;



   (P)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other
public property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which
may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing
over such substance;



   (Q)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way
or on adjacent private property;



   (R)   The display of any advertisement, literature, poster, or sign
of any kind on any telephone or electric utility pole, or on a traffic sign
or post erected on a public right-of-way constitutes a public nuisance under
this section;



   (S)   Failure to remove or cover graffiti within two business days
(Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays) of the discovery or
notification of the presence of graffiti is declared to be a public
nuisance.  For purposes of this section, graffiti is defined as the
unpermitted application of any drawing, inscription, figure or mark upon a
structure, wall, rock, bridge, building, fence, gate, roadway, tree or other
real or personal property, either privately or publicly owned; and



   (T)   Structures or other physical property damaged by natural
disasters, fire, decay, civil unrest, vegetation, neglect or accident.



   (U)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause
injury to the person or property of anyone.



(Am. Ord. 1520, passed 2-12-07; Am. Ord. 1650, passed 8-13-18)  Penalty, see
§ 1.999



§ 8.205  DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.



   The City Engineer, Public Works Superintendent, Police Department, Fire
Department, Building Official, City Planner, or other designated official
shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter relating to nuisances
affecting public safety.  The Police Department shall enforce provisions
relating to other nuisances and shall assist the other designated officers in
the enforcement of provisions relating to nuisances affecting public
safety.  Such officers shall have the power to inspect private premises and
take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of
public nuisances.



(Am. Ord. 1461, passed 10-13-03; Am. Ord. 1520, passed 2-12-07)



§ 8.206  ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Notice.



      (1)   Except for those cases determined by the city to require
immediate abatement, written notice of violation; notice of the time, date,
place and subject of any hearing before the City Council; and notice of City
Council order shall be served on the owner of record and any occupant of the
premises either in person or by mail.



      (2)   If the premise is not occupied, the owner of record is
unknown, or the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of
violation, notice of violation shall be served by posting it on the premises.



   (B)   Procedure.  Whenever the officer charged with enforcement
determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists within the
city, the officer shall provide notice thereof, and that such nuisance be
terminated or abated. The notice of violation shall specify the steps to be
taken to abate the nuisance and the time within which the nuisance is to be
abated. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time
specified, the enforcing officer shall report that fact forthwith to the City
Council. Thereafter, the City Council may, after notice as provided herein,
and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition identified in
the notice of violation is a nuisance and further order the nuisance be
abated.



   (C)   Emergency abatement.  In cases of emergency, where delay in
abatement required to complete the notice and procedure requirements set
forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this section will permit a continuing
nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare, the City
Council may order immediate abatement of the nuisance. Nothing in this
section shall prevent the city, without notice or other process, from
immediately abating any condition which poses an imminent and serious hazard
to human life or safety.



   (D)   Immediate abatement.  The City Council may, by resolution,
identify specific violations of City Code as a public nuisance in which an
immediate abatement shall occur.



      (1)   Whenever the office charged with enforcement determines
that such public nuisance is being maintained or exists within the city, the
officer shall provide notice thereof, and that such nuisance be terminated or
abated.  The notice of violation shall specify the steps to be taken to
abate the nuisance and the time within which the nuisance is to be abated. 
Such notice may be posted on the property, served personally, or may be
served by mail.



      (2)   The notification shall state that the city will take
appropriate remedial action to abate the public nuisance upon expiration of
the prescribed notice, with a charge to the property owner/property for costs.



      (3)   For properties for which there have been one or more
notices issued within the prior 12-month period, compliance with subdivisions
(D)(1) and (D)(2) shall not be required.  For those properties, the first
notice issued within a 12-month period shall contain a general notice that
the city may abate future public nuisances without providing additional
specific notice of the public nuisance.



   (E)   The city shall cause the removal or other prescribed action of
any public nuisances located on public property; or on private property, upon
expiration of the prescribed notice to the owner.



   (F)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply:  OWNER.  The person who is listed as the contact person on any
current rental licensing application on file with the city, if any, or if
none, the person listed as owner by the county Assessor on the homestead
record, or if none, the taxpayer as shown by the records of the County
Assessor.



(Am. Ord. 1461, passed 10-13-03; Am. Ord. 1520, passed 2-12-07; Am. Ord.
1542, passed 4-28-08; Am. Ord. 1591, passed 5-9-11)   Penalty, see § 1.999



§ 8.207  RECOVERY OF COST.



   (A)   Personal liability.  The owner of premises on which a
nuisance has been abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost
to the city of the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the
work has been completed and the cost determined, the Treasurer or other
official designated by the City Council shall prepare a bill for the cost and
mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and
payable at the office of the Treasurer.



   (B)   Assessment.  If the abatement cost as determined above is not
paid by the owner, the City Treasurer shall, on or before September 1 next
following abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with
all other such charges as well as other charges for current services to be
assessed under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time,
against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable.
The City Council may then spread the charges against such property under that
statute and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor
and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each
case.



(Am. Ord. 1461, passed 10-13-03; Am. Ord. 1520, passed 2-12-07; Am. Ord.
1542, passed 4-28-08; Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)  Penalty, see § 1.999



ARTICLE III:  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH



Section



   8.301   Storage containers



§ 8.301  STORAGE CONTAINERS.



   (A)   (1)   Every person who owns or occupies property within the
city for business, commercial, industrial or residential purposes shall
dispose of all garbage, rubbish and recyclable material as defined herein,
which may accumulate upon such property at least once a week.



      (2)   Yard waste as defined herein, which may accumulate upon
such property shall be disposed of at least once a week during the yard waste
season as determined by the City Manager.  This provision does not apply to
composting permitted by division (F) of this section.



      (3)   For purposes of this code:



         COMPOSTING.  Any above ground microbial process that
converts yard waste to organic soil amendment or mulch by decomposition of
material through an aerobic process providing adequate oxygen and moisture.



         GARBAGE.  Organic refuse resulting from the preparation of
food and decayed, spoiled food, and other organic refuse from any source.



         RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.  All items of refuse designated by
the City Manager to be a part of an authorized recycling program and which
are intended for transportation, processing and remanufacturing or reuse.



         RUBBISH.  All inorganic refuse matter such as metals,
glass, packaging material, ashes, and the like.



         SHEET COMPOSTING.  The spreading, incorporation or
application of raw or composted yard waste onto land.



         YARD WASTE.  Grass, clippings, leaves, weeds, garden
waste, twigs and branches less than four inches in diameter.



   (B)   (1)   Every person responsible under this section, except
as otherwise provided below, for the disposal of rubbish and garbage shall
use containers for the storage of such matter between periods of collection,
one or more garbage containers that meet state and federal standards. 
Rubbish and garbage placed into the containers shall be properly enclosed
(i.e. bagged or boxed) to prevent loose trash from spilling out of the
container.  The containers shall be tightly covered to prevent exposure of
the contents to potential fly or vermin infestation and shall be provided
with handles for ease of lifting.  Containers for the storage of garbage and
rubbish shall be maintained in a manner which will prevent the creation of a
nuisance or menace to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Containers which are damaged, broken or otherwise create a nuisance or menace
to public health, safety and general welfare shall be replaced with
acceptable containers.



      (2)   Disposal of yard waste shall be from Anoka County and
State of Minnesota approved bags, or a permanent ventilated flytight metal or
thermoplastic container which is clearly identified as containing yard
waste.  Containers for the storage of yard waste shall be maintained in a
manner which will prevent the creation of a nuisance or menace to the public
health, safety and general welfare.  Containers which are damaged, broken or
otherwise create a nuisance or menace to public health, safety and general
welfare shall be replaced with acceptable containers.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B) of this
section, persons responsible under this section for the disposal of rubbish
or garbage at each commercial and industrial establishment, or restaurant
necessitating the storage and disposal of garbage and rubbish, shall utilize
a vat service in lieu of the above requirements.  Such vats shall be
designed with the proper attachments for lifting onto refuse trucks.



   (D)   All accumulations of garbage, rubbish and yard waste must be
deposited and contained within the containers as provided in this section,
except those residential properties that pay for “full service” through
the municipal provided refuse service, may have extra bagged garbage and
rubbish outside of the container on collection day.



   (E)   (1)   Where alleys are platted and open for traffic,
garbage and recycling containers shall be placed at the rear of said property
adjoining the alley.  Where no alley exists, containers will be kept at or
near the back door; provided, however, that where the back door is not
reasonably accessible from the front yard, the container shall be placed at a
point adjacent to the house which is reasonably accessible from the front
yard.  Garbage and recycling containers must be removed from the curb line
within 24 hours after scheduled collection, and cannot be placed on the curb
line more than 24 hours before scheduled collection.



      (2)   All yard waste, appliances, and electronics shall be
placed at the street curb line on collection day.



   (F)   Composting is prohibited for any owner or occupant of property
within the city for business, commercial, industrial or residential purposes,
except as hereinafter provided:



      (1)   Composting shall be established in such a manner so as
not to create an odor or other condition that is a nuisance;



      (2)   Composting may consist only of yard waste, wood ash, and
sawdust generated from the site on which the composting is located;



      (3)   Composting must be in a back yard and must be five feet
from any side or rear yard lot line and no closer than 20 feet to any
habitable building, other than the resident’s own home, or less than two
feet from the alley if any alley exists;



      (4)   Composting shall be conducted within an enclosed
container(s) not to exceed a total of 100 cubic feet in volume for city lots
less than 10,000 square feet, and five feet high, the container(s) shall be
of a durable material such as wood, block, or sturdy metal fencing material;



      (5)   Sheet composting shall cover no more than 0.025 of the
total lot area, and in no case exceed 500 square feet, must be in a back
yard, and must be five feet from any side or rear yard lot line.  Sheet
composting must be incorporated directly into the soil; and



      (6)   None of the following materials shall be placed in the
composting container(s):  meat, bones, fat, oils, dairy products and other
kitchen wastes, whole branches or logs, plastics, synthetic fibers, human or
pet wastes or diseased plants.



   (G)   Refuse or garbage for commercial and industrial properties
shall be located to the rear property line of the building.  Said containers
shall be located immediately adjacent to the buildings which the containers
serve.  The location of the containers shall be in such proximity to the
property that their appearance will not be evident from the street.



      (1)   Said containers shall be screened by appropriate fencing
and/or shrubbery when adjacent to or across from residential property. 



      (2)   Where it is physically impossible to place the
containers behind the rear line of the main building, the containers shall be
placed as inconspicuously as possible along the side or front of the building
with appropriate screening or in such place as the Council may require.



   (H)   The presence of any garbage or rubbish on any property other
than within a structure permitted by the zoning code within the city or in
any container other than a container authorized by this section or in the
presence of containers not conforming with the requirements of this section,
except as specifically authorized by this section, shall constitute a public
nuisance under this section and shall constitute an offense punishable under
this division.



   (I)   Any person, firm or corporation who causes any violation of
any provision of this section or who owns, maintains, or has a superior
possessory interest in any estate where violations of the provisions of this
section exist, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
1.999.



(`77 Code, § 8.301)  (Am. Ord. 1181, passed 3-27-89; Am. Ord. 1231, passed
9-9-91; Am. Ord. 1334, passed 11-25-96; Am. Ord. 1578, passed 4-12-10)



ARTICLE IV:  FIRE SAFETY



Section



   8.401   General provisions



   8.402   Open burning; permitted fires



   8.403   Fire Department service charges



§ 8.401  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Codes adopted by reference.  The Minnesota State Fire Code,
as adopted by the Commissioner of Public Safety through the Division of the
Fire Marshal, pursuant to M.S. Ch. 299F.011, including all of the amendments,
rules and regulations established, adopted and published from time to time by
the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety through the Fire Marshal Division
is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the optional appendices,
unless specifically adopted herein.  The Minnesota State Fire Code is hereby
incorporated in this section as if fully set out herein.



   (B)   Application, administration and enforcement.  The
application, administration, and enforcement of the code shall be in
accordance with Minnesota State Fire Code.  The code shall be enforced
within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. Ch. 299F.011, when so
established by this section.  The code enforcement agency of the city is the
Columbia Heights Fire Department.



   (C)   Permits and fees.  The issuance of permits and the collection
of fees shall be as authorized in M.S. Ch. 299F.011.  Permit fees shall be
assessed for work governed by this code in accordance with the fee schedule
adopted by the city by resolution.



   (D)   Violations and penalties.  A violation of the code is a
misdemeanor pursuant to M.S. Ch. 299F.011.



   (E)   Fire Code optional appendices.  The Minnesota State Fire
Code, established pursuant to M.S. Ch. 299F.011 allows the municipality to
adopt by reference and enforce certain optional appendices of the most
current edition of the Minnesota State Fire Code.  Optional appendices of
the most current edition of the Minnesota State Fire Code may be adopted by
Council resolution.



(`77 Code, § 8.401)  (Am. Ord. 1059, passed 10-11-83; Am. Ord. 1487, passed
6-27-05; Am. Ord. 1628, passed 7-11-16)



§ 8.402  OPEN BURNING; PERMITTED FIRES.



   (A)   Open fire burning.  No person shall burn materials in an
“open fire,” that is, a fire burning outside the confines of a structure
or container, or in a firebox which is designed to control and contain a
fire, if the products of combustion create a visual or odor nuisance in the
air space of other property users.  Except as provided in this section and
Minnesota Statutes, no burning shall be conducted which violates
Minnesota’s Clean Air Act (M.S. §§ 144.411 to 144.417, as they may be
amended from time to time).  Violation of either or both standards shall be
punished as provided in § 1.999.



   (B)   Permitted fires.



      (1)   A fire contained in a grill or barbecue designed for the
preparation of food shall be a permitted fire under this division.



      (2)   (a)   The Fire Department is authorized to permit
“recreation fires,” provided the resident first provides notice to the
Fire Department of its intent to have a recreation fire and there is no
violation of the city’s air quality standards.  A “recreation fire”
means a fire set for cooking, warming or ceremonial purposes, which is not
more than three feet in diameter, the surrounding ground is clear of readily
combustible materials for a distance of five feet from the base of the fire,
there is a readily available and operable fire extinguishing device, and
there is a responsible adult in continuous supervision at the fire. 
Violation of these “permission” requirements shall be punished as
provided in § 1.999.  The Fire Department is authorized to impose
additional regulations to ensure the health and welfare of our citizens and
for the protection of property.



         (b)   The Fire Department is authorized to permit a
“festival bonfire,” if requested by a state recognized agency or
institution, such as an annual high school homecoming football celebration. 
Special conditions for the bonfire may be imposed, such as the presence of
Fire Department personnel and equipment, approving the location of the
bonfire, and the presence of adult supervisors.



         (c)   The Fire Department is authorized to permit an
open burn of timber and/or untreated lumber or debris when necessary to avoid
or abate a public hazard and there is no practical alternative to dispose of
the materials, under the circumstances existent at that time.  City Council
concurrence of justifying circumstances is a condition precedent to the Fire
Department’s permit issuance.



      (3)   Fees for recreation fires, festival bonfires, and open
burn permits shall be in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city
by resolution and on file in the office of the City Clerk.



   (C)   Fire Department training.  The Fire Department is authorized
to conduct live fire training exercises which are conducted in accordance
with Minnesota Statutes and rules of the Department of Natural Resources and
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.  Such exercises shall not constitute a
violation of this section.



(Ord. 1283, passed 4-25-94; Am. Ord. 1489, passed 7-11-05)  Penalty, see §
8.401(C)



§ 8.403  FIRE DEPARTMENT SERVICE CHARGES.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.  The purpose of this section is to
establish user service charges for Fire Department services as described in
this section.



   (B)   Definitions.  The following terms shall apply in the
interpretation and application of this chapter:



      EXCAVATOR. A person who conducts excavation.



      MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed and originally
manufactured to operate primarily upon public roads and highways, and not
operated exclusively upon railroad tracks.  It includes any vehicle
propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle. This includes semi trailers.
It does not include snowmobiles, manufactured homes, all terrain vehicles or
park trailers.



      MOTOR VEHICLE OWNER. Any person, firm, association, or
corporation owning or renting a motor vehicle, or having the exclusive use
thereof, under a lease or otherwise, for a period of greater than 30 days.



      PERSON. The state, a public agency, a local governmental unit, an
individual, corporation, partnership, association, or other business or
public entity or a trustee, receiver, assignee, or personal representative of
any of them.



      UNDERGROUND PIPELINE UTILITY. An underground line, facility,
system, and its appurtenances used to produce, store, convey, transmit, or
distribute gas, oil, petroleum products, and other similar substances.



   (C)   Conflicts.  In the event of any conflict between the
provisions of this code and applicable provisions of state law, rules or
regulations, the latter shall prevail.



   (D)   Emergency response service charges.



      (1)   The collection of service charges shall be as authorized
in M.S. § 366.011, as it may be amended from time to time.



      (2)   Collection of unpaid service charges shall be as
authorized in M.S. § 366.012, as it may be amended from time to time.



      (3)   The service charges shall be as outlined below.  Fees
shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city by
resolution.



         (a)   Vehicle accident. 



            1.   Any incident response to an accident
involving a motor vehicle where the Fire Department is able to render aid,
provide assistance, or otherwise improve the conditions of the patients. This
would include but not be limited to:



               a.   Extrication;



               b.   Medical care;



               c.   Absorbing liquid spills;



               d.   Vehicle system safety;



               e.   Vehicle stabilization.



            2.   An invoice for the service charge will be
sent to the motor vehicle owner or owner’s insurance company.  In the
event the owner cannot provide insurance information and is charged for the
offense, the city shall collect the fee through the criminal process as
defined in the Minnesota State Statutes.



            3.   If there is more than one motor vehicle
involved for which Fire Department service is provided, each motor vehicle
owner or insurer will be invoiced an equal share of the service charge.



         (b)   Fires along a railroad right of way or operating
property.



            1.   Any incident response to a fire or fire
hazard emergency caused by a railroad locomotive, rolling stock, or employees
on a railroad right-of-way or operating property as defined in M.S. §
219.761, as it may be amended from time to time.



            2.   An invoice will be sent to the railroad
responsible for the railroad right-of-way or operating property.  The
invoice amount will follow the Incident Invoice Fee Schedule based on the
number of hours on the incident.



         (c)   Grass fires within trunk highway right-of-way.



            1.   Any incident response to a grass fire within
the right-of-way of a trunk highway or outside of the right-of-way of a trunk
highway if the fire originated within the right-of-way of a trunk highway as
defined in M.S. § 161.465, as it may be amended from time to time.



            2.   An invoice will be sent to the commissioner
of transportation.  The invoice amount will follow the Incident Invoice Fee
Schedule based on the number of hours on the incident.



         (d)   Technical rescue.



            1.   Any incident response to a rescue on the
water, ice, confined space, trench, high or low level where specialized
equipment and training are required and where the Fire Department is able to
render aid, provide assistance, or otherwise improve the conditions of the
persons in need of rescue.



            2.   An invoice will be sent to the persons,
corporation or business owner receiving rescue service. The invoice amount
will follow the Incident Invoice Fee Schedule based on the number of hours on
the incident.



         (e)   Underground pipeline utility breaks.



            1.   Any incident response to an underground
pipeline utility break if caused by an excavator or person other than a
homeowner or resident.



            2.   An invoice will be sent to the excavator or
person responsible for the pipeline utility break. The invoice amount will
follow the Incident Invoice Fee Schedule based on the number of hours on the
incident. 



         (f)   Hazardous material.



            1.   Any incident response to the release of
hazardous material from its container, or the threat of a release of a
hazardous material from its container, chemical reaction, or other potential
emergency as the result of a hazardous material where the Fire Department is
able to render aid, provide assistance, or otherwise improve the conditions
or protect the public.



            2.   An invoice will be sent to the person
responsible for the hazardous material or transportation of the hazardous
material. The invoice amount will follow the Incident Invoice Fee Schedule
based on the number of hours on the incident, specialized equipment and
materials used on the incident.



         (g)   Arson fire.



            1.   Any incident response to a fire where a
person is charged under the arson statutes.



            2.   The fire investigator responsible for the
incident investigation will forward all costs encumbered by the Fire
Department in association with the incident to the court for reimbursement
through restitution.



(Ord. 1562, passed 5-11-09)



ARTICLE V:  PUBLIC SAFETY



Section



   8.501   Water preservation



   8.502   Emergency water conservation



§ 8.501  WATER PRESERVATION.



   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all persons
using water both in and outside the city and regardless of whether any person
using water shall have a contract for water service with the city.



   (B)   No person shall use or withdraw water for the purpose of
sprinkling, watering or irrigating of lawns, grass, ground covers or gardens,
except as follows:



      (1)   Watering of mature sod and gardens at any site with an
odd-numbered address will be permitted on odd-numbered dates;



      (2)   Watering of mature sod and gardens at any site with an
even-numbered address will be permitted on even-numbered dates;



      (3)   Watering of new sod or trees planted within the last
five years or having a diameter of less than three inches will be permitted
at any time.



   (C)   No person, other than a commercial car wash, shall wash a
private vehicle except those persons residing in odd-numbered residences may
wash their private vehicles on odd-numbered dates and persons with
even-numbered residences may wash their private vehicles on even-numbered
dates.  No person shall knowingly allow defective plumbing to remain out of
repair which allows the escape of water.



   (D)   The City Manager shall have the authority to permit a
reasonable use of water in any case necessary to maintain adequate health and
sanitation standards.



   (E)   The City Manager shall have the authority to enforce the
provisions of this article by discontinuance of water service in the event of
violation hereof in addition to the other penalties available herein.



   (F)   The City Manager shall have the authority to terminate
enforcement of this article at such time as he determines that the shortage
of water no longer exists.



   (G)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
this section shall be warned of the existence of this article.  Any person,
firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article after
having first received a warning shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount of $25.



   (H)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article after having received a warning and after
receiving a citation for a petty misdemeanor violation, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in § 1.999.  Each day such violation
is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder.



(`77 Code, § 8.501)  (Am. Ord. 1166, passed 6-27-88; Am. Ord. 1167, passed
7-11-88)



§ 8.502  EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION.



   (A)   No person shall use or withdraw water for the following
purposes:



      (1)   Sprinkling, watering or irrigating of lawns, grass,
ground covers, plants, vines, vegetables, flowers or any other vegetation
(except trees, gardens, perennials or golf greens);



      (2)   Washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers,
trailer-houses, railroad cars, or any other type of mobile equipment (other
than at a commercial car wash);



      (3)   Washing of sidewalks, driveways, filling station aprons,
porches and other outdoor services;



      (4)   Washing of the outside of buildings;



      (5)   Operating of any ornamental fountains or other
structures making similar use of water.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly allow defective plumbing to run out
of repair which allows the escape of water.



   (C)   The City Manager shall have the authority to terminate
enforcement of some or all of the provisions of this article at such time as
he determines that the supply of water is adequate to allow some or all of
the uses of water prohibited by this section.



(`77 Code, § 8.502)  Penalty, see § 8.501(H)



ARTICLE VI:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   8.601   Policy and purpose



   8.602   Definitions



   8.603   Establishment of an emergency management organization



   8.604   Powers and duties of the Director



   8.605   Local emergencies



   8.606   Emergency regulations



   8.607   Emergency management a government function



   8.608   Participation in labor dispute or politics



   8.609   Penalty



§ 8.601  POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or from sabotage,
hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure;
and in order to ensure that preparations of this city will be adequate to
deal with such disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense
and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the
lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and
declared to be necessary:



   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization
responsible for city planning and preparation for emergency government
operations in time of disasters.



   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during
emergencies and disasters.



   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city
and other political subdivisions of this state and of other states with
respect to the carrying out of emergency preparedness functions.



   (D)   To comply with provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be
amended from time to time, which requires that each political subdivision of
Minnesota shall establish a local organization for emergency management.



§ 8.602  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISASTER.  A situation which creates an immediate and serious
impairment to the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has
resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for
which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area
are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.



   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.  The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters, caused by fire, flood, tornado and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous
material mishaps.  These functions include, without limitation, firefighting
services, police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning
services, communications, radiological, and chemical, evacuation, congregate
care, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of
plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other
functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental for carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT includes those activities sometimes referred to as
“civil defense” functions.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES.  The total personnel resources engaged in
city-level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions
of this article or any rule or order thereunder.  This includes personnel
from city departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and
agencies.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.  The staff responsible for
coordinating city- level planning and preparation for disaster response. 
This organization provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state
and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and
assures implementation of federal and state program requirements.



§ 8.603  ESTABLISHMENT OF AN EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.



   There is hereby created with the city government an emergency
management organization which shall be under the supervision and control of
the City Emergency Management Director, hereinafter called the Director. 
The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor for an indefinite term and may
be removed by him at any time.  The Director shall serve with a salary and
shall be paid his necessary expenses.  The Director shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the
emergency preparedness organization, subject to the direction and control of
the Mayor.



§ 8.604  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Director, with the consent of the Mayor shall represent
the city on any regional or state conference for emergency management.  The
Director shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political
subdivisions of the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and
assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted, and shall
present these agreements to the Council for its action.  These arrangements
shall be consistent with the State Emergency Plan.



   (B)   The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human
resources, industries, resources and facilities of the city as deemed
necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan
for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster.  The
Director shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures,
service staffs, boards and sub-boards required, in accordance with state and
federal plans and directions subject to approval of the Mayor.



   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for
the emergency preparedness of the city and shall present such plan to the
Council for its approval.  When the Council has approved the plan, it shall
be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the
city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. 
The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time.  The Director
shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end
that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plan of
the federal government and the state and correlated with emergency plans of
the county and other political subdivisions within the state.



   (D)   In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the
Director shall institute training programs, public information programs and
conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary
to assure prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan when a
disaster occurs.



   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to
the maximum extent practicable.  The officers and personnel of all city
departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate
with and extend such services and facilities to the city's emergency
management organization and to the Governor upon request.  The head of each
department or agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible
for the planning and programming of such emergency activities as will involve
the utilization of the facilities of the department or agency.



   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments
and agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting and training of
emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state.  To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.



   (G)   Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director
shall coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations
within the city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs
as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several
services as provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations
issued by the Governor with reference to emergency management.



   (I)   The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency
preparedness activities when requested by the Mayor.



§ 8.605  LOCAL EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his
legal successor.  It shall not be continued for a period in excess of three
days except by or with the consent of the Council.  Any order, or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be
given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the
City Clerk.



   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary
portions of the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or
interjurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance
thereunder.



   (C)   No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local
emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency
functions.  However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall provide
aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.



(Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



§ 8.606  EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare
for such an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by
the Governor or the Council, the Council may by resolution promulgate
regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation,
respecting:  the conduct of persons and the use of property during
emergencies; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public
services, emergency health, fire, and safety regulation, drills, or practice
periods required for preliminary training, and all other matters which are
required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in declared
emergencies.



   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in
writing;  shall be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which
it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City
Clerk.  A copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection
during business hours. Notice of the existence of these regulations and their
availability for inspection at the City Clerk’s office shall be
conspicuously posted at the front of the City Hall or other headquarters of
the city or at such other places in the affected area as the Council shall
designate in the resolution. By resolution, the Council may modify or rescind
any such regulation.



   (C)   The Council may rescind any such regulation by resolution at
any time.  If not sooner rescinded every such regulation shall expire at the
end of 30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to
which it relates, whichever comes first.  Any resolution, rule, or
regulation inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the
Council shall be suspended during the period of time and to the extent such
conflict exists.



   (D)   During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions
of M.S. § 12.31, as it may be amended from time to time, and notwithstanding
any statutory or charter provision to the contrary, empowered, through its
Council, acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter
into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat such disaster by
protecting the health and safety of persons and property and providing
emergency assistance to the victims of such disaster.  The city may exercise
these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without
compliance with the time consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by
law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering rental equipment
agreements, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies,
and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds including, but not
limited to, publication of resolutions, publication of call for bids,
provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to low bids, and
requirement for bids.



(Am. Ord. 1535, passed 9-8-08)



§ 8.607  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.



   All functions and activities relating to emergency management are
hereby declared to be governmental functions.  The provisions of this
section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which
he would otherwise be entitled under this section or under the workers'
compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any such person
to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.



§ 8.608  PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTE OR POLITICS.



   The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form
of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.



§ 8.609  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter relating to acts,
omissions, or conduct other than official acts of city employees or officers
is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in § 1.999.



ARTICLE VII:  SURFACE DRAINAGE CONNECTIONS AND DISCHARGES



Section



   8.701   Purpose



   8.702   Definitions



   8.703   Compliance



   8.704   Prohibited discharges



   8.705   Inspections



§ 8.701  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to implement regulations that will aid
the city in limiting and reducing the inflow of rainwater (or clear water)
into the sanitary sewer system.  The article will be utilized to minimize
the overflow problem resulting from the lack of capacity of the sanitary
sewer system to handle large amounts of rainwater.  Other sources of inflow
and infiltration are discharges of water from rooftops; surface water,
groundwater sump pumps, footing tiles, swimming pools, or other natural
precipitation sources that may flow into the city sewer system and
potentially cause flooding or overloading of the city’s sewage system. 
When clear water is discharged into the sanitary sewer system it is treated
at the sewage treatment plant.  This results in added expenses for the
city.  The City of Columbia Heights, therefore, finds it in the best
interest of the city to prohibit such discharges into the sanitary sewer
system in order to protect and maintain the health and property of its
residents.



(Ord. 1472, passed 7-12-04)



§ 8.702  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AREA DRAIN.  A receptacle designed to collect and convey surface or
storm water to the drainage system.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs).  The schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or storm water
conveyance systems that are identified and adopted by the city. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from
raw materials storage.



   CLEARWATER.  Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage that does not
contain any hazardous substance or sewage.  This includes, but is not
limited to, NPDES permitted discharges, storm water and water from foundation
and footing drains and basement sump pumps.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer that must handle flow of both sanitary
wastewater and storm water in a single pipeline.



   COMBINED SEWER OVERFLOW (CSO).  Occurs when excessive amounts of
rainfall enter a sanitary sewer system.  The result is a volume of rainwater
and sanitary wastewater, which exceeds the system’s capacity.  Combined
rainwater and sewage is forced to overflow into area streams and rivers
through outfalls.



   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES.  Materials which may cause or contribute to a
substantial hazard to human health, safety, property or the environment based
upon its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical, or infectious nature. 
These may include:



      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.



      (2)   Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters or the wastewater treatment plant.



      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works.



   ILLICIT CONNECTION. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain
system, including but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any
non-storm-water discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash
water, to enter the storm drain system, and any connections to the storm
drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether the drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the city;
or any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use
to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by the city.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE.  Any direct or indirect non-storm-water discharge
to the storm drain system, except exempted in § 8.704.



   LIQUID WASTE.  The discharge from any fixture, appliance, or
appurtenance that does not receive fecal matter.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). The system of conveyances
(including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and
operated by the city, and designed or used for collecting or conveying storm
water, and is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT.  A permit issued by the Environmental Protection Agency
(or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b))
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area.



   NON-STORM-WATER DISCHARGE.  Any discharge to the storm drain system
that is not composed entirely of storm water.



   OWNER.  The person who is listed as property owner or taxpayer by
Anoka County.



   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. 
POLLUTANTS may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.



   RUNOFF.  Precipitation and other surface drainage that is not
infiltrated into or otherwise retained by the soil, concrete, asphalt, or
other surface upon which it falls.



   SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.  Pipelines, pumping stations, force mains, and
all other construction devices, and mechanical devices used for conveying
sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.



   STORM DRAIN SYSTEM.  The publicly-owned facilities by which storm
water is collected or conveyed, including but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.



   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP).  A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a
person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a
site, and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm
water, storm water conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum
extent practicable.



   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.



   STORM WATER.  Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation.



(Ord. 1472, passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 2-9-15)



§ 8.703  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Compliance with other codes and laws.  Compliance with the
provisions of this article does not release a person from any responsibility
to comply with any other law or regulation, whether federal, state, or local.



   (B)   Conflict.  In the event that the provisions of the chapter
shall conflict with any Minnesota statute or any federal statute, the
Minnesota statute or federal statute shall govern to the extent of any direct
conflict.



   (C)   Violations.  Any person who violates any provision of this
article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and subject to punishment
and penalties as set forth in § 8.705(E).



(Ord. 1472, passed 7-12-04)



§ 8.704  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Prohibited discharges.



      (1)   Sanitary sewer. No clear water from any roof, surface,
groundwater, sump pump, footing tile, swimming pool, or other buildings or
structures which require, because of infiltration of water into basements,
crawl spaces, and the like, a sump pump discharge system shall have a
permanently installed discharge line which shall not at any time discharge
water into the sanitary sewer system. No person shall discharge, or cause to
be discharged, hazardous substances to any public sewers.



      (2)   Storm drain system.



         (a)   No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise
discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or
otherwise discharge into the storm drain system any pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants, other than storm water.



         (b)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this article:



            1.   Water line flushing, landscape irrigation,
diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, uncontaminated ground water
infiltration, uncontaminated pumped ground water, discharges from potable
water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation
water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering,
individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and
wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street wash water;



            2.   Discharges or flow from firefighting, and
other discharges, authorized by the city in writing, that are necessary to
protect public health and safety;



            3.   Discharges associated with dye testing;
however, this activity requires verbal notification to the city prior to the
time of the test;



            4.   The prohibition shall not apply to any
non-storm-water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority
of the federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger
is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order
and other applicable laws and regulations, and further provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharges to the storm drain system.



   (B)   Illicit connections.



      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.



      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the
time of the connection.



      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drain
system, or allows that connection to continue.



      (4)   Improper connections in violation of this article must
be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite
wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of
the city.



      (5)   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in
plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer
system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property, upon
receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such
locating be completed. The notice will specify a reasonable time period
within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined,
that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or
other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm
sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. 
Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city.



   (C)   Disconnection.



      (1)   Before August 1, 2004, any person having a yard drain,
roof surface, tile, or swimming pool now connected and/or discharging into
the sanitary sewer system shall be disconnected or removed.  Any
disconnections or openings in the sanitary sewer system shall be closed or
repaired in an effective, workmanlike manner, as approved by the Public Works
Director or his or her designated agent.



      (2)   Sump pumps shall not be connected to the sanitary
sewer.  Prior to the closing of the sale of a dwelling, the seller must
request that the sump pumps and drain tiles be inspected by the city visually
and/or by smoking, to ensure that they are not connected in any manner to the
sanitary sewer system. If the city determines that the sump pump or drain
tile is illegally connected to the sanitary sewer system, the situation must
be corrected before the unit is considered in compliance to be sold.



   (D)   Manner of disconnection.



      (1)   The disconnection shall be accomplished by a complete
and permanent method and performed in a competent manner. Any disconnection,
plugging, capping, rerouting, altering, or modifying must be done in
accordance with all applicable state and city building codes.



      (2)   A permanent installation shall be one which provides for
year-round discharge capability to either the outside of the dwelling,
building, or structure, or is connected to city storm sewer or discharge
through the curb and gutter to the street. It shall consist of a rigid
discharge line, without valving or quick connections for altering the path of
discharge, and if connected to the city storm sewer line, shall include a
check valve and air gap located in a small diameter structure.



   (E)   Industrial or construction activity discharges.



      (1)   Any person subject to an industrial or construction
activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions
of such permit.  Proof of compliance with the permit may be required in a
form acceptable to the city prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.



      (2)   The operator of a facility, including construction
sites, required to have an NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated
with industrial activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to
the city at the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent
to the Environmental Protection Agency as applicable.



      (3)   The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the
city, either in person or by mailing it to:



         Notice of Intent to Discharge Storm Water



         City of Columbia Heights



         590 40th Avenue NE



         Columbia Heights, MN 55421



      (4)   A person commits an offense if the person operates a
facility that is discharging storm water associated with industrial activity,
without having submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the city.



   (F)   Watercourse protection.  Every person owning or occupying
premises through which a watercourse passes, shall keep and maintain that
part of the watercourse within the premises free of trash, debris, excessive
vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or
significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse.  In
addition, the owner or occupant shall maintain existing privately owned
structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that they will not become a
hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.



   (G)   Notification of spills.



      (1)   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as
any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known
or suspected release of materials resulting in, or that may result in,
illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm
drain system, or waters of the state, that person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of that release.  In
the event of the release of hazardous materials, that person must immediately
notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch
services.  In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, that person
shall notify the city no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed
to the city within three business days of the personal or phone notice. If
the discharge of prohibited materials originates from an industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of the establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence.  These records must be retained for at least four years.



(Ord. 1472, passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 2-9-15)



§ 8.705  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Inspection.



      (1)   Sanitary sewer.



         (a)   Every person owning improved real estate that
discharges into the city’s sanitary sewer system shall allow a city
employee, or a designated representative of the city, to inspect the building
to confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharges into the
sanitary system.  In lieu of having the city inspect their property before
the sale of a dwelling, the property owner may furnish a certificate from a
licensed plumber, certifying that the property is in compliance with this
section.



         (b)   Any person refusing to allow their property to be
inspected, or refusing to furnish a plumber's certificate within 21 days of
the date city employee(s), or their designated representatives, are denied
admittance to the property, shall immediately become subject to the surcharge
hereinafter provided for.  Any property found to violate this article shall
make the necessary changes to comply with the article, and furnish proof of
the changes to the city.



      (2)   Storm drain system. The city shall be permitted to enter
and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article, as often as
may be necessary to determine compliance with this article.



         (a)   The owner or party responsible shall allow the
city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept
under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the area to
be inspected or sampled shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the
request of the city, and shall not be replaced.



         (b)   If the city employee or representative of the city
has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is
discharged, and he or she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe
that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to
inspect and/or sample, as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article, or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of
the community, then the city employee or representative of the city may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.



         (c)   The city may require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment or other such devices as are necessary, in the opinion
of the city, to conduct monitoring or sampling of the premises storm water
discharge.  The monitoring equipment must be maintained by the discharger in
a safe and proper operating condition at all times.  All devices used to
measure storm water flow and quality must be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.



   (B)   New construction. All new dwellings that are permitted to
install a sump pump after June 1, 2004, shall have a pump that is piped to
the outside of the dwelling before a certificate of occupancy is issued. New
homes will be required to have their sump pump system inspected within 30
days of occupancy, and a certificate of compliance must be completed before
the property owner may occupy the property.



      (1)   Incentives. Property owner reimbursement and fees
related to the program will be set by resolution.



      (2)   Surcharge. A surcharge of $100 per month is hereby
imposed on every utility bill accrued on or after January 1, 2005, to
property owners who are not found to be in compliance with this section, or
who have refused to allow the city to inspect the property.  The surcharge
will be added to the property owner’s utility billing until the property is
found to be in compliance.



   (C)   Warning notice. When the city finds that any person has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any
order issued hereunder, the city may serve upon that person a written warning
notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred, and
requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the matter, and to seek
a resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease.  Investigation
and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in no way
relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of the warning notice.  Nothing in this division
shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency
action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a warning
notice.



   (D)   Notice of violation.



      (1)   Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the authorized
enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person.



      (2)   The notice of violation shall contain:



         (a)   The name and address of the alleged violator;



         (b)   The address when available, or a description of
the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has
occurred;



         (c)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;



         (d)   A description of the remedial measures necessary
to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the
completion of the remedial action;



         (e)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall
or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;



         (f)   A statement that the determination of violation
may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within three
days of service of notice of violation; and



         (g)   A statement specifying that, should the violator
fail to restore compliance within the established time schedule, the work
will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor, and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.



      (3)   The notice may require without limitation:



         (a)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and
reporting;



         (b)   The elimination of illicit connections or
discharges;



         (c)   That violating discharges, practices, or
operations shall cease and desist;



         (d)   The abatement or remediation of storm water
pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;



         (e)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and



         (f)   The implementation of source control or treatment
BMPs.



   (E)   Suspension of MS4 access.



      (1)   When the city finds that any person has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued
hereunder, or that the person’s past violations are likely to recur, and
that the person’s violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an
actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States,
which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the city may issue
an order to the violator, directing it immediately to cease and desist all
such violations, and directing the violator to:



         (a)   Immediately comply with all article requirements;
and



         (b)   Take such appropriate preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.



      (2)   Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it
under this division shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its
endangering discharge.  In the event of a discharger's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the city may take
such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or
waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the
environment, including immediate termination of a facility’s water supply,
sewer connection, or other municipal utility services.



   (F)   Penalties.



      (1)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this
article shall be served by the city with written notice, stating the nature
of the violation, and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof.  The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
the notice, permanently cease all violations.



      (2)   In the event that the owner fails to correct the
situation within the given time period, the city may correct it and collect
all costs, together with reasonable attorneys’ fees, or in the alternative,
by certifying the costs of correction as any other special assessment upon
the land from which the correction of the violation was made.



      (3)   Any person that has violated or continues to violate
this chapter shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of
the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $1,000 per violation
per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 90 days.  The
authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorneys’ fees, court costs,
and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including
sampling and monitoring expenses.



   (G)   Winter discharge.



      (1)   The Director of Public Works, and his or her designee,
shall issue a permit to allow a property owner to discharge surface water
into the sanitary sewer system.  The permit shall authorize the discharge
only from November 1 to March 30 of each year, and a property owner is
required to meet at least one of the following criteria in order to obtain a
permit:



         (a)   The freezing of the surface water discharge from
sump pump or footing drain is causing a dangerous condition, such as ice
buildup or flooding, on public or private property.



         (b)   The property owner has demonstrated that there is
a danger that the sump pump or footing drain pipes will freeze up and result
in either failure or damage to sump pump unit of the footing drain and cause
basement flooding.



         (c)   The water being discharged from the sump pump or
footing drain cannot be readily discharged into a storm drain or other
acceptable drainage system.



      (2)   Following ten days’ written notice and an opportunity
to be heard, the City Manager may require a property to discharge its sump
pump into the sanitary sewer from November 1 to March 30, if surface water
discharge is causing an icy condition on streets.



   (H)   Disclaimer. The city does not guarantee or imply that areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages caused by inflow and
infiltration.  The city does not assume a specific duty as to individual
property owners to enforce this article, but is enacting the article as a
general regulation.  This article shall not create liability on the part of
the city or its offices or employees for any flood damage that may result
from failure to comply with any portion of this article, or any
administrative decisions made pursuant thereto, whatever the cause.



(Ord. 1472, passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 1538, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord. 1618,
passed 2-9-15)



ARTICLE VIII:  REPEAT NUISANCE CALL SERVICE FEE



Section



   8.801   Purpose



   8.802   Scope and application



   8.803   Definitions



   8.804   Repeat nuisance service call fee



   8.805   Notice



   8.806   Right to appeal



   8.807   Legal remedies nonexclusive



   8.808   Applicability of repeat nuisance service call fee



   8.809   Recovery of fee



§ 8.801  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to protect the public safety, health and
welfare and to prevent and abate repeat service response calls by the city to
the same property or location for nuisance service calls, as defined herein,
which prevent police or public safety services to other residents of the
city.  It is the intent of the city by the adoption of this article to
impose and collect service call fees from the owner or occupant, or both, of
property to which city officials must repeatedly respond for any repeat
nuisance event or activity that generates extraordinary costs to the city. 
The repeat nuisance service call fee is intended to cover that cost over and
above the cost of providing normal law or code enforcement services and
police protection city-wide.



(Ord. 1568, passed 8-24-09)



§ 8.802  SCOPE AND APPLICATION.



   This article applies to all owners and occupants of private property
which is the subject or location of the repeat nuisance service call by the
city.  This article applies to any repeat nuisance service calls made by a
City of Columbia Heights peace officer, part-time peace officer, community
service officer, animal control and/or code enforcement officers.



(Ord. 1568, passed 8-24-09)



§ 8.803  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this article, the term “nuisance misconduct” means
any activity, conduct, or condition occurring upon private property within
the city that unreasonably annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health,
morals, comfort or repose of any member of the public; or will, or tend to,
alarm, anger or disturb others or provoke breach of the peace, to which the
city is required to respond, including, but not limited to the following:



   (A)   Any activity, conduct, or condition deemed as a public
nuisance under any provision of the city code;



   (B)   Any activity, conduct, or condition in violation of M.S. §
609.33, as it may be amended from time to time;



   (C)   Any conduct, activity or condition constituting a violation of
any Minnesota state law prohibiting or regulating prostitution, gambling,
controlled substances, use of firearms; and/or



   (D)   Any conduct, activity, or condition constituting disorderly
conduct under M.S. Chapter 609, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 1568, passed 8-24-09)



§ 8.804  REPEAT NUISANCE SERVICE CALL FEE.



   (A)   The city may impose a repeat nuisance service call fee upon
the owner and/or occupant of a private property if the city has rendered
services or responded to the property on three or more occasions within a
period of 365 days in response to or for the abatement of nuisance conduct.



   (B)   The repeat nuisance service call fee will be set forth in a
resolution approved by the City Council.  An additional amount may be
imposed to reflect the salaries of police officers, community service
officers, animal control and/or code enforcement officers while responding to
or remaining at the nuisance event, the pro rata cost of equipment, the cost
of repairing city equipment and property damaged as a result of the nuisance
call, and the cost of any medical treatment of injured officers. 



   (C)   A repeat nuisance service call fee imposed under this section
will be deemed delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days after the city
mails the billing statement for the fee.  The city will add a 10% late
penalty to a delinquent payment.



(Ord. 1568, passed 8-24-09)



§ 8.805  NOTICE.



   No repeat nuisance service call fee may be imposed against an owner or
occupant of property without first providing the owner or occupant with
written notice of the two previous nuisance service calls which are the basis
for the fee.  The written notice must:



   (A)   Identify the nuisance conduct that previously occurred on the
property, and the dates of the previous nuisance conduct; and



   (B)   State that the owner or occupant may be subject to a nuisance
call service fee if a third nuisance service call is rendered to the property
for any further nuisance conduct; and



   (C)   State that the city has the right to seek other legal remedies
or actions for abatement of the nuisance or compliance with the law; and



   (D)   Be served personally; by U.S. Mail upon the owner or occupant
at the last known address; or by posting the subject property.



(Ord. 1568, passed 8-24-09)



§ 8.806  RIGHT TO APPEAL.



   (A)   When the city mails the billing statement for the repeat
nuisance service call fee, the city will inform the owner or occupant of
their right to request a hearing.



   (B)   The owner or occupant upon whom the fee is imposed must
request a hearing within ten business days of the mailing of the billing
statement, excluding the day the statement is mailed.  The request for a
hearing must be in writing and delivered to the City Clerk.  The hearing
will occur within 30 days of the date of the request.  If the owner or
occupant fails to request a hearing within the time and in the manner
required under this section, the right to a hearing is waived.



   (C)   The hearing will be conducted by the City Council in an
informal manner.  The Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure and Rules of
Evidence will not be strictly applied.  After considering all evidence
submitted, the City Council will make written findings of fact and
conclusions regarding the nuisance conduct and the imposition of the repeat
nuisance service fee.  The City Council will serve the findings of fact and
conclusions upon the owner or occupant by U.S. Mail within ten days of the
hearing.



   (D)   If the owner or occupant fails to appear at the scheduled
hearing date, the right to a hearing is waived.



   (E)   Upon waiver of the right to a hearing under divisions (B) or
(D) or upon service of the City Council’s findings of fact and conclusions
that the repeat nuisance call service fee is warranted, the owner or occupant
must pay the fee imposed within ten days.



(Ord. 1568, passed 8-24-09)



§ 8.807  LEGAL REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.



   Nothing in this section will be construed to limit the city’s other
available legal remedies, including criminal, civil, injunctive or others,
for any violation of the law.



(Ord. 1568, passed 8-24-09)



§ 8.808  APPLICABIILTY OF REPEAT NUISANCE SERVICE CALL FEE.



   The city may not impose a repeat nuisance service call fee against an
owner or occupant for a police response relating to emergency assistance,
including, but not limited to, domestic spousal and child abuse.



(Ord. 1568, passed 8-24-09)



§ 8.809  RECOVERY OF FEE.



   (A)   If a repeat nuisance service call fee remains unpaid 30 days
after the billing statement is sent by the city, it shall constitute:



      (1)   A lien on the real property where the violation
occurred; or



      (2)   A personal obligation of the owner or occupant in all
other situations.



   (B)   A lien may be assessed against the property and collected in
the same manner as taxes.



   (C)   A personal obligation may be collected by appropriate legal
means.



(Ord. 1568, passed 8-24-09)



CHAPTER 9:  LAND USE



   Article



      I.   ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



ARTICLE I:  ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



Section



   9.101   Purpose, authority and jurisdiction



   9.102   Rules of construction



   9.103   Definitions



   9.104   Administration and enforcement



   9.105   Nonconformities



   9.106   General development standards



   9.107   Specific development standards



   9.108   General district provisions



   9.109   Residential districts



   9.110   Commercial districts



   9.111   Industrial districts



   9.112   Mixed-use development district



   9.113   Planned Unit Development District



   9.114   Overlay districts



   9.115   Public and Open Space District



   9.116   Subdivision regulations



§ 9.101  PURPOSE, AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.



   (A)   Title.  This article shall be known, cited and referred to as
the Columbia Heights Zoning and Development Ordinance, except as referred to
herein, where it shall be known as “this article.”



   (B)   Purpose.  The City Council of the City of Columbia Heights,
Minnesota, adopts this article to accomplish the following:



      (1)   Protect the public health, safety, morals, aesthetics,
comfort, convenience and general welfare of the community and its people;



      (2)   Implement the goals and policies included in the city's
comprehensive plan;



      (3)   Divide the city into districts restricting and
regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and
use of structures and land;



      (4)   Protect the stability and character of residential,
commercial, industrial and public areas of the city and promote the orderly
development of those areas;



      (5)   Provide and protect adequate light, air, privacy and
convenience of access to property;



      (6)   Provide a safe and efficient traffic circulation system
for all modes of transportation and limit congestion in the public
rights-of-way;



      (7)   Prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
structures by regulating the use of land and buildings and the bulk of
buildings in relation to the land and buildings surrounding them;



      (8)   Provide for the compatibility of different land uses and
the most appropriate use of land throughout the city;



      (9)   Provide for the effective administration of this
article, including powers and duties of officers and bodies, procedures and
standards for land use approvals, and procedures for enforcement;



      (10)   Establish a continuing system of review of this article
to ensure it will be amended to meet the changing needs of the city;



   (C)   Authority.  This article is enacted under the authority
granted to the City of Columbia Heights by the Municipal Planning Act, M.S.
§§ 462.351 to 462.365, as they may be amended from time to time. If those
statutes are amended to restrict or enlarge the authority delegated to the
city, those amendments shall be incorporated into this article.



   (D)   Jurisdiction.  This article governs the use of all land and
structures within the corporate limits of the City of Columbia Heights,
unless such regulation is specifically pre-empted by state or federal law or
regulation.



   (E)   Violations.  Any violation of any provision of this article
shall be considered a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine and/or a
jail term under state law plus the cost of prosecution. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate violation for the purposes of this section.



(Ord. 1428, passed 5-29-01)



§ 9.102  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Language.  The following rules of construction govern the
language of this article:



      (1)   The singular number includes the plural and the plural
the singular;



      (2)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses,
and the future tense the present;



      (3)   The word “shall” is mandatory, and the word
“may” is permissive;



      (4)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter
genders;



      (5)   Whenever a word or term defined in this article appears
in the text of this article, its meaning shall be as stated in the article
definition;



      (6)   Words or terms that are not defined in this article
shall have the meaning found in the most recent edition of Webster's
Unabridged Dictionary;



      (7)   Words or terms not defined in Webster's Unabridged
Dictionary shall have their ordinary, usual meaning at the time the word or
term is applied to a zoning or development question or situation;



      (8)   General words are construed to be restricted in their
meaning by preceding particular words;



      (9)   The terms “article” and “code” may be used
interchangeably hereunder.



   (B)   Application.



      (1)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion and protection of the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare. The city may impose additional requirements where deemed necessary
to protect the public interest and ensure compliance with the standards and
purposes of this article and the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan.



      (2)   In addition to the requirements of this article, all
land uses and development shall comply with all other applicable city,
county, state and federal regulations. If a provision of this article
conflicts with any other provision of this article, the Columbia Heights City
Code, or any other provision of law, the provision that is more restrictive,
or which imposes a higher standard or requirement, shall prevail.



   (C)   Separability.  Provisions of this article are separable in
accordance with the following:



      (1)   If any court of competent jurisdiction finds any
provision of this article to be invalid, that judgment shall not affect any
other provisions of this article not specifically included in the judgment.



      (2)   If any court of competent jurisdiction finds the
application of any provision of this article to a particular property,
building, or other structure to be invalid, that judgment shall not affect
the application of the provision to any other property, building or structure
not specifically included in the judgment.



   (D)   Interpretation.  The following rules govern the
interpretation of this article:



      (1)   City Council intention.



         (a)   1.   The object of all construction of this
article is to ascertain and effectuate the intention of the City Council.
This article shall be construed if possible to give effect to all the
provisions of this article.



            2.   When the words of this article in their
application to an existing situation are clear and free from all ambiguity,
the letter of this article shall not be disregarded under the pretext of
pursuing the spirit.



         (b)   When the words of this article are not explicit,
the intentions of the City Council may be ascertained by considering, among
other matters:



            1.   The occasion and necessity for the ordinance
or specific provision;



            2.   The circumstances under which it was enacted;



            3.   The mischief to be remedied;



            4.   The object to be attained;



            5.   The former zoning ordinance;



            6.   The consequences of a particular
interpretation;



            7.   Administrative interpretation of this article
and interpretations by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments.



         (c)   In ascertaining the intention of the City Council,
the following presumptions apply:



            1.   The City Council does not intend a result
that is absurd, impossible of execution, or unreasonable;



            2.   The City Council intends this article to be
effective and certain in its entirety;



            3.   The City Council does not intend to violate
the Constitutions of the United States or the State of Minnesota;



            4.   The City Council intends to favor the public
interest as against any private interest.



      (2)   Grammatical errors.  Grammatical errors shall not
destroy the application of this article. A transposition of words and clauses
may be resorted to when a sentence is without meaning as it stands. Words and
phrases which may be necessary to the proper interpretation of this article
and which do not conflict with its obvious purpose and intent, nor in any way
affect its scope in operation, may be added in the construction thereof.



      (3)   Language. 



         (a)   Provisions shall be construed to limit rather than
to extend the operation of the clause to which they refer. Exceptions
expressed in this article shall be construed to exclude all others.



         (b)   When a general provision of this article conflicts
with a special provision in this article, the two shall be constructed if
possible so that effect shall be given to both. If the conflict between the
two provisions is irreconcilable, the special provision shall prevail and
shall be construed as an exception to the general provision. If the general
provision was enacted subsequent to the special provision and it is the clear
intention of the City Council that such general provision shall prevail, then
the general provision shall prevail.



         (c)   When several clauses are irreconcilable, the
clause last in order of date of position shall prevail.



         (d)   When the provisions of two or more amendments to
this article passed at different dates are irreconcilable, the amendment
latest in date of final enactment shall prevail.



      (4)   Amendments.



         (a)   When a section or part of this article is amended,
the amendment shall be construed as merging into the original ordinance,
becoming a part thereof, and replacing the part amended. The remainder of the
original ordinance and the amendment shall be read together and viewed as one
ordinance passed at one time. The portions of this article that were not
altered by the amendment shall be construed as effective from the date of the
first enactment, and the new provision shall be construed as effective only
from the date when the amendment became effective.



         (b)   When this article adopts the provisions of state
statute by reference, it also adopts by reference any subsequent amendments
of that statute except when the intent of the City Council is clearly to the
contrary.



         (c)   If two or more amendments to the same provision of
this article are enacted at the same or at different times, one amendment
overlooking and making no reference to the other or others, the amendments
shall be construed together if possible and effect be given to each. If the
amendments are irreconcilable, the amendment latest in date of final
enactment shall prevail.



      (5)   Diagrams.  Diagrams, where provided, are intended to be
illustrative only and may not be drawn to scale. Where a conflict exists
between a diagram and the text, the text shall prevail.



(Ord. 1428, passed 5-29-01)



§ 9.103  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONMENT.  To discontinue a use or activity for any reason, but
excluding temporary interruptions to the use during periods of building or
remodeling where a valid building permit has been issued or during periods of
routine seasonal closure.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE.  A building or structure or portion
of a structure subordinate to and serving the principal structure on the same
lot.



   ACCESSORY USE.  A use that is reasonably necessary and incidental to
the conduct of the primary use of the principal building or buildings.



   ADDITION.  Any change or modification in construction or occupancy of
an existing structure. The enclosure of an existing screened porch, deck,
roofed deck, patio, or roofed patio shall be considered an addition.



   ADJACENT or CONTIGUOUS.  Bordering, touching or adjoining. If two lots
are separated by a public street, they shall not be deemed adjacent. If two
lots are separated by a public walkway, they shall be deemed adjacent.



   ADULT USE.  Adult uses include adult bookstores, adult motion picture
theaters, adult motion picture sales/rental, adult mini-motion picture
theaters, adult massage parlors, adult steam room/bathhouse/sauna facilities,
adult companionship establishments, adult conversation parlors, adult
health/sport clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion
picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body
painting studios, and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses
or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is
an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” which
are capable of being seen by members of the public. Activities classified as
obscene as defined by M.S. § 617.241, as it may be amended from time to
time, are not included.



   ADULT USE, ACCESSORY.  The offering of retail goods for sale which are
classified as adult uses on a limited scale and which are incidental to the
primary activity and goods and/or services offered by the establishment.
Examples of such items include the sale of adult magazines, the sale or
rental of adult motion pictures, the sale of adult novelties, and the like.



   ADULT USE, PRINCIPAL.  The offering of goods and/or services which are
classified as adult uses as a primary or sole activity of a business or
establishment and include, but are not limited to adult body painting
studios, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult companionship
establishments, adult conversation parlors, adult health clubs, adult
theaters, adult modeling studios, and adult saunas and massage parlors.



   ALLEY.  A public right-of-way or private way that affords a secondary
means of access to abutting property.



   ANNEXATION.  The incorporation of a land area into the city with a
resulting change to the corporate limits of the city.



   ASSISTED LIVING.  A facility licensed by the MnDOH where
individualized home care aide services or home management services are
provided to residents either by management or by providers under contract
with the management.



   AUTO REDUCTION YARD.  A lot or yard where one or more unlicensed motor
vehicles or the remains thereof are kept for the purpose of dismantling, sale
of parts, sale as scrap, storage or abandonment.



   AUTO AND TRUCK SALES LOT.  Buildings and premises for automobile/truck
sales and show rooms with incidental and accessory sales and service
facilities also permitted but not required.



   AUTO AND TRUCK SALES LOT, USED.  Any land used or occupied for the
purpose of buying and selling secondhand passenger cars or trucks, and the
storing of such vehicles prior to sale.



   AUTOMOBILE, USED.  Any secondhand, previously owned passenger vehicle,
car, or truck.



   BANNER, FLAG or PENNANT.  A sign made of a flexible material, such as
cloth, paper, or plastic, however and wherever affixed.



   BANQUET HALL.  A building for the purpose of hosting a party, banquet,
wedding, reception or other social events.



   BASEMENT.  A portion of a building located partially, up to 50%
underground or below grade.



   BAY.  Cantilevered portion of a building.



   BED AND BREAKFAST RESIDENCE.  An owner-occupied, single-family
residence that provides lodging and meals to registered guests.



   BEDROOM.  Any room used principally for sleeping purposes and does not
contain separate kitchen and sanitary facilities.



   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS.  The Columbia Heights Planning Commission.



   BOARDING HOUSE.  A building other than a motel or hotel where, for
compensation and by pre- arrangement for definite periods, meals and/or
lodgings are provided for three or more persons, but not to exceed eight
persons.



   BREW PUB. A restaurant that conducts the retail of on-sale malt liquor
consumed and brewed on the premise.



   BREWER TAPROOM. A facility on the premises of, or adjacent to, a malt
liquor manufacturer intended for on-sale and consumption of malt liquor
produced by the brewer.



   BUFFER.  A landscaped area intended to separate and/or partially
obstruct the view of adjacent land uses or properties from one another.



   BUILDABLE AREA.  The area of the lot remaining after the minimum yard
or setback requirements of this article have been established.



   BUILDING.  Any roofed structure that may provide shelter or enclosure
of persons, animals or chattel.



   BUILDING LINE.  A line parallel with the street right-of-way, or any
property line, at the foundation level of a building and representing the
distance which the building is set back from the street right-of-way or other
property line.



   BULK REGULATIONS.  Standards and controls that establish the maximum
size of structures and the buildable area within which the structure can be
located, including height, floor area ratio, gross floor area, lot area, lot
coverage, impervious surface area and yard requirements, but excluding
residential density regulations.



   BUSINESS.  Any occupation, employment, or enterprise wherein
merchandise is exhibited, rented or sold or which occupies time, attention
labor and/or materials or where services or goods are offered for
compensation.



   BUSINESS FRONTAGE.  The property lines or lease lines at the front of
the building or the location of the main public entrance of said building.



   CANOPY, AWNING or MARQUEE.  A projection or extension of a structure,
building or place of assembly, erected in such a manner as to provide a
shelter or cover over the approach to any entrance of such structure,
building, or place of assembly.



   CARPORT.  An automobile shelter having one or more sides open.



   CARWASH.  A building that provides facilities for washing and cleaning
motor vehicles, which may use production line methods with a conveyor,
blower, or other mechanical devices, and which may employ some hand labor.



   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.  A document issued by the Building Official
allowing for the occupancy or use of a building, and certifying that the
structure or use has been constructed or will be used in compliance with all
the applicable codes and ordinances.



   CLINIC, MEDICAL.  A place used for the diagnosis and treatment of
sick, ailing, infirm, injured persons, and those persons who are in need of
medical attention. Overnight care facilities are not provided at the clinic.



   CLINIC, VETERINARY.  A place used for the diagnosis and treatment of
sick or injured animals and those animals in need of medical attention.



   COFFEE SHOP.  An establishment engaged principally in the sale of
coffee and other non-alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or
for carryout, which may also include the sale of a limited number of food
items.



   COLOR.  Any hue or combination of values of these. Black and white,
shall not be considered colors.



   COMMERCIAL USE.  A use of land, building or structure intended,
designed or arranged for a business, occupation, trade, or profession,
including entertainment, services or sale of goods.



   COMMUNITY CENTER.  An establishment operated by a non-profit
organization or government agency, which includes recreational facilities,
meeting rooms, social service facilities, and public health facilities, or
any combination thereof.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  The policies, statements, goals and interrelated
plans for private and public use of land and water, transportation, and
community facilities including recommendations for plan execution, documented
texts, ordinances, maps which constitute the guide for the future development
of the city.



   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.  A permit specially and individually granted
by the City Council after public hearing thereon by the Planning Commission
for any conditional use so permitted in any use district.



   CONVENIENCE STORE.  A retail establishment, having a maximum gross
floor area of 7,500 square feet, offering for sale prepackaged food products,
household items and other goods commonly associated with this type of store.
This use may also be combined with a motor vehicle service station.



   COUNCIL.  The Columbia Heights City Council.



   CURB.  A stone, asphalt or concrete boundary marking the edge of a
roadway or paved area.



   CURB LEVEL.  The grade elevation as established by the city, of the
curb in front of the center of the building. Where no curb level has been
established, the City Engineer shall determine a curb level or its equivalent
for the purpose of this article.



   CURB LINE.  The line at the face of the curb nearest the street or
roadway. In the absence of a curb, the curb line shall be established by the
City Engineer.



   DAY CARE, ADULT.  A facility that provides care to functionally
impaired adults on a regular basis for periods of less than 24 hours in a
structure that is not the residence of the person being served or the
facility operator.



   DAY CARE, FAMILY.  A facility that provides care, protection and
supervision of children in a private residence for periods of less than 24
hours. The size of the outdoor play area, the maximum number of children who
may be served, and the number and qualifications of required outside teachers
and helpers are set forth in Minnesota Statutes. This use may be licensed by
other agencies.



   DAY CARE, GROUP.  A non-residential facility where child care,
protection and supervision services are provided on a regular basis for
periods of less than 24 hours. A group day care facility may also be referred
to as a NURSERY.



   DECK, ATTACHED.  A structure six feet or more attached to the main
building that may or may not have a railing or access to the ground, but does
not have a roof or contain walls.



   DECK, DETACHED.  A free-standing structure that is directly adjacent
or attached to the principal building that may or may not have a railing, but
does not have a roof or contain walls.



   DENSITY.  The number of dwellings or principal buildings or uses
permitted per net acre of land. Net acre of land shall not include any land
required for public streets or other rights-of-way.



   DEVELOPMENT.  All structures and other human modifications of the
landscape.



   DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT.  Any premise where alcohol or non-alcoholic
beverages are sold at retail for consumption on the premises.



   DRIP LINE.  A vertical line extending from the outermost branches of a
tree to the ground.



   DRIVE-IN FACILITY.  Any portion of a building from which business is
transacted, or is capable of being transacted, directly with customers
located in a motor vehicle. Such use may also be referred to as a
drive-through.



   DRIVEWAY.  A private way used by vehicles to gain access to an
individual lot or parcel of land. For one- and two-family dwellings, the
driveway shall be defined as the length and width of a driving surface that
is used to gain access to a private garage.



   DWELLING.  A building or one or more portions thereof occupied or
intended to be occupied exclusively by a family, but not including rooms in
motels, hotels, nursing homes, boardinghouses, nor trailers, tents, cabins,
or trailer coaches.



   DWELLING, ATTACHED.  A dwelling that is joined to another dwelling on
one or more sides by a common wall.



   DWELLING, DETACHED.  A dwelling that is surrounded by open space on
the same lot.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE.  A building so designed as to contain three or
more dwellings as the principle use.



   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE.  Attached dwelling units, each with a separate
entrance to front and rear yards.



   EASEMENT, UTILITY.  A grant by a property owner for the use of a
portion or strip of land for the purposes of constructing and maintaining
utilities, including, but not limited to, sanitary sewers, water mains,
electric liners, telephone lines, storm sewers or storm drainage ways, and
gas lines.



   EMERGENCY SHELTER.  A non-profit, charitable, or religious
organization providing boarding and/or lodging and ancillary services on the
premises primarily to indigent, needy, homeless or transient persons.



   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT.  A method of determining the location of
encroachment lines so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows. This as determined
by considering the effect of encroachment on the hydraulic efficiency of the
flood plain along both sides of a stream for a significant reach.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICE.  Underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or
water distribution systems; collection, communication, supply or disposal
systems including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits,
cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants or
other similar equipment and accessories in conjunction therewith; but not
including telecommunication towers.



   FACADE.  The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view.



   FAMILY.  An individual, or two or more persons each related by blood,
marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a
group of not more than four persons not so related, maintaining a common
household and using common cooking and kitchen facilities.



   FENCE.  A fence is any partition, structure, wall or gate erected as a
dividing marker along property lines or within the required yard.



   FILLING.  The placement of sand, gravel, earth or other materials of
any composition on a parcel of land.



   FIREARM.  Any device, designed to be used as a weapon, which will or
is designed to or may readily be converted to expel a projectile by the
action of an explosive or other form of combustion, but excluding a stud or
nail gun used in the construction industry or a toy gun.



   FLOOD.  A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in
inundation of the areas adjacent to the channel.



   FLOOD FREQUENCY.  The average frequency, statistically determined, for
which it is expected that a specific flood state or discharge may be equaled
or exceeded.



   FLOOD FRINGE.  That portion of the flood plain outside of the
floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term floodway fringe used in
the Flood Insurance Study.



   FLOOD PLAIN.  The areas adjoining a watercourse that have been or
hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.



   FLOOD PROOFING.  A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for
the reduction or elimination of flood damages.



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining flood plain that is reasonably required to carry and discharge the
regional flood.



   FLOOR AREA, GROSS.  The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors measured to the outside of exterior walls.



   FLOOR AREA, NET.  The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building including interior balconies, mezzanines and basements,
but excepting that area primarily devoted to window display, fitting rooms,
stairs, escalators, unenclosed porches, dead storage, heating and utility
rooms, inside off-street parking or loading space. Measurements shall be made
from the outside of exterior walls.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO.  The numerical value obtained through dividing the
gross floor area of a building or buildings by the lot area on which such
building or buildings are located.



   FRONTAGE.  The distance for which a lot line coincides with the
right-of-way line of a public street or the boundary of a private street.



   FUNERAL HOME.  A building or part of a building thereof used for human
funeral services. Such building may contain space and facilities for
embalming and other services used to prepare the dead for burial, performance
of autopsies, storage of caskets, funeral urns and other related funeral
supplies and the storage of other funeral supplies, but excluding
crematoriums.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE.  A detached accessory building or portion of
principal building, including a carport, which is used primarily for storing
passenger vehicles, trailers or one truck of a rate capacity not in excess of
9,000 pounds.



   GARAGE SALE.  Any display of used goods and/or salesmen samples and
sale of said goods on a property used primarily as a dwelling. The person
conducting the sale shall be a member of the family occupying the dwelling.



   GRADE.  The elevation or level of the street closest to the building,
structure or sign to which reference is made, measured at the street's
centerline.



   GLARE, DIRECT.  That part of the visible light reaching an observer
directly in a straight line from the source of its principal diffuser and/or
its associated focusing reflector.



   GLARE, INDIRECT.  Light described in the definition for direct glare,
but reaching an observer by reflection from a surface or surfaced which
either:



      (1)   Move periodically under power of the wind, electricity,
burning fossil fuel, or similar energy source; or



      (2)   Reflect 70% or more of the light incident upon them; or



      (3)   Produce by imaging the effect of the conditions of
subdivision (a) above.



   GRAPHICS.  An illustration or rendering which is not for an
advertising purpose and which is applied directly to a building or structure.



   HEIGHT, BUILDING.  The distance measured from the mean curb level
along the front lot line or from the mean ground level for all of that
portion of the structure having frontage on a public right-of- way, whichever
is higher, to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a
mansard roof, to a point on the roof directly above the highest wall of a
shed roof, to the uppermost point on a round or other arch type roof, to the
mean distance of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof.



   HEIGHT, STRUCTURE OR SIGN.  The distance measured from the mean curb
level along the front lot line or from the mean ground level for a structure
having frontage on a public right-of-way, whichever is higher, to the
uppermost portion of the structure or sign.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  Any gainful occupation or profession engaged in by
an occupant of a dwelling unit. Such use must be clearly incidental and
secondary to the principal use of the dwelling for residential purposes and
shall not change the residential character of the dwelling or have an adverse
effect on adjacent properties nor constitute a nuisance or safety hazard.



   HOTEL.  A building containing eight or more guest rooms in which
lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation and which is open
to transient, permanent guests or both, and where no provision is made for
cooking in any guest room, and in which ingress and egress to and from all
rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in
charge.



   IMPERVIOUS SERVICE.  A surface that is occupied by buildings or
structures, or has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that
it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.



   INDUSTRIAL USE.  The use of land or buildings for the production,
manufacture, warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products,
commodities or other wholesale items.



   JUNK YARD.  An area where used, waste, discarded or salvaged materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, stored baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or
handled including but not limited to scrap, iron, and other metals, paper,
rags, rubber products, bottles and lumber. Storage of such material in
conjunction with a permitted manufacturing process when within an enclosed
area or building shall not be included.



   KENNEL.  Any premises where three or more non-caged domestic animals
over six months of age are kept, except for an animal hospital, pet shop or
veterinary clinic.



   LAND ALTERATION.  Depositing or removing 400 cubic yards or more of
material after the effective date of this article so as to modify the
existing grade, excluding excavations for the placement of footings or the
construction of basements.



   LOT.  A parcel of land occupied or used or intended for occupancy or
use by a use permitted in this article, abutting on a public street, and of
sufficient size to provide the yard required by this article.



   LOT AREA.  The area of a lot in a horizontal plan bounded by the lot
lines, but not including any area occupied by the waters of a duly recorded
lake or area which has been dedicated as a public right- of-way.



   LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT.  The number of square feet of lot area
required per dwelling unit.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on two
or more intersecting streets or other public rights-of-way, or a lot at the
point of deflection in alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle
of which does not exceed 135 degrees.



   LOT DEPTH.  The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the rear lot line of a lot.



   LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot other than a corner lot.



   LOT LINE.  A lot line is the property line bounding a lot except that
where any portion of a lot extends into the public right-of-way or a proposed
public right-of-way shown on a recorded official map, the line of such public
right-of-way shall be deemed the lot line.



   LOT LINE, FRONT.  That boundary of a lot that abuts a public street.
In the case of a corner lot it shall be the shortest dimension on a public
street. If the dimensions of a corner lot are equal, the front lot line shall
be designated by the owner and filed with the city.



   LOT LINE, REAR.  That boundary of a lot that is opposite the front lot
line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot
forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten feet in
length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the
front lot line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE.  Any boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line or
a rear lot line.



   LOT OF RECORD.  Any lot which is one unit of a plat heretofore or
hereafter duly approved and filed, or one unit of an auditor's subdivision or
a registered land survey, or a parcel of land not so platted, subdivided or
registered for which a deed, auditor's subdivision or registered land survey
has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds or Registrar of
Titles for Anoka County, Minnesota prior to the effective date of this
article.



   LOT, SUBSTANDARD.  A lot or parcel of land that has less than the
required minimum area or width as established by this article as a buildable
parcel.



   LOT, THROUGH.  A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting
two substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a
through lot, both street lines shall be front lot lines for applying this
article.



   LOT WIDTH.  The minimum horizontal distance between the side lot lines
as measured at the median point of the front yard setback line.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A manufactured home means a factory-built
structure or structures equipped with the necessary service connections and
made so as to be readily movable as a unit or units on its or their own
running gear and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or units without a
permanent foundation. The phrase “without a permanent foundation”
indicates that the support system is constructed with the intent that the
mobile home placed thereon will be moved from time to time at the convenience
of the owner.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.  A parcel of land so designed and improved
with utilities, parking pads, walks, access roads, and other facilities to
accommodate manufactured homes that are to be used as dwellings and that have
received state approval.



   MOTEL.  A building containing eight or more guest rooms in which
lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation and which is open
to transient, permanent guests or both, and where no provision is made for
cooking in any guest room, and in which ingress and egress to and from all
rooms is made directly from the outside.



   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL.  A building or area where freight arrives
and/or is removed for routing in intra-state or inter-state shipment by motor
truck.



   MOTOR FUEL STATION.  A retail place of business engaged primarily in
the sale of motor fuels, but may also be engaged in supplying goods and
services generally required in the operation and maintenance of motor
vehicles.



   MOTOR FUEL STATION, MAJOR.  A primarily retail place of business which
may engage in major motor vehicle repair and may include auto wash or
convenience store as an accessory use.



   MOTOR FUEL STATION, MINOR.  A retail place of business which shall
have no more than two service bays, and may engage in minor motor vehicle
repair.



   MOTOR VEHICLE PARTS STORE. Any building or premise used for the purpose
of selling and storing any component, product or system of an automobile,
motorcycle or truck vehicle.



   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MAJOR.  General repair, rebuilding or
reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, including body work,
frame work and major painting service.



   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MINOR.  The replacement of any part or repair of
any part including the removal of the engine head or pan, engine,
transmission or differential; incidental body and fender work; minor painting
and upholstering service when said service above stated is applied within an
enclosed building.



   NONCONFORMITY.  Nonconformity shall have the meaning given in the M.S.
§ 394.22, subd. 8, or successor statutes.



   NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIAL.  Material capable of causing injury to
living organisms by chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental
effects on the physical or economic well being of individuals.



   NURSING HOME.  A place, residence, or home used for the boarding and
care of elderly or infirm that are dependent upon the services of others.



   OBSTRUCTION.  Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across,
or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood hazard area
which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water,
either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water,
or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to
the damage of life or property.



   OFFICE.  A building or portion of a building wherein services are
performed involving predominantly administration, professional or clerical
operations.



   OFFICIAL CONTROL.  Means legislatively defined and enacted policies,
standards, precise detailed maps, and other criteria all of which control the
physical development of a municipality or a county or any part thereof or any
detail thereof, and are the means of translating into ordinances all or any
part of the general objections of the comprehensive plan. Such official
controls may include but are not limited to ordinances establishing zoning,
subdivision controls, site plan regulations, sanitary codes, building codes,
housing codes and official maps.



   OFFICIAL MAP.  Means a map adopted in accordance to Minnesota Statutes
which may show existing roads and highways, future roads and highways and the
area needed for widening existing public land and facilities and other land
needed for future parks, playgrounds, schools, and other public buildings,
civic centers, travel service facilities.



   OPAQUE.  Impervious to the passage of light.



   OPEN SALES LOT.  Land devoted to the display of goods for sale, rent,
lease, advertising or trade where such goods are not enclosed within a
building but not including new or used cars or trucks.



   OPEN SPACE, COMMON.  Open space within or related to a development
designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the occupants of the
development or the public at large.



   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK.  Shall have the meaning given in M.S. §
103G.005, subd. 14; or successor statutes.



   OUTSIDE STORAGE.  The keeping in an unroofed area of any goods, bulk
material, other material, merchandise, or products for more than 24 hours.



   OVERLAY DISTRICT.  A zoning district that encompasses one or more
primary zoning districts, or portions thereof, and that imposes additional
requirements above and beyond those required by the primary zoning district.



   PARCEL.  An area of land that may be designated by platting, by metes
and bounds descriptions, by a registered land survey, by auditor's
subdivision, or other acceptable means, which distinguishes it from other
parcels.



   PARKING, JOINT.  The development and use of a parking space or parking
lot by two or more separate uses.



   PAWNBROKER.  A person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal
property or other valuable items or who deals in the purchasing of personal
property or other valuable items on condition of selling the same back again
at a stipulated price or who loans money secured by security interest on
personal property or any part thereof. 



   PAWN SHOP. A business establishment operated by a pawnbroker.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY.  A public or private right-of-way, across or within a
block that provides access for pedestrians.



   PERFORMANCE STANDARD.  Criterion established to control noise, odor,
radiation, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or
glare or heat generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.



   PERSONS.  Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or body politic; includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.



   PLACE OF WORSHIP.  A building, together with its accessory buildings
and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which
buildings and uses are maintained and controlled by a religious body
organized to sustain regular public worship.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  Planned unit development means a type of
development characterized by a unified site design for a number of dwelling
units or dwelling sites on a parcel, whether for sale, rent or lease, and
usually involving a mix of land use, structure types and other design
development details specific to the site or project goals.



   PLAT.  A map depicting the division or subdivision of land into lots,
blocks, parcels, tracts or other portions thereof.



   PLAT, FINAL.  A drawing of a permanent nature showing the precise
location and dimensions of such features as streets, lots, easements and
other elements pertinent to transfer of ownership and prepared for permanent
record.



   PLAT, PRELIMINARY.  A drawing showing the proposed general pattern of
streets, lots, and land uses within a tract of land to be subdivided.



   PRECIOUS METALS.  Gold, silver or platinum. 



   PRECIOUS METALS DEALER.  Any person, partnership or corporation,
either as principal or agent, who engages in the business of buying or
selling secondhand items containing precious metal, including but not limited
to jewelry, watches, coins, eating utensils, candlesticks, decorative objects
and ingots.



   PRECIOUS METALS DEALERSHIP.  Any business establishment operated by a
precious metals dealer.



   PUBLIC WATERS.  Public waters shall have the meaning given in M.S. §
103G.005, subd. 15, or successor statutes.



   RAMP.  A structure attached to a principle or accessory building which
is constructed at a slope that meets the Uniform Building Code requirements
for the purposes of providing access to a building.



   REACH.  A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or manmade obstruction.
In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive
bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.



   RECREATIONAL FACILITY (INDOOR AND OUTDOOR).  Clubhouses, swimming
pools, tennis courts, trails and similar facilities used by the general
public for exercise, sports or entertainment.



   REGIONAL FLOOD.  A flood which is representative of large floods known
to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the
100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term base
flood used in the flood insurance study.



   RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY.  A licensed public or private facility,
which, for gain or otherwise, regularly provides one or more dependents with
24-hour-a-day substitute for the care, food, lodging, training, supervision,
rehabilitation, and treatment they need, but which for any reason cannot be
furnished in the dependent’s own home. The term includes facilities that
are licensed by the Minnesota Department of Health, foster homes, residential
treatment facilities, maternity shelters, group homes, schools for challenged
children, and homes for battered children or spouses.  Such term shall not
include any facility eligible for licensure by the Minnesota Department of
Corrections.



   RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY, CORRECTIONAL.  A licensed public or private
facility, which, for gain or otherwise, regularly provides one or more
dependents with 24-hour-a-day substitute for the care, food, lodging,
training, supervision, rehabilitation, and treatment they need, but which for
any reason cannot be furnished in the dependent’s own home. The term
includes facilities that are licensed by the Minnesota Department of Health,
foster homes, residential treatment facilities, maternity shelters, group
homes, schools for challenged children, and homes for battered children or
spouses.  Such term shall also include any facility eligible for licensure
by the Minnesota Department of Corrections.



   RESIDENTIAL USE BUILDING.  A dwelling, boarding, lodging, rooming,
fraternity or sorority house, or a dormitory unit.



   RESTAURANT.  An establishment engaged in the preparation and retail
sale of food and beverages, which is characterized by table service to
customers and does not meet the definition of a fast food restaurant.



   RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD.  An establishment whose design or principal
method of operation includes at least five of the following characteristics.



      (1)   Less than 50% of the gross floor area is devoted to
customer dining.



      (2)   A permanent menu board is provided from which to select
and order food.



      (3)   If a chain or franchised restaurant, standardized floor
plans are used over several locations.



      (4)   Customers pay for food before consuming it.



      (5)   A self-serve condiment bar is provided.



      (6)   Trash receptacles are provided for self-serve bussing.



      (7)   Furnishing plan indicates hard-finished stationary
seating arrangement.



      (8)   Most main course food items are substantially cooked on
the premises and packaged in individual, non-reusable containers.



      (9)   In addition, any restaurant with a drive-through
facility shall be considered a fast food restaurant.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  An area or strip of land, either public or private,
upon which a right-of-passage has been recorded for the use of vehicles,
including trains, or pedestrians or both.



   ROAD.  A public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians
and vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, service
road, place or however otherwise designated.



   ROOF LINE.  The uppermost line of the roof of a building or, in the
case of an extended facade, the uppermost height of said facade.



   ROOMER.  A person who is not a member of the family occupying a room
for a charge.



   ROOMING HOUSE.  A residential structure that offers a room or rooms
without kitchen facilities for rent.



   SAMPLING, TOBACCO.  The lighting, inhalation, or combination thereof
of tobacco, tobacco paraphernalia, or tobacco-related products for the
purpose of testing a tobacco product prior to the sale of such product.



   SEMI-PUBLIC USE.  The use of land by a private, non-profit
organization to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some
persons outside the regular constituency of the organization.



   SETBACK.  The minimum horizontal distance between a building or
structure and a right-of-way, property line, ordinary high water level, or
other specified facility.



   SEWER SYSTEM.  Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force
main, and all other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used
for conducting sewage or industrial wastes or other wastes to a point of
ultimate disposal and/or treatment.



   SHOPPING CENTER.  A group of four or more commercial uses that has
either common management or ownership, or has a contiguous gross retail area
of 20,000 square feet or more.



   SHORE IMPACT ZONE.  The land located between the ordinary high water
level of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50% of the
required structure setback for the applicable lake or river classification.



   SHORELAND.  Shoreland shall have the meaning given in M.S. §
103F.205, subd. 4, or successor statutes.



   SIGN.  A structure, device, advertisement, advertising device or
visual representation intended to advertise, identify or communicate
information to attract the attention of the public for any purpose and
without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing. A sign includes any
symbols, letters, figures, graphics, or forms painted or otherwise affixed to
a building or structure intended to attract the attention of the public for
any purpose. This definition includes a structural or nonstructural device
that borders, illuminates, animates or projects the visual representation.



      (1)   SIGN AREA.  The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign. Such perimeter shall, in
no case, pass through or between any adjacent elements of such sign. In the
case of a sign designed with more than one exterior surface, the area shall
be computed as including only the maximum single display surface, which is
visible from any ground position at one time. The supports, uprights, or
structures on which any sign is supported, which do not form an integral part
of the display, are not included in the sign area.



      (2)   SIGN, MAXIMUM HEIGHT.  Refers to the vertical distance
measured from the nearest finished grade to the top of such a sign.



      (3)   SIGN, MINIMUM HEIGHT.  Shall refer to the vertical
distance measured from the nearest finished grade to the lower limit of such
sign.



      (4)   SIGN STRUCTURE.  The structure which supports or is
capable of supporting any sign, including the framework, braces, uprights,
and supports of such signs. Said definition shall not include a building to
which the sign is attached.



   SIGN ALTERATION.  A change of copy area, size, or location exclusive
of routine maintenance, painting or change of the copy itself.



   SIGN, ANIMATED.  A sign that includes action or motion effected
through mechanical or electrical means or wind, exclusive of flashing,
changing and indexing signs.



   SIGN, AREA IDENTIFICATION.  A sign identifying a shopping center or
multiple dwelling units.



   SIGN, BILLBOARD.  A non-accessory sign for the purpose of advertising
a product, event, person, subject or service not entirely or directly related
to the premises on which said sign is located, including a sign for the
purpose of advertising the availability for rental or sale of the sign itself.



   SIGN, CANOPY, AWNING OR MARQUEE.  A sign suspended from or forming
part of the canopy, awning, or marquee that does not extend horizontally
beyond such canopy, awning or marquee.



   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY.  A sign employing detachable copy, letters or
symbols which may be altered, substituted or rearranged to convey varying
messages, regardless of method of attachment.



   SIGN, CHANGING.  A sign which displays copy changes, such as an
electronically or electrically controlled public service, time and
temperature sign, message center or reader-board.



   SIGN, COPY.  The letters, symbols, or other representatives used on a
sign to convey a message.



   SIGN, COPY AREA.  That portion of the sign which contains the copy and
to which the copy is applied.



   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL.  An on-premise sign designed to guide or direct
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.



   SIGN, DYNAMIC LED.  Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have
movement or that appear to change, caused by any method other than physically
removing and replacing the sign or its components. This includes a display
that incorporates a technology or method allowing the sign face to change the
image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face or
its components.  This also includes any moving, flashing, blinking, or
animated display and any display that incorporates LED lights manipulated
through digital input, “digital ink” or any other method or technology
that allows the sign face to present a series of images or displays.



   SIGN, ELECTRIC.  A sign that uses electrical wiring on, in or near
such sign to effect illumination.



   SIGN, FLASHING.  A sign that contains flashing lights or exhibits
discernable and purposeful changes in light intensity or color.



   SIGN, FREE-STANDING.  A permanent sign which is not affixed to any
part of a building or structure and which is supported by upright brace(s) or
post(s) placed in the ground.



   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION.  A sign which is limited to the name, address
and number of a building, structure, institution, or person in addition to
the activity carried on in the building, structure or institution, or the
occupation of the person.



   SIGN, ILLUMINATED.  A sign designed to give forth or reflect any
artificial light, either directly from a source of light incorporated in or
connected with such sign, or indirectly from an artificial source in the
immediate proximity thereof.



   SIGN, INCIDENTAL.  A small sign less than two square feet in area of a
noncommercial nature, intended primarily for the convenience of the public,
including signs designating rest areas and public telephones.



   SIGN, INSTITUTIONAL.  A sign used by an institution.



   SIGN, MONUMENT.  A permanent freestanding sign which is not affixed to
any part of a building or structure and which is typically constructed of
masonry, concrete, wood or other decorative type material to complement the
surrounding area.



   SIGN, POLITICAL.  A sign which states the name, slogan and/or picture
of an individual seeking election to a public office, or which pertains to a
public election or referendum, or which relates to or advocates political
views or policies.



   SIGN, PORTABLE.  A sign that is not permanently attached to the ground
or to a building or structure.



   SIGN, PROJECTING.  A sign which extends outward from the wall of a
building or structure more than 18 inches, and is supported by or suspended
from such wall.



   SIGN, REAL ESTATE.  A sign offering land and/or buildings for sale,
lease or rental, located on such property.



   SIGN, REVOLVING.  A sign, any part of which turns, rotates, or
revolves.



   SIGN, ROOF.  A sign which is painted on, affixed to, or erected upon
the roof or parapet of a building or structure of which any portion in
situated on or above the roof level of such building or structure and is
wholly or partially supported by said building or structure.



   SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD.  A freestanding “A” frame sign, not
requiring staking to the ground, placed near the entrance of a retail store
to direct pedestrians to that business.



   SIGN, TEMPORARY.  A sign, banner, pennant, valance, or advertising
device intended to be displayed for a limited period of time, whether
portable or attached to the principal structure.



   SIGN, TIME AND TEMPERATURE.  A sign that displays only time and
temperature information.



   SIGN, VARIABLE ELECTRONIC MESSAGE.  A dynamic LED sign that changes
its message more frequently than once every ten seconds for commercial and
industrial properties located in the LB, GB, CBD, I-1 and I-2 zoning
districts and a dynamic LED sign that changes its message more frequently
than once every 10 minutes for religious and/or educational institutions
located in the R-1, R-2A, R-2B, R-3, R-4, LB and PO zoning districts.



   SIGN, WALL.  An identification sign affixed to or painted on the wall
of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane
parallel to the plane of said wall.



   SIGN, WINDOW.  A sign painted on, placed in, or affixed to any window,
exclusive of merchandise on display.



   SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE.  An archaeological site, standing
structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the
National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of
Historic Sites or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under
the provisions of the M.S. § 307.08; or successor statutes. A historic site
meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register or if it is
determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the
Minnesota State Archaeologist or the director of the Minnesota Historical
Society.



   SMOKE SHOP.  A retail establishment that has obtained an appropriate
license, in which greater than 90% of the business’s gross revenue must be
from the sale of tobacco, tobacco products or smoking related accessories.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola: and human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Activities including: (1) Actual or
simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal
copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals,
flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use
of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of
the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery,
coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty,
pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or, (2) Clearly depicted human
genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or, (3)
Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or
masturbation; or, (4) Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breast; or, (5) Situations involving a person or
persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing
costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation,
torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such persons;
or, (6) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact
with an animal by a human being; or, (7) Human excretion, urination,
menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.



   STORY.  That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there is no floor
above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement
shall be counted as a story.



   STREET.  A public right-of-way not less than 50 feet in width which
affords a primary means of access to abutting property.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION.  Any change, other than incidental repairs,
which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as
bearing walls, column beams, girders, or foundations.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
more or less permanent location on the ground or attachment to something
having a permanent location on the ground. When a structure is divided into
separate parts by an unpierced wall, each part shall be deemed a separate
structure.



   SUBDIVISION.  Land that is divided for the purposes of sale, rent, or
lease and including planned unit developments.



   SWIMMING POOL, ABOVE-GROUND.  All swimming pools that are constructed
so that the edge of the pool is greater than three and one-half feet above
ground grade or has a capacity of more than 3,000 gallons of water.



   SWIMMING POOL, HOT TUB.  All pools that are intended for
hydro-therapeutic massage and relaxation purposes that have a capacity of
less than 750 gallons of water, including such pools generally constructed
with a filter unit(s), pump(s), water jet(s), molded seating and a heating
unit(s).  Any hot tub greater than 750 gallons of water shall be considered
an above-ground pool for regulatory purposes.



   SWIMMING POOL, IN-GROUND.  All swimming pools constructed so that the
pool edge is level with the ground grade.



   SWIMMING POOL, PORTABLE.  Any temporary pool designed for easy
construction and removal with a maximum height of 3.5 feet or a capacity of
less than 3,000 gallons of water.



   TWINHOME.  A single-family residential dwelling on an individual lot,
sharing a common wall with another single-family residential dwelling.



   USE.  The purpose or activity for which the land, structure or
building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is
occupied or maintained.



   USE, CONDITIONAL.  Either a public or private use as listed which,
because of its unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a
permitted use in a particular district.



   USE, INTERIM.  A temporary use of property until a particular date,
until the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no
longer permit it.



   USE, PERMITTED.  A use which may be lawfully established in a
particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements,
regulations and performance standards of such district.



   USE, PRINCIPAL.  The main use of land or buildings.



   VENDING MACHINE.  Any coin operated device that dispenses a product or
service without an attendant.



   WALL SURFACE.  The total horizontal area of the building face,
including windows and door areas, measured to the extreme outer limits of
such wall surface.



   YARD.  A required open space on a lot, which is unoccupied and
unobstructed by a structure from its lowest ground level to the sky except as
expressly permitted in this article. A yard shall extend along a lot line and
at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which such lot is located.



   YARD, FRONT.  A yard extending along the full width of the front lot
line between side lot lines and extending from the abutting front street
right-of-way line to a depth required in the yard regulations for the
district in which such lot is located.



   YARD, REAR.  A yard extending along the full width of the :rear lot
line between the side lot lines and extending toward the front lot line for a
depth as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot
is located.



   YARD, SIDE.  A yard extending along a side lot line between the front
and rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard regulations for the
district in which such lot is located.



   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.  Person appointed by the City Manager as
provided by this article.



   ZONING DISTRICT.  An area or areas within the limits of the city for
which the regulations and requirements governing use are uniform.



(Ord. 1428, passed 5-29-01; Am. Ord. 1507, passed 3-27-06; Am. Ord. 1515,
passed 11-13-06; Am. Ord. 1516, passed 10-23-06; Am. Ord. 1517, passed
10-23-06; Am. Ord. 1523, passed 5-29-07; Am. Ord. 1530, passed 9-24-07; Am.
Ord. 1536, passed 3-24-08; Am. Ord. 1553, passed 8-25-08; Am. Ord. 1570,
passed 9-28-09; Am. Ord. 1593, passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord. 1606, passed 4-23-12;
Am. Ord. 1626, passed 5-9-16; Am. Ord. 1638, passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 1653,
passed 2-25-19; Am. Ord. 1654, passed 2-25-19) 



§ 9.104  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   General provisions.



      (1)   Purpose.  This article sets forth the procedures
required for the administration of this article, outlines the powers and
duties of the officials and bodies charged with such administration,
establishes standards for required approvals, and provides enforcement in a
manner which protects the public health, safety and general welfare.



      (2)   Concurrent review.  In order to provide for the
efficient: administration of this article, all applications for a single
project or proposal that require multiple actions shall be processed
concurrently.



      (3)   Substantially similar uses.  Whenever an application
contains a use not specifically included in this article, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue a statement of clarification, finding that the use
is either substantially similar in character and impact to a use regulated in
this article or that the use is not substantially similar to any other use
regulated in this article. If the use is not substantially similar to any
other use regulated in this article, the use shall be prohibited.



   (B)   Authority and duties for administration.



      (1)   Authority.  The following city officials and bodies,
without limitation upon such authority as each may possess by law, have
responsibility for implementing and administering this article:



         (a)   Zoning Administrator;



         (b)   Development Review Committee;



         (c)   Planning Commission;



         (d)    City Council.



      (2)   Zoning Administrator.



         (a)   Authority.  The Zoning Administrator shall be
appointed by the City Manager to administer and enforce the provisions of
this article.



         (b)   Duties.  The Zoning Administrator shall have the
following responsibilities:



            1.   Conduct inspections of buildings and uses of
land to determine compliance with the provisions of this article.



            2.   Maintain permanent and current records of
this article, including, but not limited to, all associated maps, amendments,
conditional uses, variances, and appeals.



            3.   Receive, file and forward all applications
for appeals, variances, conditional use permits, interim use permits, zoning
ordinance amendments, vacations, minor subdivisions, preliminary plats, final
plats or other matters to the appropriate decision-making body.



            4.   Make a determination of compliance with this
article on all applications for building permits and certificates of
occupancy.



            5.   Provide zoning information to residents and
others upon request.



            6.   Interpret the provisions of this article.



      (3)   Development Review Committee.



         (a)   Authority.  The membership of the Development
Review Committee shall be city staff members as appointed by the City Manager.



         (b)   Duties.  The Development Review Committee shall
have the following responsibilities:



            1.   Review plans and plats for conformance with
the technical requirements of this article.



            2.   Make recommendation to the Planning
Commission and City Council regarding applications for development or land
use approvals.



      (4)   Planning Commission.



         (a)   Authority.  The Planning Commission shall be
appointed by the City Council.



         (b)   Duties. The Planning Commission shall have the
following responsibilities:



            1.   Hear and make recommendations to the City
Council regarding all applications for a conditional use permit or an
amendment to a conditional use permit.



            2.   Hear and make the final decisions on all
applications for an interim use as defined in this article.



            3.   Hear and make recommendations to the City
Council regarding all applications for an amendment to this article, both
text amendments and amendments to the district boundaries on the official
zoning map.



            4.   Hear and make recommendations to the City
Council regarding all applications for minor subdivisions, preliminary plats
and final plats.



            5.   Review, hold public hearings, and prepare
recommendations on any changes to the City's Comprehensive Plan.



            6.   Review this article from time to time and
make recommendations to the City Council that changes be initiated.



            7.   Hear and make recommendations on any other
matter referred to it by the City Council.



         (c)   Board of Appeals and Adjustment duties.  In
accordance with M.S. § 462.354, as it may be amended from time to time, the
City Council has designated the Planning Commission as the Board of Appeals
and Adjustments. As such, the Planning Commission shall have the following
additional responsibilities:



            1.   Hear and make decisions on all applications
for an appeal of any administrative order, requirement, determination or
final decision made by the Zoning Administrator or other official in the
administration of this article.



            2.   Hear and make decisions on all applications
for a variance from the literal provisions of this article.



      (5)   City Council.



         (a)   Authority.  The City Council shall have the
authority given to it by state statutes.



         (b)   Duties.  The City Council shall hear and make the
final decision on all matters identified as requiring City Council action in
this article.



   (C)   General application procedures.



      (1)   Applications.  All applications for land use or
development approval shall be made on the appropriate application, as
approved by the city and available from the Community Development Department.
The application shall be accompanied by detailed written and graphic
materials fully explaining the proposed development or land use change, as
required by the Zoning Administrator. The application shall also be
accompanied by the appropriate fee, proof of legal interest in the property,
and two copies of a list of property owners within 350 feet of the subject
property or as otherwise defined in state statutes, in the format required by
the Zoning Administrator.



      (2)   Additional information.  The Zoning Administrator may
require applicants for land use or development approval to submit additional
information as may be necessary to evaluate the application. Such additional
information may include, but shall not be limited to, traffic studies,
engineering studies and environmental studies. The costs of such studies
shall be the responsibility of the applicant, with the person or firm
preparing the study approved by the Zoning Administrator.



      (3)   Pre-application conference.  A pre-application
conference with the Zoning Administrator shall be required prior to the
submission of any application for land use or development approval. The
purpose of the conference is to review application procedures and ordinance
requirements with the applicant, to exchange information regarding the
proposed project, and to identify potential opportunities and constraints for
development of the site under consideration.



      (4)   Completeness of application.  No application for land
use or development approval shall be deemed complete until all items that are
required in support of the application, including any additional studies or
information required by the Zoning Administrator, have been submitted.



      (5)   Application fees. Fees for all applications for
development or land use approval shall be a flat rate and established by
resolution of the City Council.  The city retains the right to require an
escrow and additional payment for any out-of-pocket expenses for consultants
and professional services and/or to obtain an escrow for cases that are
extraordinary in size or complexity.  Remaining escrowed funds not spent in
reviewing the application shall be returned to the applicant.  Payment of
all fees is a condition of application approval.  The Community Development
Department will keep a record of current fees for all land use applications.



      (6)   Required action.  Pursuant to M.S. § 15.99, as it may
be amended from time to time, all applications for land use or development
approval shall be approved or denied as per state statute, unless extended
pursuant to statute or unless a time waiver has been granted by the applicant.



      (7)   Reconsideration of applications.  No application for
land use or development approval that has been denied by the City Council, in
whole or in part, shall be reconsidered for a period of six months from the
date of City Council action on the application.



      (8)   Expiration of approval.  If substantial development or
construction has not taken place within one year of the date of City Council
approval of an application for land use or development approval, the approval
shall be considered void unless a petition for time extension has been
granted by the City Council. Such extension shall be submitted in writing at
least 30 days prior to the expiration of the approval and shall state facts
showing a good faith effort to complete the work permitted under the original
approval. This provision shall not apply to zoning amendments or vacations of
streets, alleys or public rights-of-way.



   (D)   Public hearings.



      (1)   Notice of public hearing.  For all development or land
use applications requiring a public hearing, notice of the public hearing
shall be as follows:



         (a)   Official publication.  The Zoning Administrator
shall publish notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing at
least once in the official city newspaper, not less than 10 days nor more
than 30 days before the hearing.



         (b)   Notice to affected property owners. The Zoning
Administrator shall mail a written notice of the time, place and purpose of
the public hearing to all owners of record of property located in whole or in
part within 350 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, or as
otherwise defined in state statutes, not less than 10 days nor more than 30
days before the hearing. The failure to give mailed notice to individual
property owners, or defects in the notice, shall not invalidate the
proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with this requirements
has been made.



         (c)   Notice to Department of Natural Resources.  When
a land use or development application relates to property within the
Floodplain Management or Shoreland Management Overlay District, the Zoning
Administrator shall mail a written notice of public hearing to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources at least 21 days before the hearing.



      (2)   Hearing procedure.  All hearings shall be open to the
public. Any person may appear and testify at a hearing in person or by
representative. Upon conclusion of the public testimony, the decision-making
body shall announce its decision or recommendation, or shall continue the
matter to a subsequent meeting.



   (E)   Appeals.



      (1)   Right of appeal.  At any time within 30 days after a
written order, requirement, determination or final decision has been made by
the Zoning Administrator or other official in interpreting or applying this
article, except for actions taken in connection with prosecutions for
violations thereof, the applicant or any other person affected by such action
may appeal the decision.



      (2)   Application for appeal.  An appeal must be made by
filing a written notice of appeal addressed to the Zoning Administrator and
Planning Commission, and stating the action appealed as well as the specific
grounds upon which the appeal is made.



      (3)   Public hearing.  The Planning Commission, sitting as
the Board of Appeals and Adjustments, shall hold a public hearing on the
appeal in accordance with the requirements of this section. After the close
of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall render its findings.



   (F)   Zoning amendments.



      (1)   Right of application.  Amendments to the text of this
article or to the district boundaries on the official zoning map may be
initiated by the City Council, the Planning Commission, or by application of
any person with a legal interest in the affected property.



      (2)   Application for amendment.  An application for an
amendment to change the district boundaries on the official zoning map or the
text of this article shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on the
approved form and shall be accompanied by a map or plat showing the lands
proposed to be changed, a concept development plan and any other information
determined by the Zoning Administrator to be necessary.



      (3)   Public hearing.  The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the complete application for a zoning amendment and all
amendments initiated by the City Council or Planning Commission in accordance
with the requirements of this section. After the close of the hearing, the
Planning Commission shall make findings and submit its recommendation to the
City Council.



      (4)   City Council action.  The City Council shall make the
final decision regarding an application for a zoning amendment. Amendments of
this article or the district boundaries on the official zoning map shall
require a four-fifths majority vote of the City Council.



      (5)   Required findings.  The City Council shall make each of
the following findings before granting approval of a request to amend this
article or to change the district boundaries on the official zoning map:



         (a)   The amendment is consistent with the comprehensive
plan.



         (b)   The amendment is in the public interest and is not
solely for the benefit of a single property owner.



         (c)   Where the amendment is to change the zoning
classification of a particular property, the existing use of the property and
the zoning classification of property within the general area of the property
in question are compatible with the proposed zoning classification.



         (d)   Where the amendment is to change the zoning
classification of a particular property, there has been a change in the
character or trend of development in the general area of the property in
question, which has taken place since such property was placed in its current
zoning classification.



   (G)   Variances.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of a variance is to provide a
means of departure from the literal provisions of this article.  Variances
may be granted when the applicant for the variance establishes that there are
practical difficulties in complying with the zoning ordinance.  It is not
the intent of this section to allow a variance for a use that is not
permitted within a particular zoning district.



      (2)   Right of application.  Any person with a legal interest
in the property may file an application for one or more variances.



      (3)   Application for variance.  An application for a
variance shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on the approved form
and shall be accompanied by a site plan and any other information determined
by the Zoning Administrator to be necessary.



      (4)   Public hearing.  The Planning Commission, sitting as
the Board of Appeals and Adjustments, shall hold a public hearing on the
complete application for a variance in accordance with the requirements of
this section.  After the close of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall
make findings and submit its recommendation to the City Council.



      (5)   City Council action.  The City Council shall make the
final decision regarding an application for a variance from the provisions of
this article.  Approval of a variance shall require a simple majority vote
of the City Council.



      (6)   Required findings.  The City Council shall make each of
the following findings before granting a variance from the provisions of this
article:



         (a)   Because of the particular physical surroundings,
or the shape, configuration, topography, or other conditions of the specific
parcel of land involved, strict adherence to the provisions of this article
would cause practical difficulties in conforming to the zoning ordinance. 
The applicant, however, is proposing to use the property in a reasonable
manner not permitted by the zoning ordinance.



         (b)   The conditions upon which the variance is based
are unique to the specific parcel of land involved and are generally not
applicable to other properties within the same zoning classification.



         (c)   The practical difficulties are caused by the
provisions of this article and have not been created by any person currently
having a legal interest in the property.



         (d)   The granting of the variance is in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan.



         (e)   The granting of the variance will not be
materially detrimental to the public welfare or materially injurious to the
enjoyment, use, development or value of property or improvements in the
vicinity.



      (7)   Conditions of approval.  The City Council may establish
any reasonable conditions of approval that are deemed necessary to mitigate
adverse impacts directly associated with granting of the variance and to
protect neighboring properties.



   (H)   Conditional use permits.



      (1)   Purpose.  The conditional use permit process is
intended as a means of reviewing uses which, because of their unique
characteristics, cannot be permitted as a right in a specific zoning
district, but may be allowed upon demonstration that such use meets
identified standards established in this article. A conditional use permit is
granted for a specific use of a specific property, and may be transferred to
subsequent owners as long as the conditions agreed upon are observed.



      (2)   Right of application. Any person with a legal interest
in the property may file an application for a conditional use permit,
provided said conditional use is identified as a conditional use within the
zoning district in which the property is located.



      (3)   Application for conditional use permit.  An application
for a conditional use shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on the
approved form and shall be accompanied by a site plan, a detailed written
description of the proposed use and any other information determined by the
Zoning Administrator to be necessary.



      (4)   Public hearing.  The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the complete application for a conditional use permit in
accordance with the requirements of this section. After the close of the
hearing, the Planning Commission shall make findings and submit its
recommendation to the City Council.



      (5)   City Council action.  The City Council shall make the
final decision regarding an application for a conditional use permit.
Approval of a conditional use permit shall require a simple majority vote of
the City Council.



      (6)   Required findings.  The City Council shall make each of
the following findings before granting a conditional use permit:



         (a)   The use is one of the conditional uses listed for
the zoning district in which the property is located, or is a substantially
similar use as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



         (b)   The use is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of the comprehensive plan.



         (c)   The use will not impose hazards or disturbing
influences on neighboring properties.



         (d)   The use will not substantially diminish the use of
property in the immediate vicinity.



         (e)   The use will be designed, constructed, operated
and maintained in a manner that is compatible with the appearance of the
existing or intended character of the surrounding area.



         (f)   The use and property upon which the use is located
are adequately served by essential public facilities and services.



         (g)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to
minimize traffic congestion on the public streets and to provide for
appropriate on-site circulation of traffic.



         (h)   The use will not cause a negative cumulative
effect, when considered in conjunction with the cumulative effect of other
uses in the immediate vicinity.



         (i)   The use complies with all other applicable
regulations for the district in which it is located.



      (7)   Conditions of approval.  The City Council may establish
any reasonable conditions of approval that are deemed necessary to mitigate
adverse impacts associated with the conditional use, to protect neighboring
properties, and to achieve the objectives of this article.



      (8)   Revocation.  Failure to comply with any condition set
forth as part of a conditional use permit shall be a violation of this
article and is subject to the enforcement process identified in this section.
Continued noncompliance shall be grounds for revocation of the conditional
use permit, as determined by the City Council following a public hearing on
the issue.



      (9)   Discontinuance.  When a conditional use has been
established and is discontinued for any reason for a period of one year or
longer, or where a conditional use has been changed to a permitted use or any
other conditional use, the conditional use permitted shall be considered
abandoned.



   (I)   Interim uses.



      (1)   Purpose.  The interim use process provides for a
temporary use of land for a specific period of time, and may be allowed upon
demonstration that such use meets identified standards established in this
article. It is intended that the interim use of land does not run with the
land, and would need to be approved upon each subsequent use.



      (2)   Right of application.  Any person with a legal interest
in the property may file an application for an interim use, provided said
interim use is identified as an interim use within the zoning district in
which the property is located.



      (3)   Application for interim use.  An application for an
interim use shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on the approved form
and shall be accompanied by a site plan, a detailed written description of
the proposed use and any other information determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be necessary.



      (4)   Public hearing.  The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the complete application for an interim use in accordance
with the regulations of this section. After the close of the public hearing,
the Planning Commission shall make findings and make the final decision
regarding the application.



      (5)   Required findings.  The Planning Commission shall make
each of the following findings before granting an interim use:



         (a)   The use is one of the interim uses listed for the
zoning district in which the property is located, or is a substantially
similar use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



         (b)   The use is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of the Comprehensive Plan.



         (c)   The use will not impose hazards or disturbing
influences on neighboring properties.



         (d)   The use will not substantially diminish the use of
property in the immediate vicinity.



         (e)   The use will be designed, constructed, operated
and maintained in a manner that is compatible with the appearance of the
existing or intended character of the surrounding area.



         (f)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to
minimize traffic congestion on the public streets and to provide for
appropriate on-site circulation of traffic.



         (g)   The use will not cause a negative cumulative
effect, when considered in conjunction with the cumulative effect of other
uses in the immediate vicinity.



      (6)   Conditions of approval.  The Planning Commission may
establish any reasonable conditions of approval that are deemed necessary to
mitigate adverse impacts associated with the interim use, to protect
neighboring properties, and to achieve the objectives of this article.



      (7)   Time duration.  An interim use shall be granted for a
maximum of 90 days per calendar year, unless otherwise specified in this
article.



      (8)   Discontinuance.  An interim use shall be deemed
discontinued after the specified time duration has elapsed. Upon
discontinuance of an interim use, all subsequent interim uses shall require
an interim use permit.



      (2)   Right of application.  Any person or persons who own
property adjoining both sides of the street, alley or other public
right-of-way to be vacated may file an application for vacation. In the event
that the person or persons making the request do not own all of the adjoining
parcels, the application shall be accompanied by affidavits from all such
property owners indicating their consent.



      (3)   Application for vacation.  An application for the
vacation of a street, alley or other public right-of-way shall be filed with
the Zoning Administrator on the approved form and shall be accompanied by a
legal description, a survey depicting the area to be vacated, a list of all
property owners with land adjacent to the area to be vacated, and any other
information determined by the Zoning Administrator to be necessary.



      (4)   Public hearing.  The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the completed application for the vacation of a street,
alley or other public right-of-way in accordance with the requirements of
this section. After the close of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall
make findings and submit its recommendation to the City Council.



      (5)   City Council action.  The City Council shall make the
final decision regarding an application for the vacation of a street, alley
or other public right-of-way. Approval of the vacation shall require a
four-fifths majority vote of the City Council.



      (6)   Required findings.  The City Council shall make each of
the following findings before vacating a street, alley or other public
right-of-way:



         (a)   No private rights will be injured or endangered as
a result of the vacation.



         (b)   The public will not suffer loss or inconvenience
as a result of the vacation.



   (J)   Vacations.



      (1)   Purpose.  The vacation process allows for the vacation
of public streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way when it is
demonstrated that the public reservation of the land no longer serves a
clearly identified public purpose.



      (2)   Right of application.  Any person or persons who own
property adjoining both sides of the street, alley or other public
right-of-way to be vacated may file an application for vacation. In the event
that the person or persons making the request do not own all of the adjoining
parcels, the application shall be accompanied by affidavits from all such
property owners indicating their consent.



      (3)   Application for vacation.  An application for the
vacation of a street, alley or other public right-of-way shall be filed with
the Zoning Administrator on the approved form and shall be accompanied by a
legal description, a survey depicting the area to be vacated, a list of all
property owners with land adjacent to the area to be vacated, and any other
information determined by the Zoning Administrator to be necessary.



      (4)   Public hearing.  The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the completed application for the vacation of a street,
alley or other public right-of-way in accordance with the requirements of
this section. After the close of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall
make findings and submit its recommendation to the City Council.



      (5)   City Council action.  The City Council shall make the
final decision regarding an application for the vacation of a street, alley
or other public right-of-way. Approval of the vacation shall require a
four-fifths majority vote of the City Council.



      (6)   Required findings.  The City Council shall make each of
the following findings before vacating a street, alley or other public
right-of-way:



         (a)   No private rights will be injured or endangered as
a result of the vacation.



         (b)   The public will not suffer loss or inconvenience
as a result of the vacation.



   (K)   Minor subdivisions (lot splits).



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of this process is to provide for
approval of subdivisions that meet specific criteria and for the waiver of
standard platting requirements specified elsewhere in this article. It is
intended to facilitate the further division of previously platted lots, the
combination of previously platted lots into fewer lots, or for the adjustment
of an existing lot line by relocation of a common boundary.



      (2)   Right of application. Any person having a legal interest
in the property may file an application for a minor subdivision. For an
adjustment of an existing lot line, the application shall be accompanied by
affidavits from all affected property owners indicating their consent.



      (3)   Application for minor subdivision. An application for a
minor subdivision shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on the
approved form and shall be accompanied by an accurate boundary survey and
legal description of the original parcel, a survey and legal description of
the resulting parcels, and any other information determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be necessary.



      (4)   Public hearing.  The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the completed application for a minor subdivision in
accordance with the requirements of this section. After the close of the
hearing, the Planning Commission shall make findings and submit its
recommendation to the City Council.



      (5)   City Council action.  The City Council shall make the
final decision regarding the application for a minor subdivision. Approval of
a minor subdivision shall require a simple majority vote of the City Council.



      (6)   Required findings.  The City Council shall make each of
the following findings before approving a minor subdivision:



         (a)   The proposed subdivision of land will not result
in more than three lots.



         (b)   The proposed subdivision of land does not involve
the vacation of existing easements.



         (c)   All lots to be created by the proposed subdivision
conform to lot area and width requirements established for the zoning
district in which the property is located.



         (d)   The proposed subdivision does not require the
dedication of public rights-of-way for the purpose of gaining access to the
property.



         (e)   The property has not previously been divided
through the minor subdivision provisions of this article.



         (f)   The proposed subdivision does not hinder the
conveyance of land.



         (g)   The proposed subdivision does not hinder the
making of assessments or the keeping of records related to assessments.



         (h)   The proposed subdivision meets all of the design
standards specified in the § 9.116.



      (7)   Conditions of approval.  The City Council may establish
any reasonable conditions of approval that are deemed necessary to protect
the public interest and ensure compliance with the provisions of this
article, including, but not limited to, the following:



         (a)   The applicant shall provide required utility and
drainage easements for all newly created lots and be responsible for the cost
of filing and recording written easements with the Anoka County Recorder’s
Office.



         (b)   The applicant shall pay parkland dedication fees
for each lot created beyond the original number of lots existing prior to
subdivision, except when such fees have been applied to the property as part
of a previous subdivision.



      (8)   Recording of minor subdivision.  Upon approval of a
minor subdivision, the applicant shall be responsible for filing the
subdivision survey with the Anoka County Recorder’s Office. Any minor
subdivision approved under this section shall become invalid if the minor
subdivision is not filed with the Anoka County Recorder within one year of
the date of the City Council action.



   (L)   Preliminary plats.



      (1)   Purpose.  A preliminary plat is a drawing intended to
illustrate the proposed subdivision of land within the city. Preliminary plat
approval is required for all subdivisions of land not specifically exempted
in this article. Approval of a preliminary plat is authorization to proceed
with the final plat and does not constitute approval of the subdivision.



      (2)   Right of application.  Any person having a legal
interest in the property may file an application for a preliminary plat.



      (3)   Application for preliminary plat.  An application for a
preliminary plat shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on the approved
form and shall be accompanied by an accurate boundary survey and legal
description of the original parcel, five copies of the preliminary plat, and
any other information determined by the Zoning Administrator to be necessary.



      (4)   Public hearing.  The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the completed application for a preliminary plat in
accordance with the requirements of this section. After the close of the
hearing, the Planning Commission shall make findings and submit its
recommendation to the City Council.



      (5)   City Council action.  The City Council shall make the
final decision regarding an application for a preliminary plat. Approval of a
preliminary plat shall require a simple majority vote of the City Council.



      (6)   Required findings.  The City Council shall make each of
the following findings before approving a preliminary plat:



         (a)   The proposed preliminary plat conforms with the
requirements of § 9.116.



         (b)   The proposed subdivision is consistent with the
comprehensive plan.



         (c)   The proposed subdivision contains parcel and land
subdivision layout that is consistent with good planning and site engineering
design principles.



      (7)   Expiration of preliminary plat.  An approved
preliminary plat shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of
City Council approval. In the event that a final plat is not submitted within
this time period, the preliminary plat will become void.



   (M)   Final plats.



      (1)   Purpose.  A final plat is a drawing representing the
proposed subdivision of land within the city and serves as the document for
recording purposes, as required by the Anoka County Recorder’s Office.



      (2)   Right of application.  Any person having a legal
interest in the property may file an application for a final plat. A
preliminary plat for the property must have been approved within the past
year for a final plat application to be accepted by the city.



      (3)   Application for final plat.  An application for a final
plat shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on the approved form and
shall be accompanied by five copies of the final plat and any other
information determined by the Zoning Administrator to be necessary.



      (4)   Public hearing.  The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the complete application for a final plat in accordance
with the requirements of this section. After the close of the hearing, the
Planning Commission shall make findings and submit its recommendation to the
City Council.



      (5)   City Council action.  The City Council shall make the
final decision regarding an application for a final plat. Approval of a final
plat shall require a simple majority vote of the City Council.



      (6)   Required findings.  The City Council shall make each of
the following findings before approving a final plat:



         (a)   The final plat substantially conforms to the
approved preliminary plat.



         (b)   The final plat conforms with the requirements of
§ 9.116.



      (7)   Recording of final plats.  Upon approval of a final
plat, the applicant shall be responsible for filing and recording the final
plat with the Anoka County Recorder’s Office within one year of the date of
City Council action. In the event that a final plat is not recorded within
this time period, the final plat will become void.



   (N)   Site plan review.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the site plan review process
is to promote the efficient use of land and visual enhancement of the
community, ensure that newly developed and redeveloped properties are
compatible with adjacent development, and that traffic conflicts, public
safety and environmental impacts are minimized to the greatest extent
possible.



      (2)   Site plan review required.  All site development plans
for new development, or additions to existing structures other than one- and
two-family residences, shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and Development Review Committee prior to the issuance of a
building permit.



      (3)   Required information. An application for site plan
review shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on the approved form and
shall be accompanied by a vicinity map; an accurately scaled site plan
showing the location of proposed and existing buildings, existing and
proposed topography, vehicular access and parking areas, landscaping, and
other site features; elevation views of all proposed buildings and
structures; and any other information determined by  the Zoning
Administrator to be necessary.



      (4)   Required findings. The Development Review Committee
shall conduct the administrative review of all site plan approval requests.
All findings and decisions of the Committee shall be forwarded to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for final decision, unless the Zoning
Administrator determines that Development Review Committee approval of site
plan is sufficient. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make each of the
following findings before approving a site plan:



         (a)   The site plan conforms to all applicable
requirements of this article.



         (b)   The site plan is consistent with the applicable
provisions of the city’s comprehensive plan.



         (c)   The site plan is consistent with any applicable
area plan.



         (d)   The site plan minimizes any adverse impacts on
property in the immediate vicinity and the public right-of-way.



      (5)   Conditions of site plan approval.  The Development
Review Committee and the Planning and Zoning Commission may impose conditions
of approval on any site plan and require guarantees deemed necessary to
ensure compliance with the requirements of this section.



      (6)   Changes to approved site plan.  An approved site plan
may not be changed or modified without the approval of the City Zoning
Administrator. If the proposed change is determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be minor in nature, a revised site plan may not be required.
In all other cases, a revised site plan shall be submitted for review and
approval in accordance with this section.



      (7)   Expiration of site plan approval.  The approval of a
site plan by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be valid for a period
of one year.



   (O)   Other development approvals and permits.



      (1)   Building permits.  Building permits are required in
accordance with the adopted building code. No building permit shall be issued
unless the proposed construction or use is in conformance with the
requirements of this article and all necessary zoning approvals have been
granted.



      (2)   Sign permits.  All signs displayed within the city are
required to obtain a sign permit from the Zoning Administrator in accordance
with § 9.106, unless herein excluded.



      (3)   Site plan approval.  All site development plans for
development, other than one- and two-family residences, shall be reviewed and
approved by the Development Review Committee prior to the issuance of a
building permit.



   (P)   Enforcement.



      (1)   Complaints.  The Zoning Administrator shall have the
authority to investigate any complaint alleging a violation of this article
or the conditions of any zoning or plat approval, and take such action as is
warranted in accordance with the provisions set forth in this article.



      (2)   Procedure.



         (a)   Notice of violation. The Zoning Administrator
shall provide a written notice to the property owner or to any person
responsible for such violation, identifying the property in question,
indicating the nature of the violation, and ordering the action necessary to
remedy the violation, including a reasonable time period for action.
Additional written notices may be provided at the Zoning Administrator’s
discretion.



         (b)   Enforcement without notice.  Whenever the Zoning
Administrator finds that an emergency exists in relation to the enforcement
of the provisions of this article, which requires immediate action to protect
the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of any structure, or the
public, the Zoning Administrator may seek immediate enforcement without prior
written notice.



      (3)   Violation and penalties.  Any person, firm or
corporation violation any of the provisions of this article or any amendments
thereto is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 1428, passed 5-29-01; Am. Ord. 1479, passed 2-14-05;  Am. Ord. 1530,
passed 9-24-07; Am. Ord. 1537, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord. 1577, passed 3-22-10;
Am. Ord. 1604, passed 10-24-11; Am. Ord. 1651, passed 9-24-18)



§ 9.105  NONCONFORMITIES.



   (A)   General provisions.



      (1)   Purpose.



         (a)   This section regulates and limits the continued
existence of uses, structures, lots and signs that were lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this article but do not conform to the
regulations set forth in this article.



         (b)   The zoning districts established in this article
are designed to guide the future use of land within the city by encouraging
the development and maintenance of desirable residential, commercial,
industrial and public uses in specific locations throughout the city. The
continued existence of nonconformities is inconsistent with the purposes for
which the zoning districts are established and the gradual elimination of
nonconformities is generally desirable.



      (2)   Continuation of nonconformities. 



         (a)   Legal nonconformities shall be allowed to continue
as long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the provisions of this
section. Nonconformities that were not lawfully in existence on the effective
date of this article shall be prohibited.



         (b)   Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to permit a violation of any provision of the Columbia Heights City
Code or the continuation of any unsafe or unsanitary condition.



      (3)   Change of ownership.  A change in tenancy, management
or ownership of a nonconformity shall be allowed, provided there is no change
in the nature or character of the nonconformity, except as otherwise provided
by this section.



   (B)   Nonconforming uses.



      (1)   Nonconformity established.  Any use of land that is not
identified as a permitted, provisional or conditional use within the zoning
district in which the properly is located shall be deemed a nonconforming use
of land.



      (2)   Right to continue.  A legal nonconforming use of land
may be continued as it existed on the effective date of this article, except
as provided for herein.



      (3)   Expansion prohibited.  A nonconforming use of land
shall not be enlarged, increased, expanded or changed in any manner or
dimension except to comply with the provisions of this article.



      (4)   Intensification prohibited.  A nonconforming use of
land shall not be intensified in character or operation, including, but not
limited to, increased hours of operation and the expansion of the use to a
portion of the property not previously used.



      (5)   Repair and maintenance.  Minor repairs and routine
maintenance of a structure containing or related to a nonconforming use of
land that are necessary to keep the structure in a sound and safe condition
are permitted.



      (6)   Discontinuation of use.  A nonconforming use of land
that has been discontinued for a period of six months shall not be
re-established.



      (7)   Change of use.  A nonconforming use of land that has
been changed to a conforming use shall not thereafter be changed back to any
nonconforming use.  A change in the use of land from one nonconforming use
to another nonconforming use is prohibited.



      (8)   Reduction of nonconformity.  A nonconforming use that
is reduced in size, intensity or otherwise becomes more conforming may not
again be expanded or become less conforming. Removal of a structure,
relocation of the use, and reduction or elimination of any site element (such
as outdoor storage) is deemed a reduction in intensity.



      (9)   Damaged or destroyed.  A structure containing or
relating to a nonconforming use of land that is damaged or destroyed by fire
or natural causes, to the extent that the cost of repair is more than 50% of
the assessed value, shall not be restored unless to a conforming use.
However, any principal residential structure located in a LB (Limited
Business District) which falls within the “Town Square Concept” (adopted
August, 2000) of the Columbia Heights Downtown Master Plan, and is damaged or
destroyed by fire or natural causes over 50% of the assessed value, the
dwelling may be reconstructed in the same footprint as the original
structure, but may not be expanded in size.



      (10)   Uses in Floodway District.  Nonconforming uses located
in the Floodway District shall be eliminated or brought into conformity with
the standards contained in this article within a reasonable period of time as
determined by the City Council, after a hearing for each such nonconforming
use. The Board shall make its determination upon the basis of the normal
useful life of any improvement upon the premises. In addition, the monetary
value of any competitive advantage derived by the operation of such
nonconforming use, by reason of the limitation on establishment of competing
businesses as a result of this article, shall be considered as a reduction of
losses resulting from the requirement of termination of the use under this
article.



   (C)   Nonconforming structures.



      (1)   Nonconformity established.  Any building or structure
that does not conform to the setback, dimensional or density standards of the
zoning district in which the property is located shall be deemed a
nonconforming structure.



      (2)   Right to continue.  A legal nonconforming structure may
be continued as it existed on the effective date of this article, except as
provided for herein.



      (3)   Expansion prohibited.  A nonconforming accessory
building shall not be enlarged, altered or expanded in any manner or
dimension. A nonconforming principal structure shall not be enlarged, altered
or expanded in any manner or dimension, unless the alteration or expansion:
1) does not increase the degree of nonconformity; 2) does not further
infringe upon established setbacks or building restrictions; 3) does not
exceed 50% of the assessed value of the structure over the life of the
structure at the time it became nonconforming; and 4) would substantially
reduce potential flood damages for the entire structure.



      (4)   Repair and maintenance.  Minor repairs and routine
maintenance necessary to keep a nonconforming structure in a sound and safe
condition are permitted.



      (5)   Damaged or destroyed. A nonconforming structure that is
damaged or destroyed by fire or natural causes, to the extent that the cost
of repair is more than 50% of the assessed value, shall not be restored
unless it is brought into conformance. However, any principal residential
structure located in a LB (Limited Business District), which falls within the
“Town Square Concept” (adopted August, 2000) of the Columbia Heights
Downtown Master Plan, and is damaged or destroyed by fire or natural causes
over 50% of the assessed value, the dwelling may be reconstructed in the same
footprint as the original structure, but may not be expanded in size.



      (6)   Increased livability.  Alterations may be made to a
building containing nonconforming residential units when the alteration will
improve the livability thereof, provided it will not increase the number of
dwelling units nor the outside dimensions of the building.



   (D)   Nonconforming lots.



      (1)   Nonconformity established.  A lot of record that does
not: conform to the width, depth, lot area or frontage requirements of the
zoning district in which the property is located is deemed a nonconforming
lot.



      (2)   Combination of lots required.  If two or more
nonconforming lots are contiguous and under common ownership on the effective
date of this article, such lots shall be combined for the purposes of
development in order to satisfy the requirements of this article.



      (3)   Lot developable.  A nonconforming lot that can be used
in conformity with all of the regulations applicable to the intended use,
except that the lot is smaller that the minimum required in the applicable
zoning district, can be used as proposed just as if it were conforming.



      (4)   Variance required.  Development of a nonconforming lot
that will be conforming with all applicable regulations, except for
applicable setback requirements, shall require a variance in accordance with
the provisions found in § 9.104.



   (E)   Nonconforming signs.



      (1)   Nonconformity established.  A sign that was installed
prior to July 13, 1981, and does not conform to the requirements of § 9.106
is deemed a nonconforming sign.



      (2)   Right to continue.  A legal nonconforming sign may be
continued as it existed on the effective date of this article, except as
provided for herein.



      (3)   Expansion prohibited.  A nonconforming sign shall not
be enlarged, reconstructed or altered in any manner or dimension except to
comply with the provisions of this article.



      (4)   Repair and maintenance.  Minor repairs and routine
maintenance of a nonconforming sign that are necessary to keep the structure
in a sound and safe condition are permitted. If the nonconforming sign
requires significant repairs or replacement, the Zoning Administrator may
require its removal.



      (5)   Discontinuation of use.  A nonconforming sign that has
not been used for a period of six months shall be removed from the property.



      (6)   Damaged or destroyed.  A nonconforming sign that is
damaged or destroyed by any cause or means, to the extent that the cost of
repair is more than 50%, of the assessed market value, shall not be restored
unless to a conforming sign.



(Ord. 1428, passed 5-29-01)



§ 9.106  GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   General provisions.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to establish
regulations of general applicability to property throughout the city, to
promote the orderly development and use of land, to minimize conflicts
between uses of land, and to protect the public health, safety and welfare.



      (2)   Applicability.  The regulations set forth in this
section shall; apply to all structures and uses of land, except as otherwise
provided in this article.



   (B)   Lot controls.



      (1)   Purpose.  Lot controls are established to provide for
the orderly development and use of land, and to provide for adequate light,
air, open space and separation of uses.



      (2)   Use of lots.  All lots shall be used in a manner
consistent with the requirements of the zoning district in which the property
is located. No part of any existing lot shall be used as a separate lot or
for the use of another lot, except as otherwise provided in this article.



      (3)   Lot divisions.  No lot shall be divided into two or
more lots unless all lots resulting from such division conform to all
applicable regulations of this article.



      (4)   Lots of record.  A lot of record shall be deemed a
buildable lot provided it has frontage on a public right-of-way and meets the
setback and area requirements for the district in which it is located, or
adjusted to conform as follows:  a lot or lot of record upon the effective
date of this article which is in a residential district and which does not
meet the requirements of this article as to area or width, may be utilized
for single-family detached dwelling purposes provided the measurements of
such lot meets 100% of the front yard, side yard and rear yard setback
requirements for the district in which it is located and 60% of the minimum
lot area or lot width requirements for the district in which it is located.



      (5)   Principal buildings in residential districts.  There
shall be no more than one principal building on a lot in any residential
district, unless otherwise provided for through a mixed use planned
development.



      (6)   Principal buildings in non-residential districts. 
There may be more than one principal building on a lot in non-residential
districts, provided each building meets all of the requirements, including
setbacks, of the district in which it is located.



      (7)   Required yards.  Yard requirements shall be as
specified for the zoning district in which the lot is located. No yard or
other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such
yard or other open space less than the minimum required by this article. If
the existing yard or other open space is less than the minimum required, it
shall not be further reduced. In addition, no required yard or other open
space allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be used to satisfy
yard, open space, or minimum lot area requirements for any other structure or
lot.



      (8)   Setback exception in residential districts.  In any
residential district where the average depth of the front yard for buildings
within 200 feet of the lot in question and within the same block front is
lesser or greater than that required by article, the required front yard for
the lot in question shall be the average plus or minus 10% of the depth;
however, the depth of the required front yard shall not be less than 10 feet
nor more than 50 feet.



      (9)   Corner lots.  For corner lots, the shorter lot line
abutting a public street shall be deemed the front lot line for purposes of
this article, and the longer lot line abutting a public street shall be
deemed a side lot line.



      (10)   Through lots.  For through lots, both lot lines that
abut a public street or other right-of-way shall be deemed front lot lines
for purposes of this article, and the required front yard shall be provided
along each front lot line.



      (11)   Yard encroachments.  The following uses shall not be
considered as encroachments into required yards, provided they are not
located closer than one foot to the property line, except for fences:



         (a)   Cornices, canopies, awnings, eaves, bay windows
and other ornamental features, provided they do not extend more than three
feet into the required yard.



         (b)   Chimneys, air conditioning units, fire escapes,
uncovered stairs, ramps and necessary landings, provided they do not extend
more than four feet into the required yard.



         (c)   Fences constructed and maintained in accordance
with the applicable provisions of this article.



         (d)   Driveways and parking areas constructed and
maintained in accordance with the applicable provisions of this article.



         (e)   Accessory buildings constructed and maintained in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this article.



         (f)   Mechanical equipment constructed and maintained in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this article.



         (g)   Signs constructed and maintained in accordance
with the applicable provisions of this article.



         (h)   Private swimming pools, tennis courts, basketball
courts or other private recreational facilities constructed and maintained in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this article.



      (12)   Traffic visibility.  No planting, structure or other
obstruction shall be placed or allowed to grow on corner lots in a manner
that will impede vision on the intersecting rights-of-way, in accordance with
the following sight triangles:



         (a)   Street intersections.  No planting or structure
in excess of 30 inches above the abutting curb line shall be permitted within
the sight triangle, defined as the area beginning at the intersection of the
projected curb line of two intersecting streets, then 30 feet along one curb
line, diagonally to a point 30 feet from the point of beginning on the other
curb line, then back to a point of beginning.



         (b)   Street and alley intersections.  No planting or
structure in excess of 30 inches above the abutting curb line shall be
permitted within the sight triangle, defined as the area beginning at the
point of intersection of the projected curb line and the alley right-of-way,
then 30 feet along the street curb line, diagonally to a point 15 feet from
the point of beginning along said alley right-of-way or projection of the
alley right-of-way, then back to the point of beginning.



         (c)   Alley and alley intersections.  No planting or
structure in excess of 30 inches above the nearest edge of the traveled
right-of-way shall be permitted within the sight triangle, defined as the
area beginning at the point of intersection of the two alley right-of-way
lines, then 15 feet along one alley right-of-way line, then diagonally to a
point 15 feet from the point of beginning along the second alley right-of-way
line, then back to the point of beginning. Any structures existing within
this sight triangle shall be deemed nonconforming structures in accordance
with the provisions of § 9.105.



      (13)   Height limitations.  The building and structure height
limitations established for each zoning district shall apply to all buildings
and structures, except that such height limitations may be increased by 50%
when applied to the following:



         (a)   Church spires, steeples or belfries.



         (b)   Chimneys or flues.



         (c)   Cupolas and domes which do not contain usable
space.



         (d)   Towers, poles or other structures for essential
services.



         (e)   Flag poles.



         (f)   Mechanical or electrical equipment, provided said
equipment does not occupy more than 25% of the roof area.



         (g)   Television and ham radio antennas.



         (h)   Monuments.



         (i)   Telecommunication towers constructed in accordance
with the provisions of § 9.106(O).



   (C)   Accessory uses and structures.



      (1)   Accessory structures, residential uses.  The following
standards shall regulate the construction and maintenance of residential
accessory structures:



         (a)   Each residentially zoned parcel shall be allowed
two detached accessory structures.



         (b)   No accessory structure shall be constructed or
located within any front yard.



         (c)   Accessory structures for one- and two-family
dwellings shall be set back a minimum of three feet from the side lot line,
and a minimum of three feet from the rear lot line, a minimum of five feet
from any other building or structure on the same lot, and behind the
principal structure building line in the front yard.



         (d)   An accessory structure shall be considered an
integral part of the principal structure if it is connected to the principal
building by a covered passageway.



         (e)   An accessory structure, or any combination of
accessory structures, storage sheds and attached garages, shall not exceed
1,000 square feet in area.



         (f)   The height of an accessory structure shall not
exceed the height of the principal structure or 18 feet in height, as
measured to the highest point, whichever is less.



         (g)   The wall height of an accessory structure shall
not exceed nine feet in height.



         (h)   Where the natural grade of the lot is 10 feet or
more above or below the established curb level at the front building setback
and access from an alley is not available, an accessory structure for the
storage of not more than two automobiles may be constructed within any yard,
provided that at least one-half of the height is below grade level and the
accessory structure is set back a minimum of 20 feet from any right-of-way.



         (i)   The exterior color and design of an accessory
structure shall be similar to the principal structure. Corrugated metal
siding and roofs shall be prohibited.



         (j)   The building coverage on each residential lot,
including principal and accessory structures, shall not exceed 35% for lots
of 6,500 square feet or less or 30% for lots with more than 6,500 square feet
in area.



         (k)   Whenever a garage is so designed that the vehicle
entry door(s) are facing a street or alley, the distance between the door(s)
and the lot line shall be no less than 20 feet for lots greater than 6,500
square feet, and shall be no less than 15 feet for lots 6,500 square feet or
less.



         (l)   Accessory structures for multiple-family dwellings
shall be placed in the rear yard and shall be subject to the same height and
exterior finish regulations as the principal structure for the district in
which it is located, in addition to the requirements of this section.



         (m)   Any accessory structure capable of storing one or
more motorized vehicle shall be provided with a hard-surfaced access
driveway, no less than 12 feet in width, to an adjacent public street or
alley, and shall be no less than 20 by 20 in size.



         (n)   Accessory buildings shall not be located within
any utility or drainage easement.



         (o)   All accessory buildings over 120 square feet in
area shall require a building permit from the city.



      (2)   Accessory structures, non-residential uses.  The
following standards shall regulate the construction and maintenance of
non-residential accessory structures:



         (a)   All accessory structures shall be subject to the
sane setback, height and exterior finish regulations as a principal structure
for the district in which it is located.



         (b)   The height of an accessory structure shall not
exceed the height of the principal structure.



         (c)   All multiple story and accessory structures over
120 square feet in area shall require a building permit from the city.



      (3)   Home occupations.  Home occupations are allowed in
residential districts, subject to the following standards:



         (a)   The home occupation shall be clearly incidental
and subordinate to the residential use of the property. Exterior alterations
or modifications that change the residential character or appearance of the
dwelling, any accessory building or the property itself shall not be allowed.



         (b)   Only persons residing on the premises and no more
than one nonresident employee shall be engaged in the conduct of the home
occupation on the premises at any given time.



         (c)   There shall be no outside storage of products,
materials or equipment used in conjunction with the home occupation.



         (d)   The home occupation must be conducted within the
principal residential structure and/or up to 30% of the floor area of an
accessory building or attached garage.



         (e)   The required off-street parking for the
residential use shall not be reduced or made unusable by the home occupation.



         (f)   The home occupation shall not generate excessive
traffic or parking that is detrimental to the character of the neighborhood.



         (g)   Shipment and delivery of products, merchandise or
supplies shall be by single rear axle straight trucks or similar delivery
trucks normally used to serve residential neighborhoods.



         (h)   There shall be no indications of offensive noise,
odor, smoke, heat, glare, vibration, or electrical interference at or beyond
the property line of the home occupation.



         (i)   Signage for the home occupation shall be limited
to one non-illuminated sign, not exceeding two square feet in area and
attached to the wall of the residential dwelling.



         (j)   The home occupation shall meet all applicable fire
and building codes, as well as any other applicable city, state or federal
regulations.



         (k)   The following home activities shall be prohibited
as home occupations:



            1.   The operation of any wholesale or retail
business unless it is conducted entirely by mail and does not involve the
sale, shipment or delivery of merchandise on the premises. The sale of
products incidental to the delivery of a service is allowed.



            2.   Any manufacturing, welding, machine shop or
similar use.



            3.   Motor vehicle repair, either major or minor.



            4.   The sale, lease, trade or transfer of
firearms or ammunition.



            5.   Headquarters or dispatch centers where
persons come to the site and are dispatched to other locations.



         (l)   All home occupations shall be subject to a
one-time registration with the city, on a form as required by the Zoning
Administrator and with a fee as determined by the City Council.



      (4)   Private swimming pools and courts.  All private
swimming pools, tennis courts, ball courts and other private recreational
facilities are subject to the following standards:



         (a)   The facility is not operated as a business or
private club.



         (b)   The facility is not located within any required
front or side yard.



         (c)   The facility is set back at least five feet from
any property line, including any walks, paved areas or related structures or
equipment.



         (d)   For swimming pools, the pool itself, the rear
yard, or the entire property shall be enclosed by a non-climbable wall, fence
or combination thereof at least six feet in height, with a self- closing gate
capable of being secured with a lock so as to prevent uncontrolled access by
children. If the only access is through a principal or accessory structure,
such point of access shall be lockable. In the case of above-ground pools,
pool sides that are vertical may contribute to the required fencing, provided
all points of access are controlled to prevent access by children, including
the removal of all ladders or stairs whenever the pool is not in use.



         (e)   For in-ground pools, the pool is set back at least
six feet from the principal structure.



         (f)   Hot tubs shall not be located within five feet of
any side yard or rear lot line, or within any required front yard.  Such
pools may be equipped with a child-resistant, lockable cover in lieu of  a
six-foot tall fence.  Hot tubs are permitted on attached or detached decks
if it can be proven that the deck is engineered to be structurally sound
enough to support the bearing load of the hot tub.



         (g)   Portable pools shall not be located within five
feet of any side or rear lot line, or within any required front yard.  Such
pools may be equipped with a child resistant cover in lieu of a six-foot tall
fence.  Any ladder or other means of entry into a portable pool shall be
detachable and placed so that no child can gain entry into the pool without
the owner’s consent.  Portable pools shall not be in place longer than six
months in a calendar year.



         (h)   Lighting shall be so oriented so as not to cast
light on adjacent properties.



         (i)   The facility shall not be located within any
drainage or utility easement.



         (j)   Any accessory mechanical apparatus shall be
located at least 30 feet from any residential structure on an adjacent lot.



         (k)   All swimming pools containing more than 3,000
gallons or with a depth in excess of 42 inches (3.5 feet) shall require a
building permit from the city.



      (5)   Trash handling equipment.  For all uses other than one-
and two-family dwellings, trash and/or recycling collection areas shall be
enclosed on at least three sides by an opaque screening wall or fence no less
than six feet in height. The open side of the enclosure shall not face any
public street or the front yard of any adjacent property.



      (6)   Mechanical equipment.  Mechanical equipment, other than
that accessory to one- and two- family dwellings, shall be placed and/or
screened so as to minimize the visual impact on adjacent properties and from
public streets. Screening may be accomplished through the use of walls or
other design features that are architecturally compatible with the principal
structure, screening vegetation, integrated parapet walls of sufficient
height, or other means as approved by the Zoning Administrator.



   (D)   Dwellings.



      (1)   General requirements.  The following standards shall
apply to all dwelling units within the city:



         (a)   All single-family dwelling units shall be a
minimum of 20 feet wide at the narrowest point.



         (b)   No accessory building or recreational vehicle
shall be used at any time as a dwelling unit.



         (c)   No basement dwelling (basements without upper
floors) shall be used at any time as a dwelling unit.



         (d)   No more than three unrelated adults shall be
tenants in any single dwelling unit.



      (2)   Floor area requirements.  The following floor area
requirements shall apply to all dwelling units within the city:



         (a)   One-story dwellings shall have a minimum floor
area of 1,020 square feet, plus 120 square feet for each additional bedroom
over three. The floor area may be reduced to 960 square feet if the lot size
is 6,500 square feet or less.



         (b)   One and one-half and two story dwellings shall
have a minimum floor area of 550 square feet on the main floor, with a total
above grade minimum finished floor area of 1,020 square feet.



         (c)   Split-level dwellings shall have a minimum floor
area of 1,020 square feet, plus 120 square feet for each additional bedroom
over three. The floor area may be reduced to 960 square feet if the lot is
6,500 square feet or less.



         (d)   Split entry dwellings shall have a minimum floor
area of 1,020 square feet, plus 120 square feet for each additional bedroom
over three. The floor area may be reduced to 960 square feet if the lot is
6,500 square feet or less.



         (e)   Two-family dwellings (duplexes) and town homes
shall have a minimum floor area of 750 square feet per unit, plus 120 square
feet for each additional bedroom over two.



         (f)   Efficiency apartments shall have a minimum floor
area of 400 square feet per unit.



         (g)   One-bedroom apartments shall have a minimum floor
area of 600 square feet per unit.



         (h)   Two-bedroom apartments shall have a minimum floor
area of 720 square feet per unit.



         (i)   Apartments with more than two bedrooms shall have
a minimum floor area of 720 square feet per unit, plus 120 square feet for
each additional bedroom over two.



   (E)   Fences.



      (1)   General requirements.  The following standards shall
apply to all fences:



         (a)   Fences may be constructed, placed or maintained in
any yard or adjacent to a lot line in accordance with the requirements of
this section.



         (b)   The owner of the property upon which the fence is
located shall be responsible for locating all property lines prior to
constructing said fence.



         (c)   All fence posts and supporting members shall be
placed within the property lines of the property on which they are located.



         (d)   All fences shall be situated so that they can be
maintained from within the property boundaries of the property on which they
are located.



         (e)   All fences shall be constructed so that the
finished side or more attractive side of the fence faces the adjacent
property or right-of-way.



         (f)   Fences, freestanding walls, and retaining walls
shall be constructed in a substantial and workmanlike manner to withstand
conditions of soil, weather and use, and of substantial material reasonably
suited for the purpose for which the fence, freestanding wall or retaining
wall is proposed to be used.  No previously used materials may be used in
any fence.  All fences shall be constructed of the following approved
fencing materials:



            1.   Galvanized or vinyl coated woven fabric -
minimum 11 1/2 gauge, with two-inch minimum mesh, with knuckles up and cut
edge down.



            2.   Approved vinyl fencing materials.



            3.   Treated wood or wood of natural materials
resistant to decay.



         (g)   Retaining walls or freestanding walls shall be
constructed in the following manner:



            1.   Retaining walls and cribbing shall be used to
stabilize steep slopes or prevent erosion.



            2.   They shall be designed in accordance with
sound engineering practice; including, but not limited to, a minimum
four-inch concrete footing of appropriate width and drains of appropriate
type, size and spacing.



            3.   Cribbed slopes shall be appropriately planted
if open-faced cribbing is used.



            4.   The retaining wall or freestanding wall shall
be constructed in a manner that presents a finished appearance to the
adjoining property where applicable.



         (h)   All fences shall be maintained and kept in good
condition.



         (i)   Fence height shall be measured from the average
grade to the top of the fence. In situations where a grade separation exists
at the property line, the height of the fence shall be based on the
measurement from the average point between the highest and lowest grade.



         (j)   Barbed wire, razor wire and electric fences shall
not be permitted in any zoning district.  However, barbed wire may be
permitted in industrially zoned districts and property used for public
purposes through a Conditional Use Permit process.



         (k)   Fences exceeding six feet in height shall require
a building permit from the city.



      (2)   Residential fences.  The following standards shall
apply to all fences constructed in any residential zoning district or
directly adjacent to any residential zoning district:



         (a)   No fence shall exceed seven feet in height. Fences
exceeding six feet in height shall be deemed structures and shall require a
Conditional Use Permit.



         (b)   Fences along any rear property line that abut a
public alley or street shall be located no closer than three feet from the
alley or street right-of-way.



         (c)   It shall be the responsibility of property owners
with fences within recorded city easements to remove such fence at any time
when access to the recorded city easement would require the removal of the
fence.



         (d)   A fence extending across or into the required
front yard setback shall not exceed 42 inches (3.5 feet) in height; however,
fences that are less than 50% opaque may be up to 48 inches (4 feet) in
height.



      (3)   Non-residential fences.  The following standards shall
apply to all fences constructed in any commercial or industrial zoning
district:



         (a)   No fence shall exceed eight feet in height. Fences
exceeding seven feet in height shall be deemed structures and shall require a
Conditional Use Permit.



         (b)   A fence extending across or into the required
front yard setback shall not exceed four feet in height.



         (c)   A fence required to screen a commercial or
industrial use from an adjacent residential use shall not exceed eight feet
in height or be less six feet in height. In addition, said screening fence
shall be no less than 80% opaque on a year round basis.



      (4)   Fencing of play areas.  For parks and playgrounds,
either public or private and located adjacent to a public right-of-way or
railroad right-of-way, a landscaped yard area no less than 30 feet in width,
or a fence no less than 4 feet in height, shall be installed between the
facility and the right-of- way.



   (F)   Essential services.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to provide for
the installation of essential services in a manner that does not adversely
affect the public health, safety or welfare.



      (2)   Essential services allowed by permit.  The following
essential services, when installed in any location in the city and installed
primarily for the use of city residents, shall only require a permit from the
City Engineer:



         (a)   All communication lines.



         (b)   Underground electrical transmission lines,
overhead utility lines and electrical transmission lines intended to serve
properties within the city.



         (c)   Pipelines for distribution to individual
properties within the city.



         (d)   Substations with less than 33 KV.



         (e)   Radio receivers and transmitters accessory to an
essential service, when placed on an existing utility pole, tower or light
standard.



      (3)   Essential services requiring conditional use permit. 
The following essential services, when installed in any location in the city
and not primarily for the use of city residents, shall require a conditional
use permit in accordance with the provisions of § 9.104:



         (a)   All overhead and underground transmission lines
not required for the local distribution network.



         (b)   All transmission pipelines.



         (c)   Substations in excess of 33 KV.



         (d)   Any pole or tower used exclusively for the
placement of radio receivers or transmitters accessory to an essential
service.



         (e)   Any essential service of which 75% of the service
provided or produced is not intended to serve properties within the city.



         (f)   Any essential service requiring a structure that
exceeds the maximum height for the zoning district in which it is located.



         (g)   Any essential service requiring easements other
than easements granted to the public.



   (G)   Temporary uses and structures.  The following temporary uses
and structures shall be permitted in all zoning districts unless specified
otherwise, provided such use or structure complies with the regulations of
the zoning district in which it is located and all other applicable
provisions of this article:



      (1)   Garage sales.  Residential garage sales shall be
limited to no more than two garage sales per property per calendar year, with
the duration of each garage sale not to exceed three consecutive days at any
residential location.



      (2)   Construction sites.  Storage of building materials and
equipment or temporary building for construction purposes may be located on
the site under construction for the duration of the construction.



      (3)   Amusement events.  Temporary amusement events,
including the placement of tents for such events, may be allowed as a
temporary use for a maximum of 15 days per calendar year. In residential
districts, such temporary amusements shall be located on public or
semi-public property only.



      (4)   Promotional activities.  Promotional activities
involving the outdoor sale or display of merchandise may be allowed as a
temporary use in non-residential districts for a maximum of 30 days per
calendar year.



      (5)   Other temporary uses.  In addition to the temporary
uses and structures listed above, the Zoning Administrator may allow other
temporary uses and structures for a maximum of 15 days per calendar year,
provided the said use or structure is substantially similar to the uses and
structures listed herein.



   (H)   Performance standards.



      (1)   Purpose.  These performance standards are established
to minimize conflict between land uses, to preserve the use and enjoyment of
property, and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. These
standards shall apply to all uses of land and structures, and are in addition
to any requirements applying to specific zoning districts.



      (2)   In general.  No use or structure shall be operated or
occupied so as to constitute a dangerous, injurious or noxious condition
because of noise, odors, glare, heat, vibration, air emissions,
electromagnetic disturbance, fire, explosion or other hazard, water or soil
pollution, liquid or solid waste disposal, or any other substance or
condition. No use or structure shall unreasonably interfere with the use or
enjoyment of property by any person of normal sensitivities. In addition, no
use or structure shall be operated or occupied in a manner not in compliance
with any performance standard contained in this article or any other
applicable regulation.



      (3)   Noise.  All uses shall comply with the standards
governing noise as adopted and enforced by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency.



      (4)   Odor emissions.  All uses shall comply with the
standards governing the odor emissions as adopted and enforced by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



      (5)   Vibration.  Uses producing vibration shall be conducted
in such a manner as to make the vibration completely imperceptible from any
point along the property line. In addition, all uses shall comply with the
standards governing vibrations as adopted and enforced by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.



      (6)   Air emissions.  All uses shall comply with the
standards governing air emissions as adopted and enforced by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.



      (7)   Glare and heat.  Uses producing glare or heat shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as to make
such glare and heat completely imperceptible from any point along the
property line. In addition, all uses shall comply with the standards
governing glare and heat as adopted and enforced by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency.



      (8)   Radiation and electrical emissions.  All uses shall
comply with the standards governing radiation and electrical emissions as
adopted and enforced by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



      (9)   Waste material.  All uses shall comply with the
standards governing waste disposal as adopted and enforced by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.



      (10)   Explosive and flammable materials.  All uses involving
the manufacture, storage or use of explosive or flammable materials shall
comply with all applicable regulations, including, but not limited to, the
Minnesota Building Code and the Uniform Fire Code, and shall meet the
following requirements:



         (a)   All uses involving the manufacture, storage or use
of explosive or flammable materials shall employ best management practices
and the provision of adequate safety devices to guard against the hazards of
fire and explosion, and adequate fire-fighting and fire-suppression devices
standard in the industry.



         (b)   The manufacture or storage of any explosive or
blasting agent, as defined in the Uniform Fire Code, shall be prohibited in
all districts except the I-2, General Industrial District.



         (c)   The storage of any flammable liquid shall be
subject to the requirements established by the Uniform Fire Code and shall be
reviewed by the State Fire Marshal.



      (11)   Hazardous materials.  All uses shall comply with the
standards governing hazardous waste as adopted and enforced by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.



   (I)   Storm water management.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of this division is to promote,
preserve and enhance the natural resources within the city and protect them
from adverse effects occasioned by poorly sited development or incompatible
activities by regulating land alterations or development activities that
would have an adverse and potentially irreversible impact on water quality
and unique and fragile environmentally sensitive land; by minimizing
conflicts and encouraging compatibility between land alterations and
development activities and water quality and environmentally sensitive lands;
and by requiring detailed review standards and procedures for land
alterations or development activities proposed for such areas, thereby
achieving a balance between urban growth and development and protection of
water quality and natural areas.



      (2)   Definitions.  For the purposes of this section, the
following terms, phrases,  words, and their derivatives shall have the
meaning stated below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number
include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely
directive.



         APPLICANT.  Any person who wishes to obtain a building
permit, preliminary plat approval or an excavation permit.



         CONTROL MEASURE.  A practice or combination of practices
to control erosion and attendant pollution.



         DETENTION FACILITY.  A permanent natural or man-made
structure, including wetlands, for the temporary storage of runoff which
contains a permanent pool of water.



         EXCAVATION ACTIVITIES.  Any excavation or filling activity
as regulated by § 9.106(J).



         FLOOD FRINGE.  The portion of the floodplain outside of
the floodway.



         FLOODPLAIN.  The areas adjoining a watercourse or water
basin that have been or may be covered by a regional flood.



         FLOODWAY.  The channel of the watercourse, the bed of
water basins, and those portions of the adjoining floodplain that are
reasonably required to carry and discharge floodwater and provide water
storage during a regional flood.



         HYDRIC SOILS.  Soils that are saturated, flooded, or
ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions
in the upper part.



         HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION.  Macrophytic plantlife growing in
water, soil or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in
oxygen as a result of excessive water content.



         LAND ALTERATION.  Any change of the land surface
including, but not limited to, removing vegetative cover, excavating,
filling, grading, and. the construction of utilities, roadways, parking areas
and structures.



         NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). 
The program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating,
monitoring, and enforcing permits under the Clean Water Act (Sections 301,
318, 402, and 405) and United States Code of Federal Regulations Title 33,
Sections 1317, 1328, 1342, and 1345.



         PERSON.  Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
franchisee, association or governmental entity.



         PUBLIC WATERS.  Waters of the state as defined in M.S. §
1036.005, subd. 15, as it may be amended from time to time.



         REGIONAL FLOOD.  A flood that is representative of large
floods known to have occurred generally in the state and reasonably
characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in
the magnitude of a 100-year recurrence interval.



         RETENTION FACILITY.  A permanent natural or man-made
structure that provides for the storage of storm water runoff by means of a
permanent pool of water.



         SEDIMENT.  Solid matter carried by water, sewage, or other
liquids.



         STRUCTURE.  Any manufactured, constructed or erected
building including portable structures and earthen structures.



         SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN STANDARDS (SWMDS). Document
stating the design criteria and specifications for the city’s storm water
management program.



         WETLANDS.  Lands transitional between terrestrial and
aquatic: systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or
the land is covered by shallow water. For purposes of this definition,
wetlands must have the following attributes:



            1.   Have a predominance of hydric soils;



            2.   Are inundated or saturated by surface or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence
of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions; and



            3.   Under normal circumstances support a
prevalence of such vegetation.



      (3)   Scope and effect. 



         (a)   Applicability.  This section shall apply to any
land alteration requiring any of the following permits or approvals:



            1.   A building permit for new multiple-family
residential (three or more attached dwelling units), commercial, industrial,
or institutional development;



            2.   A preliminary plat;



            3.   Land alteration permit as regulated by §
9.106 (J);



            4.   A building permit for a single-family or
two-family residential dwelling except that only subdivisions (3) through (7)
of this division shall apply; or



            5.   Public improvement projects.



            6.   No building permit, preliminary plat,
excavation permit or public improvement project shall be approved until
approval of a storm water management plan has been obtained in strict
conformance with the provisions of this section.



            7.   All projects either creating or disturbing
one acre or greater of new impervious will require the submittal of a storm
water management plan.



         (b)   Exemptions.  The provisions of this section do
not apply to:



            1.   Construction of a single-family or two-family
dwelling or any structure or land alteration accessory thereto except that
the provisions of subdivisions (3) through (7) of this division shall apply;



            2.   Any currently valid building permit,
preliminary plat, excavation permit, or public improvement project approved
prior to the effective date of this article;



            3.   Construction of agricultural structures or
land alterations associated with agricultural uses unless an excavation
permit is required by § 9.106(J);



            4.   Installation of a fence, sign, telephone, and
electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; or



            5.   Emergency work to protect life, limb, or
property.



      (4)   Submission requirements–storm water management plan. 
A storm water management plan shall be submitted with all permit applications
identified in § 9.106(I)(3). Storm water management plan submittal
requirements are outlined in the city’s SWMDS. No building or land
disturbing activity will be approved unless it includes a storm water
management plan, detailing how runoff and associated water quality impacts
resulting from development will be controlled or managed.



      (5)   Plan review procedure.



         (a)   Process.  Storm water management plans meeting
the requirements of § 9.106(I) and the city’s SWMDS shall be reviewed by
the Engineering Division in accordance with the standards of § 9.106(I)(6)
and the city’s SWMDS. The Director of Public Works, or designee, shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the storm water management plan.



         (b)   Duration.  A storm water plan approved in
accordance with this section shall become void if the corresponding building
permit, excavation permit, preliminary plat, or public improvement project
expires or becomes invalid.



         (c)   Conditions.  A storm water management plan may be
approved, subject to compliance with conditions reasonable and necessary to
insure that the requirements contained in this article are met. Such
conditions may, among other matters, limit the size, kind or character of the
proposed development, require the construction of structures, drainage
facilities, storage basins and other facilities, require replacement of
vegetation, establish required monitoring procedures, stage the work over
time, require alteration of the site design to insure buffering, and require
the conveyance, for storm water management purposes, to the city or other
public entity of certain lands or interests therein.



         (d)   Letter of credit.  Prior to approval of any storm
water management plan, the applicant shall submit a letter of credit or cash
escrow to cover the estimated cost of site restoration. The letter of credit
or cash escrow amount shall be in the amount specified by the current city
SWMDS.



         (e)   Amendment.  A storm water management plan may be
revised in the same manner as originally approved.



      (6)   Approval standards.  No storm water management plan
which fails to meet the standards contained in this section shall be approved
by the city.



         (a)   General criteria for storm water management plans.



            1.   An applicant shall install or construct all
storm water management facilities according the criteria outlined in the
city’s SWMDS.



            2.   The applicant shall give consideration to
reducing the need for storm water management facilities by incorporating the
use of natural topography and land cover, such as wetlands, ponds, natural
swales and depressions, as they exist before development, to the degree that
they can accommodate the additional flow of water without compromising the
integrity or quality of the wetland or pond.



            3.   The following storm water management
practices shall be investigated in developing a storm water management plan
in the following descending order of preference:



               a.   Infiltration of runoff on-site, if
suitable soil conditions are available for use;



               b.   Flow attenuation by use of open
vegetated swales and natural depressions;



               c.   Storm water retention facilities; and



               d.   Storm water detention facilities.



            4.   A combination of successive practices may be
used to achieve the applicable minimum control requirements specified in
subdivision 3. above. Justification shall be provided by the applicant for
the method selected.



         (b)   Specifications. At a minimum, applicants shall
comply with all of the NPDES general storm water permit requirements.



         (c)   Wetlands.  Existing wetlands may be used for
storm water management purposes, provided the following criteria are met:



            1.   The wetland shall not be classified as a
Group I or II water within the City Water Resource Management Plan.



            2.   A protective buffer strip of natural
vegetation, at least ten feet in width, shall surround all wetlands.



            3.   A sediment trapping device or area that is
designed to trap sediments 0.5 millimeters in size or greater, with a trap
volume size based upon a prescribed maintenance schedule, shall be installed
prior to discharge of storm water into the wetlands.



            4.   The natural outlet control elevation of the
wetlands, if it is not a DNR public water, shall not be changed, except when
either i) the outlet is intended to restore the wetland to its original
elevation, ii) the wetland basin is landlocked and the artificial outlet
control is placed no lower than 1.5 feet below the ordinary high water mark,
iii) the proposed level control is identified in the City Water Resource
Management Plan, or iv) the level change is approved by a technical
evaluation panel convened pursuant to the state Wetland Conservation Act of
1991 (WCA).



            5.   The water fluctuation from storm water shall
not be increased over what occurs naturally, except as provided in
subdivision 4.c. above.



            6.   The wetland shall not be a protected fen.



            7.   Wetlands shall not be drained or filled,
wholly or partially, unless replaced by restoring or creating wetland areas
in accordance with the WCA. When wetland replacement is required, it shall be
guided by the following principles in descending order of priority:



               a.   Avoiding the direct or indirect impact
of the activity that may destroy or diminish the wetland;



               b.   Minimizing the impact by limiting the
degree or magnitude of the wetland activity and its implementation;



               c.   Rectifying the impact by repairing,
rehabilitating, or restoring the affected wetland environment;



               d.   Reducing or eliminating the impact over
time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the
activity; and



               e.   Compensating for the impact by
replacing or providing substitute wetland resources or environments.



            8.   If the wetland is a DNR public water, all
necessary permits from the DNR shall be obtained.



         (d)   Models/methodologies/computations.  Hydrologic
models and design methodologies used for the determination of runoff and
analysis of storm water management structures shall be approved by the
Director of Public Works. Plans, specifications and computations for storm
water management facilities submitted for review shall be sealed and signed
by a registered professional engineer. All computations shall appear on the
plans submitted for review, unless otherwise approved by the Director of
Public Works.



         (e)   Watershed management plans/groundwater management
plans.  Storm water management plans shall be consistent with adopted
watershed management plans and groundwater management plans prepared in
accordance with M.S. §§ 103B.231 and 103B.255, respectively, as they may be
amended from time to time, and as approved by the Minnesota Board of Water
and Soil Resources in accordance with the state law.



      (7)   Storm water management fee.



         (a)   When required.  In lieu of the storm water
management facilities required in § 9.106(I), the city may allow an
applicant to make a monetary contribution to the development and maintenance
of community storm water management facilities, designed to serve multiple
land disturbing and development activities, when consistent with the City’s
Water Resource Management Plan.



         (b)   Calculation of fee.  The amount of monetary
contribution shall be found in the SWMDS. For preliminary plats, an estimated
impervious coverage per lot, subject to the approval of the Director of
Public Works, shall be included in the total impervious surface area
calculation.



         (c)   Payment of fee.  Payment of a monetary
contribution shall occur as follows:



            1.   Building permit–upon issuance of building
permit.



            2.   Excavation permit–upon issuance of
excavation permit.



            3.   Preliminary plat–upon approval of final
plat or commencement of land alteration, whichever occurs first.



      (8)   Inspection and maintenance.  All storm water management
facilities shall be designed to minimize the need for maintenance, to provide
access for maintenance purposes, and to be structurally sound. In addition,
the following maintenance standards shall apply:



         (a)   All storm water detention periods shall be
maintained to ensure continued effective removal of pollutants from storm
water runoff. In addition, upon 50% of the pond’s original design volume
being filled with sediment, the sediment shall be removed and the pond
restored to its original design.



         (b)   The Director of Public Works, or designated
representative, shall inspect all storm water management facilities during
construction, during the first year of operation, and at least once every
five years thereafter.



         (c)   All permanent storm water management facilities
must provide a maintenance agreement with the city that documents all
responsibilities for operation and maintenance of long-term storm water
management facilities. Such responsibilities shall be documented in a
maintenance plan and executed through a maintenance agreement. All
maintenance agreements must be approved by the city and recorded at the
County Recorder’s office prior to final plan approval. At a minimum, the
maintenance agreement shall describe the inspection and maintenance
obligations:



            1.   The responsible party who is permanently
responsible for inspection and maintenance of the structural and
nonstructural measures.



            2.   Pass responsibilities for such maintenance to
successors in title.



            3.   Allow the city and its representatives the
right of entry for the purposes of inspecting all permanent storm water
management systems.



            4.   Allow the city the right to repair and
maintain the facility, if necessary maintenance is not performed after proper
and reasonable notice to the responsible party of the permanent storm water
management system.



            5.   Include a maintenance plan that contains, but
is not limited to, the following:



               a.    Identification of all structural
permanent storm water management systems.



               b.   A schedule for regular inspections,
monitoring, and maintenance for each practice. Monitoring shall verify
whether the practice is functioning as designed and may include, but is not
limited to, quality, temperature, and quantity of runoff.



               c.   Identification of the responsible party
for conducting the inspection, monitoring and maintenance for each practice.



               d.   Include a schedule and format for
reporting compliance with the maintenance agreement to the city.



               e.   Right of entry.  The issuance of a
permit constitutes a right of entry for the city or its contractor to enter
upon the construction site. The applicant shall allow the city and its
authorized representatives, upon presentation of credentials, to:



                  i.   Enter upon the permitted site for
the purpose of obtaining information, examining records, conducting
investigations or surveys.



                  ii.   Bring such equipment upon the
permitted development as is necessary to conduct such surveys and
investigations.



                  iii.   Examine and copy any books,
papers, records, or memoranda pertaining to activities or records required to
be kept under the terms and conditions of the permit.



                  iv.   Inspect the storm water
pollution control measures.



                  v.   Sample and monitor any items or
activities pertaining to storm water pollution control measures.



                  vi.   Correct deficiencies in storm
water, erosion and sediment control measures.



         (d)   Storm water management facilities serving a
single-family residential area or subdivision, but more than one
single-family lot, shall be maintained by the city. The cost incurred by the
city for maintenance of said facilities shall be assessed, levied through a
special storm water taxing district against the properties contributing storm
water runoff to or through the facility, or by the city’s storm water
utility.



         (e)   Storm water management facilities serving a
multiple-family residential building or development; a commercial, industrial
or institutional building or development; or an individual parcel shall be
maintained by the property owner on which the facility is located, unless it
is determined by the Director of Public Works that it is in the best
interests of the city for the city to maintain such facilities. If the city
is to maintain the storm water management facilities, the cost incurred by
the city for the maintenance may be assessed or levied as described in
subsection (d) above.



      (9)   Penalty.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this section shall be fined not less than deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



      (10)   Other controls.  In the event of any conflict between
the provisions of this section and the provisions of the city code, the more
restrictive standard prevails.



   (J)   Land alterations.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to manage land
alterations within the city and provide for the review and approval of
proposed grades prior to land alteration activities.



      (2)   In general.  No person, firm or corporation may engage
in any excavation, grading or filling of any land in the city without first
having secured a permit from the Public Works Director in accordance with
this section.



      (3)   Exemption.  The removal of material for the purpose of
constructing a basement or placement of footings is exempt from the
provisions of this section, provided a grading plan was submitted and
approved as part of the review and approval process. Grading of new
subdivisions or developments is also exempt from the provisions of this
section, provided a grading plan was  submitted and approved as part of the
review and approval process.



      (4)   Land alteration permit required.  A land alteration
permit from the Public Works Director is required for any of the following
activities:



         (a)   Placement, removal or grading of more than ten
cubic yards of earthen material on steep slopes adjacent to a lake or
wetland, or within the shore or bluff impact zone of a lake or wetland.



         (b)   Placement, removal or grading of more than 50
cubic yards of earthen material anywhere in the city.



         (c)   Placement, removal or grading of earthen material
within ten feet of any property line, or when such activity alters the
drainage patterns of adjacent property.



      (5)   Conditional use permit required.  A conditional use
permit is required for any of the following activities:



         (a)   Placement, removal or grading of more than 500
cubic yards of earthen material on developed property zoned R-1 or R-2.



         (b)   Placement, removal or grading of more than 1,000
cubic yards of earthen material on undeveloped property zoned R-1 or R-2.



         (c)   Placement, removal or grading of more than 1,500
cubic yards of earthen material on property zoned R-3, R-4 or LB.



         (d)   Placement, removal or grading of more than 2,000
cubic yards of earthen material on property zoned GB, CBD, I-1, I-2, or MXD.



      (6)   Submittal requirements.  An application for a land
alteration permit shall include the following:



         (a)   A legal description of the land to be altered.



         (b)   The nature of the proposed alteration and future
use of the property.



         (c)   The starting date and completion date of the land
alteration.



         (d)   The names and addresses of all the owners of all
the land to be altered.



         (e)   Scaled plans, showing the existing and proposed
topography with two- foot contour intervals, and signed by a registered
surveyor or engineer in the State of Minnesota.



         (f)    A scaled plan, showing existing and proposed
vegetation and ground cover.



         (g)   An erosion and sedimentation control plan.



   (K)   Exterior lighting.



      (1)   In general.  No use shall be operated or occupied so as
to create light or glare in such an amount or to such a degree of intensity
as to constitute a hazardous condition or a public nuisance. Lighting shall
not create a sense of brightness that is substantially greater than the
ambient lighting conditions so as to cause annoyance, discomfort, decreased
visibility or a hazard for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.



      (2)   Lighting fixtures.  Lighting fixtures shall be of a
downcast with flat lens, cut-off type that conceals the light source from
view and prevents light from shining on adjacent property. At no time should
a fixture be aimed and/or tilted above a horizontal plane in commercial or
industrial districts, with the exception of architectural up-lighting or
landscape lighting.



      (3)   Lighting intensity.  Lighting shall not directly or
indirectly cause illumination or glare in excess of one-half footcandle as
measured at the closest residential property line and three footcandles as
measured at the closest street curb line or non-residential property line.
Lighting shall be maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color,
and shall not be of a flashing, moving or intermittent type.



      (4)   Submission.  Detailed plans showing fixture type,
wattage, light source, location and elevation along with site point by point
showing footcandles must be submitted.



      (5)   Lighting of buildings.  Lighting of building facades or
roofs shall be located, aimed and shielded so that the light is directed only
onto the facade or roof.



      (6)   Exceptions.  The following uses are exempt from the
provisions of this section:



         (a)   Publicly controlled or maintained street lighting,
warning lights, emergency lights, or traffic signals.



         (b)   Athletic fields and other outdoor recreational
facilities serving or operated by an institutional or public use that is
operated in accordance with all other applicable provisions of this article.



   (L)   Off-street parking and loading.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of off-street parking and loading
requirements is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public
right-of-way, to provide for the parking and loading needs of specific uses,
to minimize the incompatibility between parking and loading areas and
adjacent uses, and to regulate the size, design, maintenance and location of
required off street parking and loading areas.



      (2)   Change of use.  If the use of a building or site is
changed or intensified, parking and loading facilities shall be provided for
the changed or intensified use in accordance with the provisions of this
section.



      (3)   Existing facilities.  Existing off-street parking and
loading facilities shall not be reduced below the requirements for a similar
new use or, if less than the requirements for a similar new use, shall not be
reduced further.



      (4)   Use of facilities.



         (a)   Required parking and loading spaces and driveways
providing access to such spaces shall not be used for storage, display,
sales, rental or repair of motor vehicles or other goods, or for the storage
of inoperable vehicles or snow.



         (b)   Off-street parking facilities accessory to
residential uses shall be utilized solely for the parking of passenger
automobiles and/or one truck not to exceed 9,000 pounds gross capacity for
each dwelling unit. Under no circumstances, shall required parking facilities
accessory to residential structures be used for the storage of commercial
vehicles or for the parking of automobiles belonging to the employees,
owners, tenants or customers of nearby business or manufacturing
establishments.



      (5)   Location of facilities.  Required off-street parking
spaces in the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts shall be located on the same lot
as the principal building. Required off-street parking and loading facilities
in all other zoning districts shall be located on the same lot or development
site as the use served, except as follows:



         (a)   Off-site parking for multiple-family and
institutional uses shall be located no more than 200 feet from the main
entrance of the use being served.



         (b)   Off-site parking for commercial or industrial uses
shall be located no more than 400 feet from the main entrance of the use
being served.



         (c)   Reasonable and improved access shall be provided
from the off-site parking facility to the use being served.



         (d)   The site used for off-site parking shall be under
the same ownership as the principal use being served or use of the off-site
parking facility shall be protected by a recordable instrument acceptable to
the city.



      (6)   Calculation of requirements.  Calculating the number of
parking or loading required shall be in accordance with the following:



         (a)   Gross floor area.  The term “gross floor
area” for the purpose of calculating the number of off-street parking
spaces required shall be determined based on the exterior floor dimensions of
the building, structure or use times the number of floors, minus 10%.



         (b)   Places of public assembly.  In places or worship,
stadiums, sports arenas and other places of public assembly in which patrons
or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each
three feet of such seating facilities shall be counted as one seat for the
purpose of determining requirements for off-street parking facilities under
this section.



         (c)   Capacity.  In cases where parking requirements
are based on capacity of persons, the capacity shall be based on the maximum
number of persons that may occupy a place, as determined under the building
code and posted within the establishment.



         (d)   Employees.  When parking requirements are based
on employee counts, such calculations shall be based on the maximum number of
employees on the premises at any one time.



         (e)   Calculating space.  When calculating the number
of off-street parking spaces required results in fraction, each fraction of
one-half or more shall require another space.



         (f)   Garage or carport.  A garage or carport shall be
considered a parking space. However, a building permit shall not be granted
to convert a garage or carport to living space unless other acceptable
provisions are made to provide the required parking space.



         (g)   Joint parking.  Except for shopping centers or
where a shared parking arrangement has been approved by the city, the
off-street parking requirements for each use in a multi-use structure or site
shall be calculated separately in determining the total spaces required.



         (h)   Proof of parking.  In cases where the future
potential use of a building may generate additional parking demand, the city
may require a proof of parking plan for the site that shows how the
anticipated parking demand will be met.



      (7)   Design and maintenance of parking facilities. 
Off-street parking facilities are subject to the following design and
maintenance requirements:



         (a)   Size of parking spaces.  Each parking space shall
be not less than 9 feet wide and 20 feet in length, exclusive of an
adequately designed system of access drives.  In the case where the parking
space is abutting a curb at its narrowest dimension, the parking stall length
may be reduced to 18 feet.  In parking lots with more than 300 spaces, up to
40% of such spaces may be designated and clearly marked as compact car
parking spaces with signage that is reasonably visible year round.  A
compact car parking space shall not be less than 8 feet wide and 18 feet in
length, exclusive of the adequately designed system of access drives.



         (b)   Access and circulation.  Except for parking
accessory to one- and two-family dwellings, each required off-street parking
space shall have direct access to an aisle or driveway no less than 24 feet
in width and designed to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access
to and from the parking space without using public right-of-way for
maneuvering.



         (c)   Surfacing.  All off-street parking areas, all
driveways leading to such parking areas and all other areas upon which motor
vehicles may be located shall be surfaced with a dustless all-weather hard
surface material. Acceptable materials include asphalt, concrete, brick,
cement pavers or similar material installed and maintained per industry
standards. Crushed rock shall not be considered an acceptable surfacing
material.



         (d)   Drainage.  Driveways shall not exceed a grade of
6% and all parking lots except those for less than four vehicles shall be
graded according to a drainage plan that has been approved by the City
Engineer. Catch basins, sumps and underground storm sewers may be required.



         (e)   Curbing.  Except for one-, two-, three- and
four-family residential uses, all off-street parking areas, all driveways
leading to such parking areas, landscape islands, and other areas upon which
motor vehicles may be located shall have six-inch non-surmountable poured in
place concrete perimeter curbing. In cases where existing circumstances or
area practices make such curbing impractical, the requirement may be waived
subject to submittal and approval of a parking area drainage plan by the City
Engineer.



         (f)   Lighting.  Lighting used to illuminate an
off-street parking area shall comply with the performance requirements of
this section. The height of parking lot light poles or standards shall be no
less than 12 feet and no more than the maximum height established for
structures in the district in which the lights will be installed.



         (g)   Setbacks.  Except for one-, two-, three- and
four-family residential uses, parking lots and loading areas shall be subject
to the same setbacks as a structure for the district in which such parking is
located.  One-, two-, three- and four-family residential uses are subject to
the following setback requirements:



            1.   Residential lots platted prior to the
effective date of this section and having a lot width of 60 feet or less,
shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of one foot in all districts.



            2.   Residential lots platted after the effective
date of this section or having a lot width greater than 60 feet shall
maintain a minimum side yard setback of three feet in all districts.



            3.   The creation of a joint driveway use between
adjoining property owners shall require a conditional use permit.



         (h)   Residential driveway locations.  Driveways may
only lead directly to, or be contiguous to driveways leading to, and attached
or detached garage.



         (i)   Minimum driveway widths.  In all zoning
districts, driveways shall be no less than 12 feet in width.



         (j)   Parking lots and loading areas shall be subject to
the same setbacks as a structure for the district in which such parking is
located.



         (k)   Signs.  No sign shall be located in any parking
area except as necessary for the orderly operation of traffic movement or
parking regulation.



         (l)   Screening. All off-street parking areas containing
six or more parking spaces and located next to a residential use shall be
screened with fencing or landscaping no less than six feet in height that is
80% opaque on a year round basis.



         (m)   Landscaping.  All setback areas shall be
landscaped with grass, vegetation or other landscape material. The front yard
setback area of all off-street parking areas containing six or more parking
spaces shall have a vegetative screen no less than 30 inches in height that
is 80% opaque on a year round basis.



         (n)   Striping.  All off-street parking areas
containing six or more parking spaces shall have the parking spaces and
aisles clearly painted on the pavement according to the plan approved by the
city.



         (o)   Maintenance.  Parking areas and driveways shall
be kept free of dirt, dust and debris, and the pavement shall be maintained
in good condition. In winter months, required parking areas for commercial
businesses shall be cleared of snow. Landscaping, lighting, fencing or other
features installed in conjunction with parking areas shall also be maintained
and kept in good condition at all times.



      (8)   Off-street parking district.



         (a)   Should the city establish a public off-street
parking district, those uses located within the district shall be exempt from
providing off-street parking spaces as required herein.



         (b)   The CBD, Central Business District, is established
as a public off-street parking district, so that nonresidential uses are
exempt from providing off-street parking spaces as required herein. 
Residential uses, including those in mixed-use buildings, shall provide
off-street parking as required herein.



      (9)   Shared parking.  The City Council may approve the use
of a required off-street parking area for more than one principal use on the
same or an adjacent site if the following conditions are met:



         (a)   Location.  The use for which application for
shared parking is being made is located within 300 feet of the use providing
the parking facilities.



         (b)   Nighttime uses.  Up to 50% of the off-street
parking facilities required for a bowling alley, nightclub, school
auditorium, theater or similar nighttime use may be supplied by off-street
parking facilities provided primarily for a daytime use.



         (c)   Sunday use.  Up to 75% of the off-street parking
facilities required for a place of worship or similar Sunday use may be
supplied by off-street parking facilities provided primarily for a daytime
use.



         (d)   Daytime use.  For the purposes of this provision,
the following uses are considered primarily daytime uses: financial
institutions, offices, retail stores, personal service facilities and similar
uses.



         (e)   Contract.  A legally binding instrument for the
shared use of off-street parking facilities shall be approved by the City
Attorney and filed with the Anoka County Recorder’s Office within 60 days
after approval of the shared parking use.



      (10)   Off-street parking requirements.  Off-street parking
shall be provided as specified in the following table, except as otherwise
provided in this section.



 


Use

 

Minimum Spaces Required





Residential Uses


Single-family
 
2 per unit, two must be enclosed (garage)


Two-family
 
2 per unit, two must be enclosed (garage)


Townhome/Twinhome
 
2 per unit, two must be enclosed (garage)


Multiple-family
 



   One-bedroom units
 
1 per unit, must be enclosed (garage)


   Two-bedroom or larger units
 
2 per unit, two must be enclosed (garage)


Manufactured home park
 
2 per unit


Residential care facility
 
1 per employee, plus 1 per every 6 residents


Convent/monastery
 
1 per every 3 beds


Rooming house/group living quarters
 
2 per every 3 residents


Nursing home
 
1 per every 2 beds


Senior housing/assisted living
 
1 per every 2 units


Transitional/emergency housing
 
1 per employee, plus 1 per every 6 residents


Bed and breakfast home
 
2 plus 1 per every room rented


Public/Institutional Uses


Community center
 
Determined by staff-based on parking study


Drop-in facility
 
30% of building capacity


Golf course
 
5 per hole, plus 30% of capacity of club house


Government facility
 
Based on type of use


Religious facilities/places of worship
 
1 per every 3.5 seats, capacity of main assembly area


School–elementary/junior high
 
10 plus 1 per classroom


School–senior high
 
10 plus 1 per every 6 students


School–vocational or business
 
Determined by staff–based on parking study


School–performing/visual/martial arts
 
30% of building capacity


Commercial Uses


Retail sales/services
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area


Retail sales, outdoor
 
1 per 1,000 sf of sales/display area


Auditorium/places of assembly
 
1 per 3.5 seats, based on design capacity


Automobile convenience facility
 
6 spaces, plus 1 per 300 sf, gross floor area


Automobile repair
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area, plus 2 per service bay


Automobile sales/rental
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area, plus 1 per 1,000 sf of outdoor sales/display
area


Banquet hall
 
1 per 3.5 seats, based on design capacity


Billiards hall
 
30% of building capacity


Bowling alley
 
5 per lane, plus 30% of capacity for related uses


Car wash
 
2 spaces per bay, plus 4 stacking spaces per bay


Clinic, medical and dental
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area


Clinic, veterinary
 
6 per veterinarian


Club or lodge
 
30% of building capacity


Consignment/thrift store
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area


Currency exchange
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area


Day care center
 
1 per every employee, plus 1 drop off space for every 5 enrollees


Financial institution
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area, plus 6 stacking spaces for each drive-through
lane


Food service, convenience
 
6 plus 1 per 40 sf of dining/service area, plus 6 stacking spaces for each
drive-through lane


Food service, limited
 
30% of building capacity


Food service, full-service
 
30% of building capacity


Funeral home
 
1 per 5 seats, plus 1 per 300 sf of non-eating area


Greenhouse/garden center
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area, plus 1 per 1,000 sf of outside sales/display
area


Health/fitness club
 
Determined by staff–based on parking study


Hospital
 
Determined by staff–based on parking study


Hotel/motel
 
1 per unit, plus 30% of capacity for meeting rooms


Laboratory, medical
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area


Liquor store, off-sale
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area


Museum/gallery
 
30% of building capacity


Office
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area


Pawnshop
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area


Personal services
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area or 2 per station, whichever is greater


Professional services
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area


Recreational facility, indoor
 
1 per 150 sf of rink, court, pool area, and the like


Recreational facility, outdoor
 
30% of facility capacity


Recreation vehicle sales
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area, plus 1 per 1,000 sf of outdoor sales/display
area


Shopping center
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area


Studio, professional
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area


Studio, radio and television
 
Determined by staff–based on design capacity


Theater, live performance or movie
 
1 per 3.5 seat, based on design capacity


Industrial Uses


Assembly/manufacturing/processing
 
2 per every 3 employees or 1 per 1,000 sf, gross floor area, whichever is
greater


Concrete, asphalt or rock crushing
 
2 per every 3 employees


Freight terminal
 
1 per 3,000 sf, gross floor area of storage/warehousing, plus 1 per 300 sf,
gross floor area of office area


Maintenance facility
 
1 per 3,000 sf, gross floor area, plus 1 per 300 sf, gross floor area of
office


Office/showroom
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area of office/showroom, plus 1 per 3,000 sf, gross
floor area of storage


Office/warehouse
 
1 per 300 sf, gross floor area of office, plus 1 per 3,000 sf, gross floor
area of storage


Outdoor sales/display
 
1 per 1,000 sf of sales/display area


Outdoor storage
 
1 per 3,000 sf of storage area


Printing/publishing
 
2 per every 3 employees or 1 per 1,000 sf, gross floor area, whichever is
greater


Salvage operation
 
2 per 3 employees


Self-service storage facility
 
1 per 3,000 sf, gross floor area of storage, plus 1 per 300 sfr, gross floor
area of office


Warehouse/distribution
 
1 per 3,000 sf, gross floor area of storage/warehousing, plus 1 per 300 sf,
gross floor area of office/sales area




 



      (11)   Stacking requirements.  Drive-up and drive-through
facilities shall provide adequate stacking space for vehicles in accordance
with the following table. Stacking spaces shall require a minimum pavement
width of 12 feet, a length of 20 feet per vehicle, and shall be exclusive of
any other required parking spaces or drive aisles.



 


Use

 

Minimum Stacking Spaces



Automobile washing facility–self-service
 
4 spaces per bay at entrance, 1 space per bay at exit


Automobile washing facility–automatic
 
4 spaces per bay at entrance, 1 space per bay at exit


Food service–fast food drive-through
 
4 spaces behind menu board, 4 space behind first window


Financial institution
 
4 spaces per teller window, 2 spaces per ATM kiosk


Other drive-up or drive-through uses
 
2 spaces per window



 



      (12)   Off-street loading requirements.  Off-street loading
space shall be provided for any non- residential use that receives or
distributes materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles and has a
gross floor area of 5,000 square feet or more, in accordance with the
following standards:



         (a)   Dimensions.  Loading berths shall be no less than
12 feet in width, 50 feet in length and 14 feet in height, exclusive of aisle
and maneuvering space.



         (b)   Location.  Loading berths shall be located on the
site and shall be separate from any required off-street parking. Loading
berths shall not be located less than 50 feet from the property line of any
residential property or residentially zoned property. Loading berths shall
not be located within the front yard setback area.



         (c)   Access.  Each loading berth shall be located with
appropriate means of vehicular access to and from a public street or alley
and shall not interfere with automobile or pedestrian traffic either on the
site or adjacent to the site.



         (d)   Surfacing.  All loading berths and access
driveways shall be surfaced with a dustless all-weather material and
constructed to control drainage according to a plan approved by the City
Engineer.



         (e)   Use.  Any space designated as a loading berth or
access drive in accordance with the terms of this section shall not be used
for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles or required off-street parking.



         (f)   Number.  For facilities with less than 20,000
square feet gross floor area, the off-street loading requirements may be met
by providing a designated loading zone on site, as opposed to constructing a
loading berth. For facilities with 20,000 square feet gross floor area or
greater, one off- street loading berth shall be provided for every 30,000
square feet gross floor area or fraction thereof.



   (M)   Landscaping and screening.



      (1)   Purpose.  Landscaping and screening requirements are
established to buffer non-compatible land uses, screen unsightly views,
reduce noise and glare, minimize storm water runoff, and generally enhance
the quality and appearance of development within the community.



      (2)   Landscape plan required.  A landscape plan is required
for all new commercial, industrial, institutional and multi-family
development. For development having an anticipated construction value in
excess of $750,000, the landscape plan must be prepared by a landscape
architect registered in the State of Minnesota. Said landscape plan shall
include the location, size, quantity and species of all existing and proposed
plant materials.



      (3)   Design considerations.  The following design concepts
and requirements should be considered when developing a landscape plan for
submittal to the city:



         (a)   To the maximum extent possible, the landscape plan
shall incorporate existing vegetative features on the site.



         (b)   The overall composition and location of landscaped
areas should complement the scale of the development and its surroundings.



         (c)   Landscaped areas should be of adequate size to
allow proper plant growth, protect plantings from both pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, and provide adequate area for plant maintenance.



         (d)   A variety of trees and shrubs should be used to
provide visual interest year round. No more than 50% of the required number
of trees or shrubs may be comprised of any one species. No less than 25% of
the required number of trees shall be over-story deciduous trees and no less
than 25% shall be coniferous.



         (e)   Final slopes greater than 3:1 will not be
permitted without special treatment such as terracing, retaining walls or
special ground covers.



         (f)   All plant materials shall meet the following
minimum size standards:



 


Plant Type

 

Minimum Size at Planting





Trees


   Evergreen
 
6 feet in height


   Deciduous–over-story
 
2.5 inches diameter, measured 2 feet from base


   Deciduous–ornamental
 
2 inches diameter, measured 2 feet from base


Shrubs


   Evergreen
 
2 feet in height


   Deciduous
 
2 feet in height


   Screening shrubs–either
 
3 feet in height




 



      (4)   Landscaping requirements.  Landscaping shall be
provided in accordance with the following requirements:



         (a)   All required setbacks shall be landscaped with
turf grass, native grasses, trees, shrubs, vines, perennial flowering plants,
or other pervious ground cover.



         (b)   A minimum of one tree shall be planted for every
50 feet of street frontage or fraction thereof. The trees shall be planted
within the front yard and may be arranged in a cluster or placed at regular
intervals to best complement existing landscape design patterns in the area.



         (c)   A minimum of four trees shall be planted for every
one acre of lot area covered by buildings, parking areas, loading areas,
exterior storage areas and other impervious surfaces.



         (d)   Parking areas shall have a minimum of 100 square
feet of landscape area and one over- story tree for each 20 spaces or,
fraction thereof. The remainder of the landscape area shall be covered with
turf grass, native grasses, trees, shrubs, vines, perennial flowering plants,
or other pervious ground cover.



      (5)   Screening requirements.  Screening shall be provided in
accordance with the following requirements:



         (a)   All off-street parking areas containing six or
more parking spaces and located adjacent to a residential or residentially
zoned property, the parking area shall be screened along the boundary with
the residential use. Where any commercial or industrial use is located
adjacent to or across a public alley from a residential or a residentially
zoned property, the commercial or industrial use shall be screened along the
boundary with the residential use.



         (b)   Exterior storage of materials or equipment, except
for allowed retail sales and temporary placement of equipment, shall be
screened from all adjacent non-industrial uses and from the public
right-of-way.



         (c)   Required screening shall consist of a fence, wall,
earthen berming and/or vegetation no less than six feet in height and no less
than 80% opaque on a year round basis. Said screening shall be located as
close to the property line as practicable and no closer than 15 feet from the
edge of a public right-of-way.



      (6)   Installation and maintenance.  The following
regulations shall govern the installation and maintenance of landscaping and
screening materials.



         (a)   All landscaping materials and screening materials
shall be installed in conjunction with site development and prior to issuance
of a final certificate of occupancy.



         (b)   A letter of credit or other security as acceptable
to the city shall be deposited with the Zoning Administrator, in an amount
equal to 10% of the estimated cost of landscaping and/or screening. The
letter of credit or other security as acceptable to the city, or portions
thereof, shall be forfeited to maintain and/or replace materials for a period
of time to include at least two growing seasons. A portion of the letter of
credit or other security as acceptable to the city may be released after one
growing season as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



         (c)   The property owner shall be responsible for
continued maintenance of landscaping and screening materials to remain in
compliance with the requirements of this section. Plant materials that show
signs of disease or damage shall be promptly removed and replaced within the
next planting season.



      (7)   Screening of parking areas from adjacent properties. 
All parking and loading areas (including drive-through facilities, pump
island service areas and stacking spaces) abutting a public street or
sidewalk shall provide:



         (a)   A landscaped frontage strip at least five feet
wide along the public street or sidewalk.  If a parking area contains over
100 spaces, the minimum required landscaped frontage strip shall be increased
to eight feet in width.



         (b)   Screening consisting of either a masonry wall,
fence, berm or hedge or combination that forms a screen a minimum of three
feet in height, a maximum of four and one half feet in height, and not less
than 50% opaque on a year-round basis.  For reasons of personal safety and
security, parking lot screening should allow clear visibility of pedestrians
above the three-foot high viewing range.



         (c)   Trees shall be planted at regular intervals of no
greater than 50 feet within the frontage strip.



   (N)   Building design standards.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to promote
quality development throughout the community that is attractive and visually
compatible with adjacent development.



      (2)   Design review required.  Approval of building
elevations is required for all new commercial, industrial, institutional and
multi-family development. Building design approval is also required for any
remodeling or expansion activity that increases the overall size of the
building by 10% or more.



      (3)   Building materials and design.  The following material
and design standards shall be adhered to:



         (a)   Building materials for all projects shall be
durable, require low maintenance and be of the same or better quality than
that used on surrounding properties; and shall consist of any of the
following materials: Brick; natural stone; stone treated concrete panels;
glass curtain wall panels; wood, provided surfaces are finished for exterior
use and only woods of proven exterior durability are used such as cedar,
redwood, and cypress; factory fabricated and finished metal frame paneling;
or other materials of high architectural quality as approved by staff.



         (b)   Building elevations and facades should include a
variety of architectural features and building materials to provide visual
interest and give each project a distinct character. Building facades shall
contain windows at the ground level or first floor in order to increase
security of adjacent outdoor spaces by maximizing natural surveillance and
visibility. Special care should be given to building elevations that face a
public right-of-way or a residential area. Doors, window frames, screening
walls, and other architectural features should be finished to complement the
color and material of the principal building. At least 20% of the first floor
facade that faces a public street, sidewalk or parking lot shall be windows
or doors for residential uses. At least 20% of the first floor facade that
faces a public street, sidewalk or parking lot shall be windows or doors of
clear or lightly tinted glass that allows views into and out of the building
at eye level for non-residential uses. Windows shall be distributed in a more
or less even manner. Minimum window area shall be measured between the height
of two feet and ten feet above the finished level of the first floor.



         (c)   All additions, exterior alterations or accessory
buildings constructed after the original buildings shall be of the same
material and design as the original structure. However, this provision shall
not prohibit the upgrading of the quality of materials used in a remodeling
or expansion activity, provided said upgraded material complements the
original.



         (d)   All structures over 120 square feet shall have
full perimeter footings.



         (e)   Steel frame structures with metal siding and roof
are allowed in commercial and industrial districts provided 50% or more of
the front of the structure is masonry type veneer and windows, and the side
walls shall be at least four feet from grade with the same type of masonry
veneer.



      (4)   Application of master plan district provisions. 
Properties located within the district boundaries of master plan area shall
also be subject to the district provisions of the master plan.



      (5)   Design guidelines.  The City Council may adopt by
resolution design guidelines that shall apply to designated areas or
districts of the city with greater specificity than the standards in this
section.  Where there is a conflict between the design guidelines and the
standards in this section, the guidelines shall apply.



   (O)   Telecommunication towers/antennae.



      (1)   Purpose. 



         (a)   The purpose of this division is to provide a
uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the development and
installation of wireless communications towers, antennas and related
facilities. The regulations and requirements contained herein are intended
to: (i) regulate the placement, construction and modification of wireless
communications towers and related wireless communications facilities in order
to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the aesthetic
quality of the city; and (ii) encourage managed development of wireless
communications infrastructure, while at the same time not unreasonably
interfering with the development of the competitive wireless communications
marketplace in the City of Columbia Heights.



         (b)   It is intended that the city shall apply these
regulations to accomplish the following:



            1.   Minimize the total number of towers
throughout the community through siting standards;



            2.   Encourage the location of towers in
non-residential areas and with compatible uses;



            3.   Provide for the appropriate location and
development of wireless communications towers, antennas and related
facilities within the city, to the extent possible, to minimize potential
adverse impacts on the community;



            4.   Minimize adverse visual impacts of wireless
communications towers and related facilities through careful design, siting,
landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques utilizing current
and future technologies;



            5.   Promote and encourage shared use/co-location
of towers and antenna support structures;



            6.   Maintain and preserve the existing
residential character of the City of Columbia Heights and its neighborhoods
and to promote the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious
community;



            7.   Promote the public safety and avoid the risk
of damage to adjacent properties by ensuring that wireless communications
towers and related wireless communications facilities are properly designed,
constructed, modified, maintained and removed;



            8.   Ensure that wireless communications towers
and related wireless communications facilities are compatible with
surrounding land uses;



            9.   Encourage the use of alternative support
structures, co-location of new antennas on existing wireless communications
towers, camouflaged towers, and construction of towers with the ability to
locate three or more providers;



            10.   Maintain and ensure that a
non-discriminatory, competitive and broad range of wireless communications
services and high-quality wireless communications infrastructure consistent
with federal law are provided to serve the community; and



            11.   Ensure that wireless communications
facilities comply with radio frequency emissions standards as promulgated by
the Federal Communications Commission.



         (c)   This section is not intended to regulate satellite
dishes, satellite earth station antennas, residential television antennas in
private use, multichannel multipoint distribution service antennas, or
amateur radio antennas.



      (2)   Definitions.  For the purposes of this division the
following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them herein:



         ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  Means a structure or portion of a
structure subordinate to and serving the principal structure on the same lot.



         ACCESSORY USE.  Shall have the meaning set forth in the
Chapter 9.



         ANTENNA.  Means a device fabricated of fiberglass, metal
or other material designed for use in transmitting and/or receiving
communications signals and usually attached to a wireless communications
tower or antenna support structure.



         ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE.  Any building or structure,
excluding towers, used or useable for one or more wireless communications
facilities.



         BUFFER or BUFFERING.  A natural or landscaped area or
screening device intended to separate and/or partially obstruct the view of
adjacent land uses or properties from one another so as to lessen the impact
and adverse relationship between dissimilar, unrelated or incompatible land
uses.



         CITY.  The City of Columbia Heights, Minnesota, and any
and all departments, agencies and divisions thereof.



         CITY CODE.  The Columbia Heights City Code, as amended
from time to time.



         CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL.  The Columbia Heights City
Council or its designee.



         CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager of the City of Columbia
Heights, Minnesota or the City Manager’s designee.



         CO-LOCATION.  The use of a single wireless communications
tower, antenna support structure and/or site by more than one provider.



         CONDITIONAL USE.  Those uses that are generally compatible
with other uses permitted in a zoning district, but that require individual
review of their location, design, configuration, intensity and structures,
and may require the imposition of conditions pertinent thereto in order to
ensure the appropriateness of the use at a particular location. This
definition shall only apply to this specific division and shall not apply to
other sections or provisions of the land use and development regulations.



         CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.  A permit specially and
individually granted by the Council after a public hearing thereon by the
Planning Commission for any conditional use so permitted in any zoning
district. In approving a conditional use permit, the Council may impose
reasonable conditions to accomplish the objectives of this division with
respect to use, screening, lighting, hours of operation, noise control,
maintenance, operation or other requirements.



         EQUIPMENT CABINET or SHELTER.  A structure located near a
wireless communications facility that contains electronics, back-up power
generators and/or other on-site supporting equipment necessary for the
operation of the facility.



         EXISTING TOWER.  Any tower designated as an existing tower
by division (O)(6) for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the
effective date of this division, including permitted towers that have not yet
been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired. After
the effective date of this division, any tower approved and constructed
pursuant to the provisions of this division shall thereafter be treated as an
existing tower for purposes of regulation pursuant to this division and the
land use and development regulations.



         GUYED TOWER.  A wireless communications tower that is
supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors or other
means of support besides the superstructure of the tower itself.



         LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.  Chapter 9 of the
Columbia Heights Code, as it may be amended from time to time.



         MICROWAVE DISH ANTENNA.  A dish-like antenna used to
transmit and/or receive wireless communications signals between terminal
locations.



         MONOPOLE TOWER.  A wireless communications tower
consisting of a single pole or spire supported by a permanent foundation,
constructed without guy wires and ground anchors.



         NONCONFORMITY.  Shall have the meaning given in M.S. §
394.22, subd. 8, or successor statutes, and shall be governed by the
provisions of the land use and development regulations (nonconformities).



         PANEL ANTENNA.  An array of antennas designed to direct,
transmit or receive radio signals from a particular direction.



         PICO CELL.  A low-power cell whose coverage area extends
300 to 500 yards.



         PLANNING COMMISSION.  The Columbia Heights Planning and
Zoning Commission.



         PROVIDER.  (When used with reference to a system) means a
person or entity that provides wireless communications service over a
wireless communications facility, whether or not the provider owns the
facility. A person that leases a portion of a wireless communications
facility shall be treated as a provider for purposes of this division.



         SATELLITE DISH.  An antenna device incorporating a
reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured that is
shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia-shaped and is used to transmit and/or
receive electromagnetic signals. This definition is meant to include, but is
not limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations,
TVROs and satellite microwave antennas.



         SELF-SUPPORT/LATTICE TOWER.  A tower structure requiring
no guy wires for support.



         STEALTH or CAMOUFLAGED TOWER, EQUIPMENT CABINET or
FACILITY.  Any wireless communications tower, equipment cabinet or facility
designed to hide, obscure or conceal the presence of the tower, antenna,
equipment cabinet or other related facility. The stealth technology used must
incorporate the wireless communications tower, equipment cabinet and facility
into and be compatible with the existing or proposed uses of the site.
Examples of stealth facilities include, but are not limited to:
architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into
architectural elements, and wireless communications towers designed to look
like light poles, power poles, trees, flag poles, clocks, steeples or bell
towers.



         UTILITY POLE-MOUNTED FACILITY.  A wireless communications
facility attached, without regard to mounting, to or upon an electric
transmission or distribution pole, street light, traffic signal, athletic
field light, utility support structure or other similar facility located
within a public right- of-way or utility easement approved by the Planning
Commission. The facility shall include any associated equipment shelters
regardless of where they are located with respect to the mount.



         WHIP ANTENNA.  An omni-directional antenna used to
transmit and/or receive radio signals.



         WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY.  A facility that is used
to provide one or more wireless communications services, including, without
limitation, arrays, antennas and associated facilities used to transmit
and/or receive wireless communications signals. This term does not include
wireless communications towers, over-the-air reception devices that deliver
or receive broadcast signals, satellite dishes regulated by 47 C.F.R. §
25.104, devices that provide direct-to home satellite services (“DBS”) or
devices that provide multichannel multi-point distribution services
(“MMDS”) as defined and regulated by 47 C.F.R. § 1.4000, as amended.



         WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.  Those services
specified in 47 U.S.C. §§ 332(c)(7)(C) and 332(d)(1)-(2), and any
amendments thereto.



         WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER.  A guyed, monopole or
self-support/lattice tower, or extension thereto, constructed as a
freestanding structure, supporting one or more wireless communications
facilities used in the provision of wireless communications services.



         ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.  The person appointed by the City
Manager as provided in the land use and development regulations.



      (3)   Applicability.  The requirements of this division apply
to the extent provided herein to all new, existing, replacement, re-located
or expanded and/or modified wireless communications towers and wireless
communications facilities. The requirements of this division apply throughout
the city. It is the express intent of the city to impose, to the extent
permitted by applicable law, all requirements of this division to all land
within the city, whether publicly or privately held, including, without
limitation, private property, city property, church property, utility
property and school property.



         (a)   Non-essential services.  Wireless communications
towers and wireless communications facilities will be regulated and permitted
pursuant to this division and not regulated or permitted as essential
services, public utilities or private utilities.



         (b)   Attempt to locate on existing tower or antenna
support structure. Every owner/operator seeking to locate a wireless
communications facility within the city must attempt to locate on an existing
wireless communications tower or antenna support structure as required by
division (O)(7) and (8).



      (4)   Exempt from city review.  The following activities
shall be permitted without city approvals:



         (a)   Amateur radio.  The installation of any antenna
and its supporting tower, pole or mast to the extent city regulation is
preempted by state or federal law.



         (b)   Residential television antennas.  The
installation of residential television antennas in private use to the extent
preempted by state and federal law.



         (c)   Satellite dishes.  The installation of satellite
dishes to the extent preempted by state or federal law.



         (d)   Mobile news.  The use of mobile services
equipment providing public information coverage of news events of a temporary
or emergency nature.



      (5)   Permitted locations.  The following applies to all
wireless communications towers, including re-located or expanded and/or
modified towers, but not to existing towers:



         (a)   Wireless communications towers less than 120 feet
in height shall be a permitted use in the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts.



         (b)   Wireless communications towers greater than or
equal to 120 feet in height shall be a conditional use in the I-1 and I-2
zoning districts.



         (c)   Wireless communications towers less than 80 feet
in height shall be a permitted use in the RB, CBD and GB zoning districts.



         (d)   Wireless communications towers greater than or
equal to 80 feet in height shall be a conditional use in the RB, CBD and GB
zoning districts.



         (e)   Wireless communications towers less than 80 feet
in height shall only be allowed as a conditional use in the R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-4 and LB zoning districts.



         (f)   Wireless communications towers greater than or
equal to 80 feet in height shall not be a permitted use in the R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-4 and LB zoning districts.



         (g)   Except where superseded by the requirements of
county, state or federal regulatory agencies possessing jurisdiction over
wireless communications towers, equipment cabinets and wireless
communications facilities, such towers, equipment cabinets and facilities
shall be stealth towers, stealth equipment cabinets and stealth facilities
camouflaged to blend into the surrounding environment using stealth
technology in a manner pre-approved by the city on a case-by-case basis.



         (h)   Utility pole-mounted facilities shall be permitted
as accessory uses in all zoning districts. Applications for such facilities
shall be subject to the conditions set forth in this division.



      (6)   Existing towers.



         (a)   Except where otherwise noted, existing towers
shall not be rendered nonconforming uses by this division. The city
encourages the use of these existing towers for purposes of co-locating
additional wireless communications facilities. Any and all towers erected and
in use or approved on or before the effective date of this division shall be
treated as existing towers. These towers shall be considered conforming uses
with respect to this division and the city shall allow co-location on these
towers subject to the requirements of division (O)(7) so long as the
providers utilize the most visually unobtrusive equipment that is
technologically feasible.



         (b)   Owners of existing towers shall be required to
comply with the requirements and procedures set forth in division (O)(13) and
(14) to replace an existing tower.



         (c)   Owners of existing towers shall be required to
comply with the applicable requirements and procedures set forth in division
(O)(6), (7), (8) and (13) to modify or relocate an existing tower or to
co-locate a wireless communications facility on an existing tower.



         (d)   Increases in height of an existing wireless
communications tower, modification of an existing wireless communications
tower or conversion of an existing wireless communications tower to a stealth
or camouflage structure shall be treated as a new tower and subject to all
the applicable requirements of this division.



         (e)   Owners of existing wireless communications towers
shall be required to comply with the requirements set forth in division
(O)(15) and (16).



      (7)   Co-location use, modification and relocation of existing
towers.



         (a)   Any owner of an existing tower or antenna support
structure containing additional capacity suitable for installation or
co-location of wireless communications facilities shall permit providers to
install or co-locate said facilities on such towers or antenna support
structures; provided that no existing tower or antenna support structure
shall be used to support wireless communications facilities for more than
three separate providers. Any co-location of wireless communications
facilities shall be subject to mutually agreeable terms and conditions
negotiated between the parties.



         (b)   Any existing tower may be modified or relocated to
accommodate co-location of additional wireless communications facilities as
follows:



            1.   An application for a wireless communications
permit to modify or relocate a wireless communications tower shall be made to
the Zoning Administrator. The application shall contain the information
required by division (O)(14)(b) and (c). The Zoning Administrator shall have
the authority to issue a wireless communications permit without further
approval by the Council or the Planning Commission, except as provided in
this division. Any denial of an application for a wireless communications
permit to modify or relocate a wireless communications tower for purposes of
co-location shall be made in accordance with division (O)(14)(e).



            2.   The total height of the modified tower and
wireless communications facilities attached thereto shall not exceed the
maximum height allowed for a permitted wireless communications tower in the
zoning district in which the tower is located, unless a conditional use
permit is granted by the city.



            3.   Permission to exceed the existing height
shall not require an additional distance separation from designated areas as
set forth in this division. The tower’s pre-modification height shall be
used to calculate such distance separations.



            4.   A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate
the co-location of additional wireless communications facilities may be moved
on the same parcel subject to compliance with the requirements of this
division.



            5.   A tower that is relocated on the same parcel
shall continue to be measured from the original tower location for the
purpose of calculating the separation distances between towers as provided
herein.



      (8)   Application to locate wireless communications facility
on existing tower.



         (a)   An application for a wireless communications
permit to locate or re-locate a wireless communications facility on an
existing tower must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on the
designated form and shall, at a minimum, contain the following:



            1.   Name, address and telephone number of the
applicant;



            2.   Location of the existing tower, along with
the tower owner’s name and telephone number;



            3.   Number of applicant’s wireless
communications facilities to be located on the subject tower;



            4.   A sworn and certified statement in writing by
a qualified engineer that the wireless communications facility will conform
to any and all other construction standards set forth by the city code, and
federal and state law;



            5.   An application fee in the amount set by the
Council for each wireless communications facility listed on the application;



            6.   A copy of all licenses and/or franchises
required by federal, state or local law for the construction and/or operation
of a wireless communications system in the city;



            7.   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the
location, type and height of the proposed wireless communications facility,
on-site land uses and zoning, elevation and stealth design drawings of the
proposed wireless communications facility and the supporting tower,
topography, and any other information deemed by the city to be necessary to
assess compliance with this division and the land use and development
regulations;



            8.   An inventory of the applicant’s existing
towers and wireless communications facilities, if any, that are either within
the jurisdiction of the city or within one mile of the city limits, including
specific information about the location, height, and design of each wireless
communications facility or tower;



            9.   A certification that the applicant will
comply with all applicable federal, state or local laws including all the
provisions of the land use and development regulations; and



            10.   A certification that the site described in
the application is located on an existing tower and the owner/operator agrees
to the co-location of the subject wireless communications facility.



         (b)   An application for a wireless communications
permit to locate or re-locate a wireless communications facility that
proposes to co-locate said facility on an existing tower and that satisfies
the requirements set forth in this division, shall receive expedited
treatment in the review process.



         (c)   So as to further expedite the permitting process
and to promote the efficient use of existing sites, the city encourages the
users of existing towers to submit a single application for approval of
multiple users on a single existing site. Applications for approval at
multiple user sites shall be given priority in the review process. The fee to
be submitted with a multiple user application shall be the fee specified in
this subsection multiplied by the number of users listed in such application.



         (d)   A petitioner shall submit any additional
information requested by the city for purposes of evaluating the permit
request.



         (e)   In granting or denying a wireless communications
permit to locate or re-locate a wireless communications facility on an
existing tower, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a written record of
decision including findings of fact.



      (9)   Wireless communications facilities on antenna support
structures.



         (a)   All wireless communications facilities to be
located on antenna support structures shall be subject to the following
minimum standards:



            1.   Wireless communications facilities shall only
be permitted on buildings which are at least 35 feet tall.



            2.   Wireless communications facilities shall be
permitted on the city’s water tower; provided that the city may impose
reasonable conditions which ensure that such facilities do not interfere with
access to or maintenance of the tower.



            3.   If an equipment cabinet associated with a
wireless communications facility is located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment cabinet shall not exceed 10 feet in height, 400 square
feet in area nor occupy more than 10% of the roof area. All equipment
cabinets shall be constructed out of nonreflective materials and shall be
designed to blend with existing architecture and located or designed to
minimize their visibility.



         (b)   Antenna dimensions.



            1.   Unless a conditional use permit is obtained
from the city, whip antennas and their supports must not exceed 25 feet in
height and 12 inches in diameter and must be constructed of a material or
color which matches the exterior of the antenna support structure.



            2.   Unless a conditional use permit is obtained
from the city, panel antennas and their supports must not exceed 8 feet in
height or 2.5 feet in width and must be constructed of a material or color
which matches the exterior of the building or structure, so as to achieve
maximum compatibility and minimum visibility.



            3.   Unless a conditional use permit is obtained
from the city, microwave dish antennas located below 65 feet above the ground
may not exceed 6 feet in diameter. Microwave dish antennas located 65 feet
and higher above the ground may not exceed 8 feet in diameter.



         (c)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, wireless
communications facilities and related equipment shall not be installed on
antenna support structures in residential zoning districts, unless a
conditional use permit is obtained from the city.



         (d)   Wireless communications facilities located on
antenna support structures, and their related equipment cabinets, shall be
located or screened to minimize the visual impact of such facilities and
equipment cabinets upon adjacent properties. Any such screening shall be of a
material and color that matches the exterior of the building or structure
upon which it is situated. Wireless communications facilities and related
equipment cabinets shall be of a stealth design, and shall have an exterior
finish and/or design as approved by the city.



      (10)   Application to locate wireless communications facility
on antenna support structure.



         (a)   An application for a wireless communications
permit to locate or re-locate a wireless communications facility on an
antenna support structure must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on
the designated form and shall, at a minimum, contain the following:



            1.   Name, address and telephone number of the
applicant;



            2.   Location of the antenna support structure,
along with the property owner’s name and telephone number;



            3.   Number of applicant’s wireless
communications facilities to be located on the subject property;



            4.   A sworn and certified statement in writing by
a qualified engineer that the wireless communications facility will conform
to any and all requirements and standards set forth in the city code, and
federal and state law;



            5.   An application fee in an amount set by the
Council for each wireless communications facility listed on the application;



            6.   A copy of all licenses and/or franchises
required by federal, state or local law for the construction and/or operation
of a wireless communications system in the city;



            7.   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the
location, type and height of the proposed wireless communications facility,
on-site land uses and zoning, elevation and stealth design drawings of the
proposed wireless communications facility and the rooftop and building,
topography, a current survey, landscape plans, and any other information
deemed by the city to be necessary to assess compliance with this division
and the land use and development regulations;



            8.   An inventory of the applicant’s existing
towers and wireless communications facilities, if any, that are either within
the jurisdiction of the city or within one mile of the city limits, including
specific information about the location, height, and design of each wireless
communications facility or tower;



            9.   A certification that the applicant will
comply with all applicable federal, state or local laws including all the
provisions of this division and the land use and development regulations; and



            10.   A certification that the site described in
the application is located on an existing antenna support structure and the
owner/operator agrees to the location or co-location of the subject wireless
communications facility.



         (b)   An application for a wireless communications
permit to locate or re-locate a wireless communications facility that
proposes to co-locate said facility on an antenna support structure and that
satisfies the requirements set forth in this division, shall receive
expedited treatment in the review process.



         (c)   So as to further expedite the permitting process
and to promote the efficient use of existing sites, the city encourages the
users of antenna support structures to submit a single application for
approval of multiple users on a single existing site. Applications for
approval at multiple user sites shall be given priority in the review
process. The fee to be submitted with a multiple user application shall be
the fee described in this division multiplied by the number of users listed
in such application.



         (d)   An applicant must submit a proposed stealth design
for camouflaging its wireless communications facility, unless this
requirement is preempted by the operation of applicable laws or regulations.



         (e)   A petitioner shall submit any additional
information requested by the city for purposes of evaluating the permit
request.



         (f)   In granting or denying a wireless communications
permit to locate or re-locate a wireless communications facility on an
antenna support structure, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a written
record of decision including findings of fact.



      (11)   Utility pole-mounted wireless communications facilities.



         (a)   Utility pole-mounted wireless communications
facilities may be permitted as accessory uses in all zoning districts if the
provider uses pico cell equipment. Such facilities shall only be permitted in
public rights-of-way that are at least 100 feet in width. To the greatest
practical extent, utility pole- mounted wireless communications facilities
shall be sited where they are concealed from public view by other objects
such as trees or buildings. When it is necessary to site such a facility in
public view, to the greatest practical extent it shall be designed to limit
visual impact on surrounding land uses, which design must be approved by the
city.



         (b)   The height of a utility pole-mounted facility
shall not exceed two feet above the pole structure.



         (c)   Equipment cabinets associated with utility
pole-mounted wireless communications facilities which are located within the
public right-of-way shall be of a scale and design that make them no more
visually obtrusive than other types of utility equipment boxes normally
located within the right- of-way and shall be located in a manner and
location approved by the city. To the greatest practical extent, equipment
cabinets associated with utility pole-mounted facilities which are located
outside of the public right-of-way shall be concealed from public view or
shall be architecturally designed using stealth technology or buffered to be
compatible with surrounding land uses, except that such shelters located in
residential zoning districts must be screened from the view of residents and
pedestrians.



         (d)   Equipment cabinets associated with utility
pole-mounted wireless communications facilities which are located outside the
public right-of-way shall meet the setback requirements for accessory
buildings and structures for the zoning district in which the equipment
cabinet is located.



         (e)   Generators associated with equipment shelters must
meet with the requirements of the city code.



      (12)   Application for utility pole-mounted wireless
communications facility.



         (a)   An application for a wireless communications
permit to locate or re-locate a utility pole-mounted wireless communications
facility must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on the designated form
and shall, at a minimum, contain the following:



            1.   Name, address and telephone number of the
applicant;



            2.   Location of the utility pole-mount, along
with the property owner’s name and telephone number;



            3.   Number of applicant’s wireless
communications facilities to be located on the subject property;



            4.   A sworn and certified statement in writing by
a qualified engineer that the wireless communications facility will conform
to any and all requirements and standards set forth in the city code, and
federal and state law;



            5.   An application fee in the amount set by the
Council for each wireless communications facility listed on the application;



            6.   A copy of all licenses and/or franchises
required by federal, state or local law for the construction and/or operation
of a wireless communications system in the city;



            7.   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the
location, type and height of the proposed wireless communications facility,
on-site land uses and zoning, elevation and stealth design drawings of the
proposed wireless communications facility and utility pole-mount, topography,
a current survey, landscape plans, and any other information deemed by the
city to be necessary to assess compliance with this division and the land use
and development regulations;



            8.   An inventory of the applicant’s existing
towers and wireless communications facilities, if any, that are either within
the jurisdiction of the city or within one mile of the city limits, including
specific information about the location, height, and design of each wireless
communications facility or tower;



            9.   A certification that the applicant will
comply with all applicable federal, state or local laws including all the
provisions of this division and the land use and development regulations; and



            10.   A certification that the site described in
the application is located on a utility pole- mount and the owner/operator
agrees to the location of the wireless communications facility.



         (b)   An application for a wireless communications
permit to locate or re-locate a wireless communications facility that
proposes to co-locate said facility on an already existing utility pole-mount
and that satisfies the requirements set forth in this division, shall receive
expedited treatment in the review process.



         (c)   A petitioner shall submit any additional
information requested by the city for purposes of evaluating the permit
request.



         (d)   In granting or denying a wireless communications
permit to locate or re-locate a utility pole-mounted wireless communications
facility, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a written record of decision
including findings of fact.



      (13)   Construction of new towers.



         (a)   Conditions of approval for wireless communications
towers.



            1.   Setback. 



               a.   The distance between the base of any
proposed wireless communications tower, measured from the center of a tower,
and the nearest lot line shall be at least equal to the height of the tower,
provided that this distance may be reduced to a specified amount if an
applicant provides a certification from the tower manufacturer or a qualified
engineer stating that the tower is designed and constructed in such a way as
to crumple, bend, collapse or otherwise fall within the specified distance.



               b.   In no event shall the distance between
the base of a proposed wireless communications tower, measured from the
center of the tower, and the nearest lot line be less than 20% of the tower
height.



            2.   Structural requirements.  All wireless
communications tower designs must be certified by a qualified engineer
specializing in tower structures and licensed to practice in the State of
Minnesota. The certification must state the tower design is structurally
sound and, at a minimum, in conformance with the city’s building code, the
State Building Code, and any other standards outlined in the land use and
development regulations, as amended from time to time.



            3.   Height.  The height of permitted wireless
communications towers shall be as specified in division (O)(5).



         (b)   Requirements for separation between towers.



            1.   Except for wireless communications facilities
located on roof-tops or utility pole- mounted facilities, the minimum
wireless communications tower separation distance shall be calculated and
applied irrespective of jurisdictional boundaries.



            2.   Measurement of wireless communications tower
separation distances for the purpose of compliance with this division shall
be measured from the base of a wireless communications tower to the base of
the existing or approved wireless communications tower.



            3.   Proposed towers must meet the following
minimum separation requirements from existing towers or towers previously
approved but not yet constructed at the time a development permit is granted
pursuant to this division:



 


MINIMUM TOWER SEPARATION DISTANCE




Height of Existing Tower

 

Height of Proposed Tower

 

Minimum Separation





Less than 50 feet
 
Less than 50 feet
 
100 feet


50–100 feet
 
200 feet


101–150 feet
 
400 feet


151–200 feet
 
800 feet


50–100 feet
 
Less than 50 feet
 
100 feet


50–100 feet
 
400 feet


101–150 feet
 
600 feet


151–200 feet
 
800 feet


101–150 feet
 
Less than 50 feet
 
100 feet


50–100 feet
 
400 feet


101–150 feet
 
600 feet


151–200 feet
 
800 feet


151–200 feet
 
Less than 50 feet
 
100 feet


50–100 feet
 
600 feet


101–150 feet
 
800 feet


151–200 feet
 
1,000 feet




 



            4.   For the purpose of this subsection, the
separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight
line between the center of the base of the existing or approved structure and
the center of the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed
wireless communications tower.



         (c)   Standards for co-location.  This subsection is
designed to foster shared use of wireless communications towers.



            1.   Construction of excess capacity.  Any owner
of a wireless communications tower shall permit other providers to install or
co-locate antennae or wireless communications facilities on such towers, if
available space and structural capacity exists; provided, however, that no
wireless communications tower shall be used to support wireless
communications facilities for more than three separate providers. Any
co-location of wireless communications facilities shall be subject to
mutually agreeable terms and conditions negotiated between the parties. All
new wireless communications towers shall be constructed with excess capacity
for co-location as follows:



 


Less than 80 feet in height

 
One additional user


80 feet to 119 feet in height
 
Two or more additional users (up to a maximum of three users)


120 feet in height or greater
 
Three additional users



 



            2.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, all
new monopole towers over 80 feet in height and existing monopole towers that
are extended to a height over 80 feet shall be designed and built to
accommodate at least two providers, and up to a maximum of three providers if
technically possible.



            3.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, all
new guyed towers, and existing guyed towers that are replaced or modified
shall be designed and built to accommodate three providers.



            4.   Site area. The site or leased footprint shall
contain sufficient square footage to accommodate the equipment/mechanical
facilities for all proposed providers based upon the structural capacity of
the tower.



            5.   Setbacks. If it is determined that a proposed
wireless communications tower cannot meet setback requirements due to
increases in tower height to accommodate the co-location of at least one
additional wireless communications service provider, minimum setback
requirements may be reduced by a maximum of 15 feet, unless such a reduction
would decrease the distance between the base of the tower and the nearest lot
line to less than 20% of the tower height, in which case set-back
requirements may be reduced to a distance that is equal to or greater than
20% of the tower height.



         (d)   Tower design and type.



            1.   All proposed wireless communications towers
shall be monopole towers or stealth towers. Self-supporting towers or guyed
lattice towers shall only be permitted as a replacement of like structures.



            2.   Utility pole-mounted facilities or extensions
on utility poles to accommodate the mounting of wireless communications
facilities shall be of the monopole type.



            3.   Antennas shall be of the uni-cell variety
whenever feasible or mounted internal to the wireless communications tower
structure.



            4.   Stealth wireless communications towers,
equipment cabinets and related facilities shall be required in all zoning
districts.



         (e)   Landscaping minimum requirements.  Wireless
communications towers shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials
that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from surrounding
property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least 10
feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. Existing mature growth and
natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible. In some cases, such as wireless communications towers sited on
large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be a
sufficient buffer. All areas disturbed during project construction shall be
replanted with vegetation. The owner of a wireless communications tower is
responsible for all landscaping obligations and costs. A landscaping plan for
the purpose of screening the base of the tower from view shall be submitted
to the Zoning Administrator for approval prior to the issuance of a building
permit for the tower. The city may waive the enforcement of this condition if
it is deemed unnecessary.



         (f)   Visual impact standards.  To assess the
compatibility with and impact on adjacent properties of a proposed wireless
communications tower site, an applicant seeking to construct, relocate or
modify a wireless communications tower may be required to submit a visual
impact analysis. The requirements of this subsection shall be required for
any application to construct a tower greater than 80 feet in height. The
applicant may request a review of a proposed wireless communications tower
location, prior to submission of an application, to determine whether or not
a visual impact analysis will be required. The applicant shall be advised of
the requirement to submit a visual impact analysis by the city within ten
working days following the city’s receipt of the applicant’s application
for construction of a new wireless communication tower or the relocation or
modification of an existing tower.



            1.   Whenever a visual impact analysis is
required, an applicant shall utilize digital imaging technology to prepare
the analysis in a manner acceptable to the city. At a minimum, a visual
impact analysis must provide the following information:



               a.   The location of the proposed wireless
communications tower illustrated upon an aerial photograph at a scale of not
more than one inch equals 300 feet (1 inch = 300 feet). All adjacent zoning
districts within a 3,000-foot radius from all property lines of the proposed
wireless communications tower site shall be indicated; and



               b.   A line of site analysis which shall
include the following information:



                  i.   Certification that the proposed
wireless communications tower meets or exceeds standards contained in this
division;



                  ii.   Identification of all
significant existing natural and manmade features adjacent to the proposed
wireless communications tower site and identification of features which may
provide buffering and screening for adjacent properties and public
rights-of-way;



                  iii.   Identification of at least
three specific points within a 2,000-foot radius of the proposed wireless
communications tower location, subject to approval by the Zoning
Administrator, for conducting the visual impact analysis;



                  iv.   Copies of all calculations and a
description of the methodology used in selecting the points of view and
collection of data submitted in the analysis;



                  v.   Graphic illustration of the
visual impact of the proposed wireless communications tower, at a scale that
does not exceed five degrees of horizontal distance, presented from the
specific identified points;



                  vi.   Identification of all screening
and buffering materials under the permanent control of the applicant (only
screening and buffering materials located within the boundaries of the
proposed site shall be considered for the visual impact analysis); and



                  vii.   Identification of all screening
and buffering materials that are not under the permanent control of the
applicant but are considered of a permanent nature due to ownership or use
patterns, such as a public park, vegetation preserve, required development
buffer, and the like.



            2.   Screening and buffering materials considered
in the visual impact analysis shall not be removed by future development on
the site. However, screening and buffering materials considered in the visual
impact analysis shall be replaced if they die.



            3.   An applicant shall provide any additional
information that may be required by the Zoning Administrator to fully review
and evaluate the potential impact of the proposed wireless communications
tower.



      (14)   Application process for new towers.



         (a)   The use of existing structures to locate wireless
communications facilities shall be preferred to the construction of new
wireless communications towers. To be eligible to construct a new wireless
communications tower within city limits, an applicant must establish to the
satisfaction of the city that the applicant is unable to provide the service
sought by the applicant from available sites, including co-locations within
the city and in neighboring jurisdictions; and the applicant must demonstrate
to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that no other suitable existing
tower or antenna support structure is available, including utility poles; and
that no reasonable alternative technology exists that can accommodate the
applicant’s wireless communications facility due to one or more of the
following factors:



            1.   The structure provides insufficient height to
allow the applicant’s facility to function reasonably in parity with
similar facilities;



            2.   The structure provides insufficient
structural strength to support the applicant’s wireless communications
facility;



            3.   The structure provides insufficient space to
allow the applicant’s wireless communications facility to function
effectively and reasonably in parity with similar equipment;



            4.   Use of the existing structure would result in
electromagnetic interference that cannot reasonably be corrected;



            5.   The existing structure is unavailable for
lease under a reasonable leasing agreement;



            6.   Use of the structure would create a greater
visual impact on surrounding land uses than the proposed alternative or
otherwise would be less in keeping with the goals, objectives, intent,
preferences, purposes, criteria or standards of this division, the land use
and development regulations and land development regulations; and/or



            7.   Other limiting factors.



         (b)   An applicant must submit any technical information
requested by the city or its designated engineering consultant as part of the
review and evaluation process.



         (c)   An application for a wireless communications
permit to construct a wireless communications tower must be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator on the designated form and shall contain, at a minimum,
the following information:



            1.   Name, address and telephone number of the
applicant;



            2.   Proposed location of the wireless
communications tower, along with all studies, maps and other information
required by division (O)(13) and (14) (applicant shall submit information for
only one proposed tower per application);



            3.   Number of applicant’s wireless
communications facilities to be located on the subject tower and the number
of spaces available for co-location;



            4.   A sworn and certified statement in writing by
a qualified engineer that the wireless communications tower will conform to
all requirements set forth in the city code, and federal and state law;



            5.   An application fee in the amount set by the
Council;



            6.   A copy of all licenses and/or franchises
required by federal, state or local law for the construction and/or operation
of a wireless communications system in the city;



            7.   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the
location, type and height of the proposed wireless communications tower,
on-site land uses and zoning, elevation and stealth design drawings of the
proposed tower, topography, and any other information deemed by the Zoning
Administrator to be necessary to assess compliance with this division and the
land use and development regulations;



            8.   An inventory of the applicant’s existing
towers and wireless communications facilities, if any, that are either within
the jurisdiction of the city or within one mile of the city limits, including
specific information about the location, height, and design of each wireless
communications facility or tower;



            9.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of
all owners of existing towers or antenna support structures within an area
equal to 100% of the search ring for the wireless communications facility
proposed to be located on the proposed new tower;



            10.   Written documentation in the form of an
affidavit that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful efforts for
permission to install or co-locate the proposed wireless communications
facility on all existing towers or antenna support structures located within
an area equal to 100% of the search ring for the proposed site of the
wireless communications facility;



            11.   Written, technical evidence from a qualified
engineer that the proposed wireless communications facility cannot be
installed or co-located on an existing tower or antenna support structure
located within the city and must be located at the proposed site in order to
meet the coverage requirements of the proposed wireless communications
service, together with a composite propagation study which illustrates
graphically existing and proposed coverage in industry-accepted median
received signal ranges;



            12.   A written statement from a qualified
engineer that the construction and placement of the proposed wireless
communications tower will comply with Federal Communications Commission
radiation standards for interference and safety and will produce no
significant signal interference with public safety communications and the
usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television, or other
communications services enjoyed by adjacent residential and non-residential
properties; and



            13.   A certification that the applicant will
comply with all applicable federal, state or local laws including all the
provisions of this division and the land use and development regulations.



         (d)   A proposed wireless communications tower that
exceeds the height limitations for a permitted tower in the GB, RB, CBD, I-1
or I-2 zoning districts, or any proposed wireless communications tower under
80 feet in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or LB districts, shall only be allowed
upon approval of a conditional use permit. The City Council may establish any
reasonable conditions for approval that are deemed necessary to mitigate
adverse impacts associated with the conditional use, to protect neighboring
properties, and to achieve the objectives of this division and the land use
and development regulations. Such a conditional use permit shall be required
in addition to a wireless communications permit.



         (e)   In granting or denying a wireless communications
permit to construct a wireless communications tower, the Zoning Administrator
shall prepare a written record of decision including findings of fact.
Proposed wireless communication towers that meet the standards and
requirements contained herein, including location and height limitations, may
be approved administratively by the Zoning Administrator. Proposed wireless
communication towers that do not meet the standards and requirements
contained herein, including location and height limitations, may be denied
administratively by the Zoning Administrator, provided that the written
record of decision including findings of fact is accepted by the Council.



      (15)   Annual registration requirement.



         (a)   Wireless communications facilities. 



            1.   To enable the city to keep accurate,
up-to-date records of the location of wireless communications facilities
within city limits, on an annual basis, no later than February 1 of each
year, or upon change in ownership of wireless communications facilities, the
owner/operator of such facilities shall submit documentation to the Zoning
Administrator providing:



               a.   Certification in writing that the
wireless communications facility conforms to the requirements, in effect at
the time of construction of the facility, of the State Building Code and all
other requirements and standards set forth in the city code, and federal and
state law by filing a sworn and certified statement by a qualified engineer
to that effect. A wireless communications facility owner/operator may be
required by the city to submit more frequent certification should there be
reason to believe that the structural and/or electrical integrity of the
wireless communications facility is jeopardized. The city reserves the right
upon reasonable notice to the owner/operator of the wireless communications
facility to conduct inspections for the purpose of determining whether the
wireless communications facility complies with the State Building Code and
all requirements and standards set forth in local, state or federal laws; and



               b.   The name, address and telephone number
of any new owner, if there has been a change of ownership of the wireless
communications facility.



            2.   Annual payment of a registration fee, as set
by the Council, for each wireless communications facility located within the
city shall be submitted to the city at the time of submission of the
documentation required above.



         (b)   Wireless communications towers.



            1.   To enable the city to keep accurate,
up-to-date records of the location and continued use of wireless
communications towers within city limits, on an annual basis, no later than
February 1 of each year, or upon change in ownership of a wireless
communications tower, the owner/operator of each tower shall submit
documentation to the Zoning Administrator providing:



               a.   Certification in writing that the
wireless communications tower is structurally sound and conforms to the
requirements, in effect at the time of construction of the tower, of the
State Building Code and all applicable standards and requirements set forth
in the city code, and federal and state law, by filing a sworn and certified
statement by a qualified engineer to that effect. The tower owner may be
required by city to submit more frequent certifications should there be
reason to believe that the structural and/or electrical integrity of the
tower is jeopardized;



               b.   The number of providers located on the
tower and their names, addresses and telephone numbers;



               c.   The type and use of any wireless
communications facilities located on the tower; and



               d.   The name, address and telephone number
of any new owner of the tower, if there has been a change of ownership of the
tower.



            2.   An annual payment of a registration fee, as
set by the Council, for each tower located within the city shall be submitted
to the city at the time of submission of the documentation required above.



      (16)   General requirements.  The following conditions apply
to all wireless communications towers and wireless communications facilities
in the city:



         (a)   Duration of permits.  If substantial construction
or installation has not taken place within one year after city approval of a
wireless communications permit, the approval shall be considered void unless
a petition for time extension has been granted by the City Council. Such a
petition shall be submitted in writing at least 30 days prior to the
expiration of the approval and shall state facts showing a good faith effort
to complete the work permitted under the original permit.



         (b)   Assignment and subleasing.  No wireless
communications facility, tower or antenna support structure or wireless
communications permit may be sold, transferred or assigned without prior
notification to the city. No sublease shall be entered into by any provider
until the sublessee has obtained a permit for the subject wireless
communications facility or tower or antenna support structure. No potential
provider shall be allowed to argue that a permit should be issued for an
assigned or subleased wireless communications facility or tower or antenna
support structure on the basis of any expense incurred in relation to the
facility or site.



         (c)   Aesthetics.  Wireless communications towers and
wireless communications facilities shall meet the following requirements:



            1.   Signs.  No commercial signs or advertising
shall be allowed on a wireless communications tower or a wireless
communications facility.



            2.   Lighting.  No signals, lights, or
illumination shall be permitted on a wireless communications tower or a
wireless communications facility, unless required by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the
lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least obtrusiveness to
the surrounding community. However, an applicant shall obtain approval from
the city if the Federal Aviation Administration requires the addition of
standard obstruction marking and lighting (i.e., red lighting and orange and
white striping) to the tower. An applicant shall notify the Zoning
Administrator prior to making any changes to the original finish of the tower.



            3.   Graffiti.  Any graffiti or other
unauthorized inscribed materials shall be removed promptly or otherwise
covered in a manner substantially similar to, and consistent, with the
original exterior finish. The city may provide a wireless communications
tower or equipment cabinet owner and/or operator written notice to remove or
cover graffiti within a specific period of time or as required by other
appropriate sections of the city code as presently existing or as may be
periodically amended. In the event the graffiti has not been removed or
painted over by the owner and/or operator within the specified time period,
the city shall have the right to remove or paint over the graffiti or other
inscribed materials. In the event the city has to remove or paint over the
graffiti, then the owner and/or operator of the wireless communications tower
or equipment cabinet or structure on which the graffiti existed, shall be
responsible for all costs incurred.



         (d)   Federal and state requirements.  All wireless
communications towers and wireless communications facilities must meet or
exceed the standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration,
the Federal Communications Commission, and any other agency of the state or
federal government with the authority to regulate wireless communications
towers and facilities. If such standards and regulations change, then the
owners of the wireless communications towers and wireless communications
facilities subject to such standards and regulations must bring such towers
and facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations
within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations,
unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state
or federal agency. Failure to maintain or bring wireless communications
towers and wireless communications facilities into compliance with such
revised standards and regulations shall constitute a violation of this
division and shall be subject to enforcement under the city code. Penalties
for violation may include fines and removal of the tower or wireless
communications facility at the owner’s expense.



         (e)   Licenses or franchise.  An owner of a wireless
communications tower or wireless communications facility must notify the city
in writing within 48 hours of any revocation or failure to renew any
necessary license or franchise.



         (f)   Discontinued use.  In the event the use of a
wireless communications tower or wireless communications facility is
discontinued, the owner and/or operator shall provide written notice to the
city of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be
discontinued.



         (g)   Abandoned tower or antenna.  The city may require
removal of any abandoned or unused wireless communications tower or wireless
communications facility by the tower or facility owner within 30 days after
notice from the city of abandonment. A wireless communications tower or
wireless communications facility shall be considered abandoned if use has
been discontinued for 180 consecutive days.



            1.   Removal by city.  Where a wireless
communications tower or wireless communications facility is abandoned but not
removed within the specified time frame, the city may remove the facility or
remove or demolish the tower and place a lien on the property following the
procedures (but not the criteria) for demolition of an unsafe
building/structure of the city’s housing code.



            2.   Towers utilized for other purposes.  Where a
wireless communications tower is utilized for other purposes, including but
not limited to light standards and power poles, it shall not be considered
abandoned; provided, however, that the height of the tower may be reduced by
the city so that the tower is no higher than necessary to accommodate
previously established uses.



            3.   Restoration of area.  Where a wireless
communications tower or facility is removed by an owner, said owner, at no
expense to the city, shall restore the area to as good a condition as prior
to the placement of the tower or facility, unless otherwise instructed by the
city.



            4.   Surety or letter of credit for removal. 
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a surety or letter of credit
shall be submitted by the property owners or tower operators to ensure the
removal of abandoned wireless communications towers. The surety or letter of
credit shall be utilized to cover the cost of removal and disposal of
abandoned towers and shall consist of the following:



               a.   Submission of an estimate from a
certified structural engineer indicating the cost to remove and dispose of
the tower; and



               b.   Either a surety or a letter of credit,
equivalent to 100% of the estimated cost to remove and dispose of the tower.
The form of the surety or the letter of credit shall be subject to approval
by the Zoning Administrator and the City Attorney.



         (h)   FCC emissions standards.  At all times, owners
and/or operators of wireless communications facilities shall comply with the
radio frequency emissions standards of the Federal Communications Commission.



            1.   Testing required.  All existing and future
wireless communications facilities shall be tested in accordance with
applicable laws and regulations. Such testing, to the extent it is required,
shall comply with standards and procedures prescribed by the Federal
Communications Commission.



            2.   Inspections.  The city reserves the right to
conduct random radio frequency emissions inspections. The cost for such
random inspections shall be paid from the wireless communications annual
registration fees, unless an owner and/or operator is found to be in
noncompliance with Federal Communications Commission RF emissions standards,
whereupon the noncompliant owner and/or operator shall reimburse the city in
full for the cost of the inspection.



         (i)   Maintenance.  All wireless communications
facilities, wireless communications towers and antenna support structures
shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and
repair, and, maintained in stealth condition (if stealth or camouflage is a
permit requirement). The same shall not menace or endanger the life or
property of any person, and shall retain original characteristics. All
maintenance or construction on a wireless communications tower, wireless
communications facility or antenna support structure shall be performed by
licensed maintenance and construction personnel. The city shall notify a
provider in writing regarding any specific maintenance required under this
division. A provider shall make all necessary repairs within 30 days of such
notification. Failure to effect noticed repairs within 30 days may result in
revocation of a tower owner’s or provider’s permit and/or removal of the
tower, wireless communications facility or antenna support structure.



         (j)   Emergency.  The city reserves the right to enter
upon and disconnect, dismantle or otherwise remove any wireless
communications tower or wireless communications facility should the same
become an immediate hazard to the safety of persons or property due to
emergency circumstances, as determined by the Zoning Administrator or his
designee, such as natural or manmade disasters or accidents, when the owner
of any such tower or facility is not available to immediately remedy the
hazard. The city shall notify any said owner of any such action within 24
hours. The owner and/or operator shall reimburse the city for the costs
incurred by the city for action taken pursuant to this subsection.



         (k)   Equipment cabinets.  Equipment cabinets located
on the ground shall be constructed out of non-reflective materials and shall
be screened from sight by mature landscaping and located or designed to
minimize their visibility. All equipment cabinets shall be no taller than ten
feet in height, measured from the original grade at the base of the facility
to the top of the structure, and occupy no more than 400 square feet in area,
unless a waiver is granted by the city upon written request from a provider.



         (l)   Equipment on site.  No mobile or immobile
equipment or materials of any nature shall be stored or parked on the site of
a wireless communications tower or wireless communications facility, unless
used in direct support of a wireless communications tower or wireless
communications facility or for repairs to the wireless communications tower
or wireless communications facility currently underway.



         (m)   Inspections.  The city reserves the right upon
reasonable notice to the owner/operator of a wireless communications tower or
antenna support structure, including utility poles and rooftops, to conduct
inspections for the purpose of determining whether the tower or other support
structure and/or related equipment cabinet complies with the State Building
Code and all applicable requirements and standards set forth in local, state
or federal law and to conduct radiation measurements to determine whether all
antenna and transmitting equipment are operating within Federal
Communications Commission requirements.



         (n)   Security.



            1.   An owner/operator of a wireless
communications tower shall provide a security fence or equally effective
barrier around the tower base or along the perimeter of the wireless
communications tower compound.



            2.   If high voltage is necessary for the
operation of the wireless communications tower or antenna support structure,
“HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER” warnings signs shall be permanently attached to
the fence or barrier and shall be spaced no more than 20 feet apart, or on
each fence or barrier frontage.



            3.   “NO TRESPASSING” warning signs shall be
permanently attached to the fence or barrier and shall be spaced no more than
20 feet apart.



            4.   The letters for the “HIGH VOLTAGE -
DANGER” and “NO TRESPASSING” warning signs shall be at least six inches
in height. The two warning signs may be combined into one sign. The warning
signs shall be installed at least 4.5 feet above the finished grade of the
fence or barrier.



         (o)   Advances in technology.  All providers shall use
and apply any readily available advances in technology that lessen the
negative aesthetic effects of wireless communications facilities and wireless
communications towers to the residential communities within the city. Every
five years, the city may review existing structures and compare the visual
impact with available technologies in the industry for the purpose of
removal, relocation or alteration of these structures in keeping with the
general intent of this division. Such removal, relocation or alteration may
be required by the city pursuant to its zoning power and authority.



      (17)   Review of applications.  The city shall process all
applications for wireless communications towers and wireless communications
facilities in a timely manner and in accordance with established procedures.
The reason for the denial of any application filed in accordance with this
provision shall be set forth in writing, and shall be supported by
substantial evidence in a written record.



      (18)   Appeals.  At any time within 30 days after a written
order, requirement, determination or final decision has been made by the
Zoning Administrator or other official in interpreting or applying this
division, except for actions taken in connection with prosecutions for
violations thereof, the applicant or any other person affected by such action
may appeal the decision in accordance with the provisions of the land use and
development regulations.



      (19)   Revocation.  A material breach of any terms and
conditions of a permit issued for a wireless communications tower or wireless
communications facility under this division and the land use and development
regulations may result in the revocation by the city of the right to operate,
utilize or maintain the particular tower or wireless communications facility
within the city following written notification of the violation to the owner
or operator, and after failure to cure or otherwise correct said violation
within 30 days. A violation of this division shall be subject to enforcement
in accordance with the land use and development regulations. Penalties for a
violation of a permit or this division may include fines and removal of the
wireless communications tower or wireless communications facility at the
owner’s expense.



(Ord. 1424, passed 12-11-00)



   (P)   Sign regulations.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of this division is to allow
effective signage appropriate to the character of each zoning district, to
promote an attractive environment by minimizing visual clutter and confusion,
to minimize adverse impacts on nearby property and protect the public health,
safety and general welfare.



      (2)   Application.  The sign regulations set forth in this
division shall apply to all structures and all land uses, except as otherwise
prohibited by this article. All signs allowed by this division shall be
limited to on-premise signs.



      (3)   Permits.



         (a)   Permit required.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to erect, build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix,
structurally alter, or relocate any sign within the city without having first
obtained a permit from the city unless herein excluded.



         (b)   Application for sign permit.  An application for
a sign permit shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on the approved
form and shall be accompanied by such information as may be required to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this division, including but not
limited to, the following:



            1.   A drawing showing the proposed location of
the sign for which the permit is being requested and the location of all
existing signage on the premises.



            2.   A drawing indicating the size, color, content
and materials of the sign, as well as the method of construction and
attachment to the building or to the ground.



            3.   Engineering data showing the structure is
designed to accommodate dead load and wind pressure, in any direction, in the
amount required within this division, when specifically requested by the
Zoning Administrator.



         (c)   Application fee.  Fees for all sign permits shall
be established by resolution of the City Council.



         (d)   Issuance of permit.  Upon the filing of a
completed application for a sign permit, the Zoning Administrator shall
examine all accompanying drawing and supplemental data to determine
compliance with the requirements of this division. Upon approval, the sign
permit shall remain valid for a period of one year. If no work has commenced
within such time period, a new permit shall be required even if no changes
have been made to the original site plan.



         (e)   Exemptions.  The following changes shall not
require a sign permit. These exceptions shall not be construed as relieving
the owner of the sign from the responsibility for its proper erection and
maintenance and its compliance with the provisions of this article or any
other law or ordinance regulating the same.



            1.   The changing of the advertising copy or
message of a painted or printed sign. Except for theater marquees and
changeable copy signs specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy,
electric signs shall not be included in this exception.



            2.   Painting, repainting or cleaning of an
advertising structure or the changing of the advertising copy or message
thereon, unless a structural change is made.



      (4)   General sign standards.



         (a)   Construction requirements.  All signs shall be
constructed and maintained in such a manner so as to present a professional
appearance and maintained in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Uniform Building and Electrical Codes. The site on which the sign is
constructed shall utilize existing finished grade, and shall not be raised,
bermed, or otherwise elevated above surrounding grade to achieve a greater
height than allowed by this article.



         (b)   Maintenance.  All signs, including temporary
signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall
be kept in good repair and in proper state of preservation. The display
surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted. Every sign and
the immediate surrounding premises shall be maintained by the owner or person
in charge thereof in a safe, clean, sanitary, and inoffensive condition, and
free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds.



         (c)   Inspection.  All signs for which a permit is
required shall be subject to inspection by the Zoning Administrator. The
Zoning Administrator, or any other official of the municipality who may be
appointed by him is hereby authorized to enter upon any property or premises
to ascertain whether the provisions of this division are being obeyed.



      (5)   Exempt signs.  In all districts, the provisions of this
section shall not apply to the following signs:



         (a)   Signs of any governmental unit designed for
regulatory and safety purposes;



         (b)   Memorial plaques, cornerstones and historical
tablets;



         (c)   Political signs regulated per state statute;



         (d)   Direction signs not more than two in number
identifying the location and nature of a building, structure, or use which is
not readily visible from the street, serving such building, structure, or use
on lands forming part of the site of such buildings, structure, or uses,
provided that each such sign is not more than ten square feet in total area;



         (e)   Signs not exceeding nine square feet in area
located upon private property and directed toward the prevention of
trespassing;



         (f)   Window signage that does not exceed 25% of the
total area of the window on or in which it is displayed;



         (g)   Temporary signs pertaining to drives or events of
charitable, educational or religious organizations, and governmental signs
used for the promotion of citywide functions and/or events, provided that
such signs shall not be erected or posted for a period of more than 14 days
prior to the date of the event and shall be removed within three days
thereafter;



         (h)   Flags or emblems of political, civic,
philanthropic, educational or religious organizations;



         (i)   In residential districts, one temporary on-site,
freestanding real estate sign advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the
lot or premises upon which such sign is situated, provided the sign does not
exceed six feet in height and 15 square feet in area.  On corner lots, a
second such sign may be located on the property if said sign abuts a second
street right-of-way.  No such temporary on-site sign shall remain seven days
past the date of termination of such offering.



         (j)   In commercial or industrial districts, one
temporary on-site, freestanding real estate sign advertising the sale, lease,
or rental of the lot or premises upon which such sign is situated, provided
the sign does not exceed six feet in height and 32 square feet in area. On
corner lots, a second such sign may be located on the property if said sign
abuts a second street right-of-way. No such temporary on-site sign shall
remain seven days past the date of termination of such offering.



         (k)   One on-site temporary sign advertising a group of
lots for sale within a subdivision or a group of homes for sale within a
project along each street frontage which bounds such subdivision or project,
provided that the total area of such sign shall not exceed the greater of 64
square feet with no single dimension in excess of 16 feet or eight square
feet per lot or house for sale.  No such on-site temporary sign shall remain
past the sate of sale of the last lot within the subdivision or the last
house within the housing project.



         (l)   Temporary on-site signs indicating the name and
nature of a construction or demolition project, plus the names of the
contractors, subcontractors and professional advisors, provided the combined
area of such signs fronting upon each street which abounds such project shall
not exceed a ratio of two square feet of sign area for each 1,000 square feet
of lot area.  In no case shall the combined area of such signs fronting upon
each street exceed the greater of 64 square feet with no single dimension in
excess of 16 or eight square feet per house or lot on which such construction
or demolition is located.  The display of such sign shall be limited to a
period not to exceed the duration of the said construction or demolition
project, at which time such signs shall be removed.



         (m)   One wall sign per dwelling for permitted home
occupations not to exceed two square feet per surface and limited to one
surface.



         (n)   Time and temperature signs not to exceed 20 square
feet per sign and one sign per side of building.



         (o)   In commercial or industrial districts, one
temporary on-site banner or pennant advertising the sale of the lot or
premises on which such a banner or pennant is situated, or one temporary
on-site banner or pennant advertising the lease or rental of a tenant space,
provided that the banner or pennant shall not exceed 48 square feet in area
when advertising the sale of the lot or premises, and 32 square feet in area
when advertising the lease or rental of a tenant space. No such banner or
pennant shall remain past the date of the offering.



      (6)   Prohibited signs.  Signs that are not specifically
permitted in this division are hereby prohibited in all districts unless
criteria is presented to allow the Planning Commission to deem that the sign
design preserves and maintains the community’s unique historical and
cultural elements. Without restricting or limiting the generality of the
provisions of the foregoing, the following signs are specifically prohibited:



         (a)   A balcony sign and a sign mounted or supported on
a balcony.



         (b)   Any sign that obstructs any part of a doorway or
fire escape.



         (c)   Any sign which, because of its position, movement,
shape, illumination or color constitutes a traffic hazard because it
obstructs free and clear vision, or interrupts, confuses or misleads traffic.



         (d)   A private sign containing words or symbols, which
might reasonably be construed as traffic controls.



         (e)   An animated or rotating sign, except barber poles
and signs displaying time and temperature information only in the animated or
rotating portion thereof.



         (f)   A flashing sign, including indoor flashing,
electrical signs visible from the public right- of-way, other than time and
temperature signs limited to such time and temperature information.



         (g)   A sign or graphics painted directly on any
exterior surface of a building or structure. However, sign letters and
symbols may be attached directly to an exterior surface by adhesive or
mechanical means.



         (h)   Any roof sign, unless attached to mansard roof or
similar decorative style roof that is vertical in nature.



         (i)   A projecting sign which either extends more than
18 inches from the building or structure to which it is attached, or which is
larger than three feet in vertical height, other than canopy or marquee signs.



         (j)   Any sign that does not display the name of the
manufacturer or maker permanently attached to, or painted or printed on, the
exterior or structural supports of the sign.



         (k)   Any sign that is erected, placed or maintained by
any person on a rock, fence, or trees.



         (l)   Any sign that interferes with any electric light,
or power, telephone, telecommunications, or telegraph wires, or the supports
thereof.



         (m)   Any sign containing electrical wiring which does
not conform to the Electrical Code or the components thereof do not bear the
label of an approved testing agency.



         (n)   Any window sign or signs which exceed 25% of the
total area of the window on or in which it is displayed.



         (o)   Portable signage, excluding sandwich board signs.



         (p)   Temporary signage stuck into the ground, excluding
political signs regulated per state statute, professional real estate signs,
garage sale signs, and any listed in division (P)(5).



         (q)   Variable electronic message signs.



      (7)   Temporary signs.  The following standards shall apply
to temporary signs in all zoning districts:



         (a)   Each temporary sign, with the exception of
sandwich board signs, shall require a sign permit from the City of Columbia
Heights.



         (b)   No more than four temporary sign permits may be
issued per business per calendar year.



         (c)   No more than two temporary signs shall be
displayed per business at any given time.  When two temporary signs are
displayed, each sign shall require a permit and each sign will count toward
the allotment of temporary signage permitted per business per calendar year.
If the business is located within a shopping center, nor more than four
temporary signs may be displayed throughout the shopping center at any given
time.



         (d)   Any sign not considered permanent shall be
considered temporary.



         (e)   Temporary signage may not be used as permanent
wall signage for the business.



         (f)   Temporary signs or pennants shall not exceed 32
square feet in area for businesses located in the CBD, Central Business
District, and shall not exceed 48 square feet in area throughout the
remainder of the city and shall be directly and fully attached to the wall of
the building.



         (g)   Each temporary sign shall be limited to a 30-day
display period per permit.



         (h)   Grand opening signs.



            1.   Each new business is permitted one grand
opening sign, at the time when the new business is established in the city.



            2.   Grand opening signs do not require a permit.



            3.   The signs do not count against the total
number of temporary signs allowed per property per calendar year.



            4.   Grand opening signs are allowed for no more
than 60 consecutive days.



            5.   Grand opening signs must display a message
consistent with the promotion of the grand opening on the new business.



            6.   Grand opening signs shall be no greater than
50 square feet in area.



            7.   The signs must meet all other applicable
regulations for temporary signage in the city pertaining to placement on the
property, maintenance, and the like.



         (i)   No temporary sign shall extend over or into any
street, alley, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare, and may not cover more
than 25% of window area such that 75% of the total window area is kept clear
at all times.



         (j)   No temporary sign shall be erected so as to
prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape, nor
shall such sign be attached to any standpipe or fire escape.



         (k)   Unauthorized use of temporary signage shall be
subject to the other sanctions as provided herein.



         (l)   Sandwich board signs.



            1.   Permitted in the LB, Limited Business, GB,
General Business, and CBD, Central Business District only.



            2.   One sandwich board sign is permitted per
business.



            3.   Sandwich board signs are limited to eight
square feet in area per side.



            4.   Sandwich board signs are limited to five feet
in height.



            5.   The sign shall be professionally painted and
maintained in a neat and readable manner.



            6.   Signs shall be placed on private property
only, and shall be set back at least five feet from all property lines.



            7.   Signs shall not obstruct vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or visibility and shall not create a safety hazard.



            8.   Signs shall not be lighted and shall not
utilize noise amplifiers.



            9.   In the CBD, Central Business District only,
sandwich board signs may be placed on public sidewalks, directly in front of
the business being advertised.



      (8)   Dynamic LED signage.



         (a)   Regulations.  Dynamic LED signage is allowed as a
conditional use in those zoning districts specified in this code.  All
dynamic LED signage is subject to the following conditions:



            1.   Dynamic LED signs are allowed only on
monument signs for conditionally permitted uses in all zoning districts, with
the exception of the PO, Public District, in which LED signage may be
utilized in existing pylon signs.  Motor fuel stations may display dynamic
LED signs as part of the pylon sign to promote motor fuel prices only.  Such
motor fuel price signs do not require a conditional use permit.  All dynamic
LED signs may occupy no more than 60% of the actual copy and graphic area. 
The remainder of the sign must not have the capability to have dynamic LED
signs, even if not used.  Only one, contiguous dynamic display area is
allowed on a sign face.



            2.   A dynamic LED sign may not change or move
more often than once every ten seconds for commercial, industrial uses, or
public uses, and no more than once every ten minutes for religious and/or
educational institution uses, except one for which changes are necessary to
correct hour-and-minute, date, or temperature information.



            3.   A display of time, date or temperature
information may change as frequently as once every five seconds, however
information displayed not relating to the date, time or temperature must not
change or move more often than once every ten seconds for commercial,
industrial uses, or public uses, and no more than once every ten minutes for
religious and/or educational institution uses.



            4.   The images and messages displayed must be
static, and the transition from one state display to another must be
instantaneous without any special effects. Motion, animation and video images
are prohibited on dynamic LED sign displays.



            5.   The images and messages displayed must be
complete in themselves, without continuation in content to the next image or
message or to any other sign.



            6.   Dynamic LED signs must be designed and
equipped to freeze the device in one position if a malfunction shall occur.
The displays must also be equipped with a means to immediately discontinue
the display if it malfunctions, and the sign owner must immediately stop the
dynamic display when notified by the city that it is not complying with the
standards of this section.



            7.   Dynamic LED signs may not exceed a maximum
illumination of 5,000 nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours
and a maximum illumination of 500 nits (candelas per square meter) between
dusk to dawn as measured from the sign's face at maximum brightness. 
Dynamic LED signs must have an automatic dimmer control to produce a distinct
illumination change from a higher illumination level to a lower level for the
time period between one-half hour before sunset and one half-hour after
sunrise.



            8.   Dynamic LED signs existing on the effective
date of Ordinance 1593, passed April 25, 2011, must comply with the
operational standards listed above. An existing dynamic LED sign that does
not meet the structural requirements may continue as a non-conforming sign
subject to § 9.105(E).



      (9)   Signs in Residential Districts R-1, R-2A and R-2B.



         (a)   Permitted signs.  In the R-1, Single-Family
Residential District, and the R-2, Two- Family Residential District, the
following signs shall be permitted:



            1.   One identification sign per dwelling unit not
to exceed two square foot per surface, and limited to one surface attached
directly to the structure.



            2.   One wall or ground sign for each conditional
use other than the residential use, not to exceed 16 square feet per surface,
and limited to two surfaces.



            3.   One  institutional sign not to exceed 40
square feet per surface, limited to two surfaces, and set back a minimum of
ten feet from any property line.



            4.   In case of multiple structures on one parcel,
a second institutional sign may be installed provided there is a minimum
distance of 75 feet between the two sign structures.



         (b)   Restrictions on permitted signs.  Permitted signs
in the R-1, Single-Family Residential, and R-2A and R-2B, Two-Family
Residential Districts are subject to the following restrictions:



            1.   The maximum height of a sign, including its
structures, shall not exceed eight feet above the grade at street level or at
the base of the sign, whichever is greater.



            2.   No animated sign shall be permitted.



            3.   All illuminated signs shall be shielded in
such a way as to protect the rights of adjacent property owners from nuisance.



            4.   The sign number and area permitted by this
division are considered maximums. These maximums, or any portions thereof
which are not utilized by the owner, occupant or user of property are
non-transferable to any other property owned by such persons, or to any other
owner, occupant or user of property in the same or other districts.



         (c)   Conditional use signs. In the R-1, R-2A and R-2B
Districts, the following signs shall require a conditional use permit:



            1.   A dynamic LED sign used in conjunction with a
religious institution.



            2.   A dynamic LED sign used in conjunction with
an educational institution.



         (d)   Restrictions on conditional use signs. Signs
requiring a conditional use permit in the R-1, Single-Family Residential, and
R-2A and R-2B, Two-Family Residential Districts are subject to the following
restrictions:



            1.   All signage must be approved through the
conditional use permit process as outlined in § 9.104(H) above.



            2.   All signage must meet the requirements for
dynamic LED signs as outlined in division (P)(8) above.



            3.   A dynamic LED sign may change its message
with a frequency of no less than one message for each ten minutes of display
time.



      (10)   Signs in Residential Districts R-3 and R-4.



         (a)   Permitted signs.  In the R-3, Limited
Multiple-Family Residential District, and the R-4, Multiple-Family
Residential District, the following signs shall be permitted:



            1.   One identification sign per dwelling unit not
to exceed two square feet per surface, limited to one surface, and attached
directly to the structure for each single- and two-family residence.



            2.   One area identification sign per lot line
facing a public street not to exceed 16 square feet per surface and limited
to two surfaces, for each multiple dwelling.



            3.   One institutional sign not to exceed 40
square feet per surface, limited to two surfaces, and set back a minimum of
ten feet from any property line.



            4.   In case of multiple structures on one parcel,
a second institutional sign may be installed provided there is a minimum
distance of 75 feet between the two sign structures.



         (b)   Restrictions on permitted signs.  Permitted signs
in the R-3, Limited Multiple-Family Residential, and R-4, Multiple-Family
Residential Districts are subject to the following restrictions:



            1.   The maximum height of a sign, including its
structures, shall not exceed eight feet above the grade at street level or at
the base of the sign, whichever is greater.



            2.   No animated signs shall be permitted.



            3.   All illuminated signs shall be shielded in
such a way as to protect the rights of adjacent property owners from nuisance.



            4.   The sign number and area permitted by this
division are considered maximums. These maximums, or any portions thereof
which are not utilized by the owner, occupant or user of property are
non-transferable to any other property owned, occupied or used by such
persons, or to any other persons, or to any other owners, occupant or user of
property in the same or other districts.



         (c)    Conditional use signs. In the R-3 and R-4
Districts, the following signs shall require a conditional use permit:



            1.   A dynamic LED sign used in conjunction with a
religious institution.



            2.   A dynamic LED sign used in conjunction with
an educational institution.



         (d)   Restrictions on conditional use signs. Signs
requiring a conditional use permit in the R-3, Limited Multiple-Family
Residential, and R-4, Multiple-Family Residential Districts are subject to
the following restrictions:



            1.   All signage must be approved through the
conditional use permit process as outlined in § 9.104(H) above.



            2.   All signage must meet the requirements for
dynamic LED signs as outlined in division (P)(8) above.



            3.   Dynamic LED signs may change its message with
a frequency of no less than one message for each ten minutes of display time.



      (11)   Signs in LB, Limited Business District.



         (a)   Permitted signs.  In the LB, Limited Business
District, the following signs shall be permitted:



            1.   Any number of wall signs on any side of a
building not to exceed 50 square feet of total surface area for all sign
surfaces and limited to one surface per sign. Provided, however, that if a
parcel of land on which a building is located directly abuts residentially
zoned land, no wall sign may be located on the side of the building that
faces the abutting residential parcel.



            2.   One freestanding pylon sign only if the
building or structure is located adjacent to a state trunk highway and
located 20 feet or more from the front lot line, not to exceed 40 square feet
per surface, and limited to two surfaces.



            3.   If not located adjacent to a state trunk
highway and/or where the 20-foot setback cannot be met, one monument sign not
to exceed 40 square feet in size, limited to two sides, not to exceed 8 feet
in height, and set a minimum of 5 feet from any property line.



            4.   Any pylon or monument sign must be a minimum
of five feet from any building or structure on the same lot.



            5.   One wall sign on each side of the building
which faces a public alley, not to exceed four square feet per surface and
limited to one surface per sign.



            6.   One area identification sign for each
shopping center not to exceed 50 square feet per surface, and limited to four
surfaces, in addition to one wall sign for each primary use business not to
exceed 50 square feet per surface, limited to one surface.



            7.   One identification sign for each use other
than primary use not to exceed two square, feet per surface, and limited to
one surface.



            8.   One wall sign per building with an area of
the lesser of 20 square feet or 1/2 square foot for each front foot of a
building or structure provided that the said sign is located on the same side
of the building as an entrance approved by the City Building Official as a
public entrance and provided that the said public entrance and sign faces a
parking facility designated by the city as approved public parking.



         (b)   Restrictions on permitted signs.  Permitted signs
in the LB, Limited Business District, are subject to the following
restrictions:



            1.   Total sign area shall not exceed two square
feet for each front foot of the building or structure. In the case of
multiple occupancy, the wall surface for each tenant, user or owner shall
include only the surface area on the exterior facade of the premises occupied
by such tenant, user or owner.



            2.   The maximum height of a pylon sign including
its structure shall not exceed 20 feet above grade at street level or at the
base of the sign, whichever is greater. The maximum height of a monument sign
including its structure shall not exceed 8 feet above grade at street level
or at the base of the sign, whichever is greater.



            3.   The sign number and area permitted by this
section are considered maximums. These maximums, or any portion thereof,
which are not utilized by the owner, occupant or user of property are
non-transferable to any other property owned, occupied or used by such
persons, or to any other owner, occupant or user of property in the same or
other districts.



         (c)    Conditional use signs. In the LB District, the
following signs shall require a conditional use permit:



            1.   A dynamic LED sign used in conjunction with a
commercial business.



            2.   A dynamic LED sign used in conjunction with a
religious institution.



            3.   A dynamic LED sign used in conjunction with
an educational institution.



         (d)   Restrictions on conditional use signs. Signs
requiring a conditional use permit in the LB, Limited Business District, are
subject to the following restrictions:



            1.   All signage must be approved through the
conditional use permit process as outlined in § 9.104(H) above.



            2.   All signage must meet the requirements for
dynamic LED signs as outlined in division (P)(8) above.



            3.   Dynamic LED signs may change its message with
a frequency of no less than one message for each 10 seconds of display time
for commercial businesses.



            4.   Dynamic LED signs may change its message with
a frequency of no less than one message for each ten minutes of display time
for religious or educational institutions.



      (12)   Signs in CBD, Central Business District.



         (a)   Permitted signs.  In the CBD, Central Business
District, the following signs shall be permitted:



            1.   Any number of wall signs on any side of a
building not to exceed 100 square feet of total surface area for all wall
sign surfaces and limited to one surface per sign. Provided, however, that if
a parcel of land on which a building is located directly abuts residentially
zoned land, no wall sign may be located on the side of the building that
faces abutting residential parcel.



            2.   One monument sign not to exceed 50 square
feet in size, limited to two sides, not to exceed ten feet in height, and set
a minimum of five feet from any property line.



            3.   Any monument sign must be a minimum of five
feet from any building or structure on the same lot.



            4.   One wall sign on each side of the building
that faces a public alley, not to exceed four square feet per surface and
limited to one surface per sign.



            5.   One area identification sign for each
shopping center not to exceed 100 square feet per surface, and limited to
four surfaces; one wall sign for each primary use business, not to exceed 100
square feet per surface and limited to one surface.



            6.   One identification sign for each user other
than the primary use, not to exceed two square feet per surface, and limited
to one surface.



            7.   One wall sign per building with an area of
the lesser of 20 square feet or one-half square foot for each front foot of a
building or structure provided that the said sign is located on the same side
of the building as an entrance approved by the City Building Official as a
public entrance and provided that the said public entrance and sign faces a
parking facility designated by the city as approved public parking.



         (b)   Restrictions on permitted signs.  Permitted signs
in the CBD, Central Business District, are subject to the following
restrictions:



            1.   Total sign area shall not exceed two square
feet for each front foot of building or structure. In the case of multiple
occupancy, the wall surface for each tenant, user or owner shall include only
the surface area on the exterior facade of the premises occupied by such
tenant, user or owner.



            2.   The maximum height of a monument sign,
including its structures, shall not exceed eight feet above grade at street
level or at the base of the sign, whichever is greater.



            3.   The sign number and area permitted by this
division are considered maximums. These maximums, or any portion thereof,
which are not utilized by the owner, occupant or user of property are
non-transferable to any other property owned, occupied or used by such
persons or any other owner, occupant or user of property in the same or other
districts.



         (c)   Conditional use signs. In the CBD District, the
following signs shall require a conditional use permit: dynamic LED signage.



         (d)   Restrictions on conditional use signs. Signs
requiring a conditional use permit in the CBD, Central Business District, are
subject to the following restrictions:



            1.   All signage must be approved through the
conditional use permit process as outlined in § 9.104(H) above.



            2.   All signage must meet the requirements for
dynamic LED signs as outlined in division (P)(8) above.



            3.   Dynamic LED signs may change its message with
a frequency of no less than one message for each ten seconds of display time.



      (13)   Signs in the GB, General Business District.



         (a)   Permitted signs.  In the GB, General Business
District, the following signs shall be permitted:



            1.   Any number of walls signs on any side of a
building not to exceed 200 square feet of total surface area for all wall
sign surfaces and limited to one surface per sign. Provided, however, that if
a parcel of land on which a building is located directly abuts residentially
zoned land, no wall sign may be located on the side of the building that
faces the abutting residential parcel.



            2.   One freestanding pylon sign only if the
building or structure is located adjacent to a state trunk highway and
located 20 feet or more from the front lot line, not to exceed 75 square feet
per surface and limited to two surfaces. Provided, however, that:



               a.   If the building contains more than
80,000 square feet of gross floor area or the site on which the building is
located contains more than 90,000 square feet of surface area;



               b.   If the street frontage of the site on
which the building or structure is located exceeds 150 feet in length; and



               c.   If the building is located 20 feet or
more from the front lot line and is located adjacent to a state trunk
highway, a second freestanding sign not to exceed 75 square feet and limited
to two surfaces shall be permitted at a location at least 50 feet distant
from any other freestanding sign and at least 25 feet distant from the lot
line of any adjoining parcel of and other than a street or alley.



            3.   If not located adjacent to a state trunk
highway where the 20-foot building setback cannot be met, one monument sign
not to exceed 50 square feet in size, limited to two sides, not to exceed ten
feet in height, and setback a minimum of five feet from any property line.



            4.   Any pylon or monument sign must be a minimum
of five feet from any building or structure on the same lot.



            5.   One wall sign on each side of the building
that faces a public alley, not to exceed four square feet per surface and
limited to one surface per sign.



            6.   One area identification sign for each
shopping center, not to exceed 100 square feet per surface, limited to four
surfaces, in addition to one wall sign for each primary use business, not to
exceed 100 square feet per surface, limited to one surface.



            7.   One identification sign for each use other
than primary use, not to exceed two square feet per surface, and limited to
one surface.



            8.   One wall sign per building with an area of
the lesser of 20 square feet or 1/2 square foot for each front foot of a
building or structure provided that the said sign is located on the same side
of the building as an entrance approved by the City Building Official as a
public entrance and provided that the said public entrance and sign faces a
parking facility designated by the city as approved public parking.



         (b)   Restrictions on permitted signs.  Permitted signs
in the GB, General Business District, are subject to the following
restrictions:



            1.   Total signage shall not exceed two square
feet for each front foot of building or structure. In the case of multiple
occupancy, the wall surface for each tenant, user or owner shall include only
the surface area on the exterior facade of the premises occupied by such
tenant, user or owner.



            2.   The maximum height of a sign, including its
structures, shall include only the surface area on the exterior façade of
the premises occupied by such tenant, user or owner.



            3.   The maximum height of a pylon sign, including
its structures, shall not exceed 25 feet above the grade at street level or
at the base of the sign, whichever is greater. The maximum height of a
monument sign, including its structures, shall not exceed eight feet above
grade at street level or at the base of the sign, whichever is greater,
unless the monument sign is located in the Design Overlay Highway District.
In this case, the maximum height may be increased to ten feet above grade at
street level or at the base of the sign, whichever is greater, if the
principal structure is greater than or equal to 22 feet in height.



            4.   The sign number and area permitted by this
section are considered maximum. These maximums, or any portion thereof, which
hare not utilized by the owner, occupant or user of property are
non-transferable to any other property owned, occupied or used by such
persons or to any other owner, occupant or user of property in the same or
other districts.



         (c)   Conditional use permits. In the GB District, the
following signs shall require a conditional use permit: dynamic LED signage.



         (d)   Restrictions on conditional use signs. Signs
requiring a conditional use permit in the GB, General Business District, are
subject to the following restrictions:



            1.   All signage must be approved through the
conditional use permit process as outlined in § 9.104(H) above.



            2.   All signage must meet the requirements for
dynamic LED signs as outlined in division (P)(8) above.



            3.   Dynamic LED signs may change its message with
a frequency of no less than one message for each ten seconds of display time.



      (14)   Signs in I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts.



         (a)   Permitted signs.  In the 1-1, Light Industrial
District, and the I-2, General Industrial District, the following signs shall
be permitted:



            1.   Any number of wall signs on any side of a
building to exceed 100 square feet of total surface area for all wall sign
surfaces and limited to one surface per sign. Provided, however, that if a
parcel of land on which a building is located directly abuts residentially
zoned land, no wall sign may be located on the side of building that faces
abutting residential parcels.



            2.   One freestanding pylon sign only if the
building or structure is located 20 feet or more from the front lot line, not
to exceed 100 square feet per surface, and limited to two surfaces. Where the
20-foot setback cannot be met, one monument sign not exceed 50 square feet in
size, limited to two sides, not to exceed 10 feet in height, and set a
minimum of 5 feet from any building or structure on the same lot.



            3.   Any pylon or monument sign must be a minimum
of five feet from any building or structure on the same lot.



            4.   One identification sign for each use other
than primary use, not to exceed two square feet per surface and limited to
one sign.



            5.   Billboards located adjacent to public streets
with speed limits of 45 miles per hour or more, placed at a minimum of
1,500-foot intervals, not to exceed 100 square feet per surface and limited
to two surfaces.



         (b)   Restrictions on permitted signs.  Permitted signs
in the I-1, Light Industrial District, and the I-2, General Industrial
District, are subject to the following restrictions:



            1.   Total sign area shall not exceed two square
feet for each front foot of building or structure. In the case of multiple
occupancy, the wall surface for each tenant, user or owner shall include only
the surface area on the exterior facade of the premises occupied by such
tenant, user or owner.



            2.   The maximum height of a sign including its
structures shall not exceed 25 feet above the grade at street level or at the
base of the sign, whichever is greater. The maximum height of a monument
sign, including its structures, shall not exceed 10 feet above grade at
street level or at the base of the sign, whichever is greater.



            3.   The sign number and area permitted by this
division are considered maximums. These maximums, or any portion thereof,
which are not utilized by the owner, occupant or user of property are
non-transferable to any other property owned, occupied or used by such person
or to any other owner, occupant or user of property located in the same or
other districts.



         (c)   Conditional use signs.In the I-1 and I-2
Industrial Districts, the following signs shall require a conditional use
permit: dynamic LED signage.



         (d)   Restrictions on conditional use signs. Signs
requiring a conditional use permit in the I-1, Light Industrial District, and
the I-2, General Industrial District, are subject to the following
restrictions:



            1.   All signage must be approved through the
conditional use permit process as outlined in § 9.104(H) above.



            2.   All signage must meet the requirements for
dynamic LED signs as outlined in division (P)(8) above.



            3.   Dynamic LED signs may change its message with
a frequency of no less than one message for each ten seconds of display time.



      (15)   Signs in the PO, Public and Open Space District.



         (a)   Permitted signs. In the PO, Public and Open Space
District, the following signs shall be permitted:



            1.   Any number of wall signs on any side of a
building not to exceed 200 square feet of total surface area for all wall
sign surfaces and limited to one surface per sign. Provided, however, that if
a parcel of land on which a building is located directly abuts a
residentially zoned land, no wall sign may be located on the side of the
building that faces the abutting residential parcel.



            2.   One monument sign per street frontage for
those public facility parcels that include governmental offices. Such signs
shall not exceed 50 square feet in area, and shall be located no closer than
five feet from any property line.



            3.   Any number of freestanding identification
signage used to promote the name of a public city, regional or state park. 
Such signs shall be no greater than 40 square feet in area, shall not exceed
ten feet in height, and shall be located no closer than five feet from any
property line.



         (b)   Restrictions on permitted signs.  Permitted signs
in the PO, Public and Open Space District are subject to the following
restrictions:



            1.   Total signage shall not exceed two square
feet for each front foot of building or structure.



            2.   The maximum height of a monument sign shall
not exceed ten feet in height.



            3.   The sign number and area permitted by this
section are considered maximum.  These maximums, or any portion thereof,
which are not utilized by the owner or user of the property are
non-transferable to any other property owned, occupied or used by such
persons or to any other owner or user of property located in the same or
other districts.



         (c)   Conditional use signs.  In the PO District, the
followings signs shall require a conditional use permit: a dynamic LED sign
used in conjunction with a governmental facility.



         (d)   Restrictions on conditional use signs.  Signs
requiring a conditional use permit in the PO, Public and Open Space District,
are subject to the following restrictions:



            1.   All signage must be approved through the
conditional use permit process as outlined in § 9.104(H) above.



            2.   All signage must meet the requirements for
dynamic LED signs as outlined in division (P)(8) above.



            3.   Dynamic LED signs may change its message with
a frequency of no less than one message for each ten minutes of display time.



      (16)   Signs for nonconforming residential uses.  Sign number
and area for residential uses in commercial, business or industrial zones are
limited to the maximum number and area for the actual use of the subject
property.



      (17)   Minimum yard requirements–freestanding signs.  The
minimum front, side and rear yard requirements for freestanding signs shall
be ten feet from any property line or as otherwise stated in this article.
When the bottom edge of the freestanding pylon sign is eight feet or more
above grade, the leading edge of the sign may extend within one foot of the
property line. Provided, however, no freestanding sign shall invade the area
required for traffic visibility by this division.



   (Q)   Erosion and sediment control.



      (1)   Purpose.



         (a)   During the construction process, soil is highly
vulnerable to erosion by wind and water. Eroded soil endangers water
resources by reducing water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic
habitat for fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates
repair of sewers and ditches and the dredging of lakes.



         (b)   As a result, the purpose of this local regulation
is to safeguard persons, protect property, and prevent damage to the
environment in the city. This division will also promote the public welfare
by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and
maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the
topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in the city. This
division is to be used in supplement to the City Zoning Code, § 9.106 and to
any other regulations as required by state agencies.



      (2)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this division, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         AS-BUILT PLANS.  Record drawings of approved and
as-constructed improvements.



         BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs).  Erosion and sediment
control and water quality management practices that are the most effective
and practicable means of controlling, preventing, and minimizing degradation
of surface water, including avoidance of impacts, construction phasing,
minimizing the length of time soil areas are exposed, prohibitions, and other
management practices published by state or designated area-wide planning
agencies.



         CLEARING.  Any activity that removes the vegetative
surface cover.



         CONSERVATION EASEMENT.  Legal land preservation agreement
between a landowner and a municipality or a qualified land protection
organization. The easement confers the transfer of usage rights from one
party to another.



         CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.  A disturbance to the land that
results in a change in the topography, or the existing soil cover (both
vegetative and non-vegetative). Examples of construction activity may include
clearing, grading, filling and excavating.



         CONTRACTOR.  The party who signs the construction
contract. Where the construction project involves more than one contractor,
the general contractor shall be the contractor that is responsible pursuant
to the obligations set forth in this division.



         DEVELOPER. The party who signs the development agreement
with the city to construct a project.



         DEWATERING.  The removal of water for construction
activity. It can be a discharge of appropriated surface or groundwater to dry
and/or solidify a construction site. Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources permits are required to be appropriated, and if contaminated, may
require other MPCA permits to be discharged.



         EROSION. The wearing away of the ground surface as a result
of movement of wind, water, ice and/or land disturbance activities.



         EROSION CONTROL.  A measure that prevents erosion,
including, but not limited to: soil stabilization practices, limited grading,
mulch, temporary or permanent cover, and construction phasing.



         EROSION CONTROL INSPECTOR.  A designated agent given
authority by the city to inspect and maintain erosion and sediment control
practices.



         FINAL GRADE.  Excavation or fill of material to final plan
elevation. Final grade completed as part of individual site development.



         FINAL STABILIZATION.  All soil disturbing activities at
the site have been completed and a uniform (evenly distributed, without large
bare areas) perennial vegetative cover, with a density of 70% of approved
vegetative cover, for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and
areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent
stabilization measures have been employed.



         GRADING.  Excavation or fill of material, including the
resulting conditions thereof.



         GRADING, DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL PERMIT.  A permit
issued by the municipality for the construction or alteration of the ground
and for the improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff,
and grading. Hereinafter referred to as GRADING PERMIT.



         GRADING, DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL PLANS.  A set of
plans prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer.
Plans are required to indicate the specific measures and sequencing to be
used to control grading, sediment and erosion on a development site during
and after construction as detailed in the "Zoning Ordinance" and City SWPPP.



         IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.  A constructed hard surface that
either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil and causes water
to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow
than prior to development. Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios,
driveways, parking lots, storage areas, and concrete, asphalt, or gravel
roads.



         LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY.  Any land change that may result
in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into or upon
waters or lands within the city’s jurisdiction, including, but not limited
to, clearing, grubbing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling.



         NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). 
The program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating,
monitoring, and enforcing permits under the Clean Water Act (Sections 301,
318, 402, and 405) and United States Code of Federal Regulations Title 33,
Sections 1317, 1328, 1342, and 1345.



         PERIMETER SEDIMENT CONTROL.  A barrier that prevents
sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting
it to a sediment trap or basin.



         PERMANENT COVER.  Final site stabilization. Examples
include turf, gravel, asphalt, and concrete.



         PHASING.  Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases,
with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the
next.



         PUBLIC WATERWAY.  Any body of water, including, but not
limited to, lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water delineated by
the city or other state or federal agency.



         PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.  A registered professional engineer
with the State of Minnesota who has received training and is given authority
by the city to review, authorize, approve, inspect, and maintain erosion and
sediment control plans and practices.



         ROUGH GRADE.  Excavation or fill of material to a
condition suitable for general maintenance.



         SEDIMENT. The product of an erosion process; solid
material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being
transported, or has been moved by water, air, or ice, and has come to rest on
the earth’s surface, either above or below water level.



         SEDIMENT CONTROL.  Measures and methods employed to
prevent sediment from leaving the site. Sediment control practices may
include, but are not limited to, silt fences, sediment traps, earth dikes,
drainage swales, check dams, subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, storm
drain inlet protection, and temporary or permanent sedimentation basins.



         SITE.  A parcel of land or a contiguous combination
thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.



         STABILIZED.  The exposed ground surface has been covered
by appropriate materials such as mulch, staked sod, riprap, wood fiber
blanket, or other material that prevents erosion from occurring. Grass
seeding is not stabilization.



         STANDARD PLATES.  General drawings having or showing
similar characteristics or qualities that are representative of a
construction practice or activity.



         START OF CONSTRUCTION.  The first land-disturbing activity
associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing,
grading, excavation and filling.



         STORM WATER.  Defined under Minn. Rules, part 7077.0105,
subp. 41(b), and includes precipitation runoff, storm water runoff, snow melt
runoff, and any other surface runoff and drainage.



         STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PROGRAM (SWPPP).  A
program for managing and reducing storm water discharge that includes erosion
prevention measures and sediment controls that, when implemented, will
decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land and decrease off-site nonpoint
pollution.



         SURFACE WATER or WATERS.  All streams, lakes, ponds,
marshes, wetlands, reservoirs, springs, rivers, drainage systems, waterways,
watercourses, and irrigation systems, whether natural or artificial, public
or private.



         TEMPORARY EROSION CONTROL.  Methods employed to prevent
erosion. Examples of temporary cover include: straw, wood fiber blanket, wood
chips, and erosion netting.



         WATERWAY.  A channel that directs surface runoff to a
watercourse or to the public storm drain.



         WATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEM.  Any channel that conveys surface
runoff throughout the site.



         WETLAND or WETLANDS.  Defined in Minn. Rules, part
7050.0130, subp. F, and includes those areas that are inundated or saturated
by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands
generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Constructed
wetlands designed for wastewater treatment are not waters of the state.



         ZONING ORDINANCE.  City code detailing city specifications
for all plan requirements.



      (3)   Permits.



         (a)   Approval.  No person shall be granted a grading
permit for land-disturbing activity that would require the uncovering or
distributing of material in excess of any of the following measurements
without the approval of a Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control, and Storm
Water Management Plan by the city.



            1.   Ten thousand square feet.



            2.   Five hundred cubic yards undeveloped land, or
50 cubic yards developed land.



            3.   Within 1,000 feet of a waterway.



         (b)   Exception.  No grading permit is required for
land disturbances under the amounts specified above, or for the following
activities:



            1.   Any emergency activity that is immediately
necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources.



            2.   General establishment of new construction
lawns, or the addition of four or fewer inches of topsoil.



            3.   Existing nursery and agricultural operations
conducted as a permitted main or accessory use.



         (c)   Application requirements. 



            1.   Each application shall bear the name(s) and
address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm
retained by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant's
principal contact at such firm.



            2.   A filing fee and security as outlined by the
city’s Zoning Ordinance and subdivision (d) below.



            3.   A Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control, and
Storm Water Management Plan meeting the requirements of this division. Each
application shall include the required number of plans and other required
materials as specified on the application form.



            4.   The application form shall include a
statement by the applicant that any land clearing, construction, or
development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the
approved Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control, and Storm Water Management
Plan.



         (d)   Security.



            1.   The permittee will be required to file with
the city an irrevocable, automatically renewing letter of credit, or other
improvement security in the amount specified by the current city SWMDS for
fee schedule.



               a.   The security shall cover all costs of
engineering and inspection, site improvements, street sweeping, repairs to
erosion control measures, and maintenance of improvements for such period as
specified by the city. Such deposit shall be provided prior to the release of
the grading permit.



               b.   Deposit shall be released after final
stabilization is complete, erosion control measures have been removed, and
their removal area inspected.



            2.   Individual lot developers shall be required
to provide a bond with a building permit application.



               a.   The security shall cover city costs for
street sweeping, installation, maintenance and repairs to erosion control
measures. The bond will be in an amount as specified by the current city
SWMDS for fee schedule.



               b.   The security shall be released after
turf is established as specified in the City Zoning Ordinance.



         (e)   Procedure.  The city will review each application
for grading permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this
regulation and other applicable requirements. The city requires complete
application no less than 15 working days in advance of the desired grading
permit date. Upon complete application, the city shall, in writing:



            1.   Approve the permit application;



            2.   Approve the permit application, subject to
such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the
objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these
conditions; or



            3.   Disapprove the permit application, indicating
the reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised application and/or
submission;



            4.   Appeals of denial of permit shall be
processed in accordance with appeal to the City Zoning Ordinance.



      (4)   Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control, and Storm Water
Management Plan requirements.



         (a)   Plan requirements.  Grading, erosion control
practices, sediment control practices, storm water management practices, and
waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the Grading,
Erosion and Sediment Control, and Storm Water Management Plan, and shall be
adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the
satisfaction of the city. No land shall be disturbed until the plan is
approved by the Public Works Director, and conforms to the standards set
forth herein.



         (b)   The Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control, and
Storm Water Management Plan shall comply with all of the NPDES general storm
water permit requirements and the city’s SWMDS for temporary erosion and
sediment control, final stabilization and permanent water quality.



      (5)   Construction requirements.  Construction
specifications, waterway and watercourse protections requirements, and
pollution prevention management measures shall comply, at a minimum, with all
of the NPDES general storm water permit requirements, in addition to the
city’s SWMDS.



      (6)   Inspection.  Notification, procedures, material
requirements, permittee inspection, authorization, and record keeping shall
comply, at a minimum, with all of the NPDES general storm water permit
requirements, in addition to the city’s SWMDS.



      (7)   Site maintenance.  Responsibilities, maintenance
requirements, and lapses regarding site maintenance shall comply, at a
minimum, with all of the NPDES general storm water permit requirements, in
addition to the city’s SWMDS.



      (8)   Final stabilization requirements.  Final stabilization
is not complete until the criteria laid out in the NPDES general storm water
permit and the city’s SWMDS are met.



      (9)   Post-construction storm water management. All
post-construction storm water management plans must be submitted to the
Public Works Director prior to the start of construction activity. Standards
for post-construction storm water management shall be as follows:



         (a)   Specifications.  At a minimum, applicants shall
comply with all of the NPDES general storm water permit requirements.



         (b)   Design criteria. Permanent storm water management
systems shall meet the design criteria as provided in the city’s SWMDS.



         (c)   Maintenance agreement. The applicant shall enter
into a maintenance agreement with the city that documents all
responsibilities for operation and maintenance of long-term storm water
treatment BMPs. Such responsibilities shall be documented in a maintenance
plan and executed through a maintenance agreement. All maintenance agreements
must be approved by the city and recorded at the County Recorder’s office
prior to final plan approval. At a minimum, the maintenance agreement shall
describe the following inspection and maintenance obligations:



            1.   The responsible party who is permanently
responsible for inspection and maintenance of the structural and
nonstructural measures.



            2.   Pass responsibilities for such maintenance to
successors in title.



            3.   Allow the city and its representatives the
right of entry for the purposes of inspecting all permanent storm water
management systems.



            4.   Allow the city the right to repair and
maintain the facility, if necessary maintenance is not performed, after
proper and reasonable notice to the responsible party of the permanent storm
water management system.



            5.   Include a maintenance plan that contains, but
is not limited to, the following:



               a.   Identification of all structural
permanent storm water management systems.



               b.   A schedule for regular inspections,
monitoring, and maintenance for each practice. Monitoring shall verify
whether the practice is functioning as designed and may include, but is not
limited to, quality, temperature, and quantity of runoff.



               c.   Identification of the responsible party
for conducting the inspection, monitoring, and maintenance for each practice.



               d.   Include a schedule and format for
reporting to the city compliance with the maintenance agreement.



            6.   The issuance of a permit constitutes a right
of entry for the city or its contractor to enter upon the construction site.
The applicant shall allow the city and its authorized representatives, upon
presentation of credentials, to:



               a.   Enter upon the permitted site for the
purpose of obtaining information, examining records, conducting
investigations or surveys.



               b.   Bring such equipment upon the permitted
development as is necessary to conduct such surveys and investigations.



               c.   Examine and copy any books, papers,
records, or memoranda pertaining to activities or records required to be kept
under the terms and conditions of the permit.



               d.   Inspect the storm water pollution
control measures.



               e.   Sample and monitor any items or
activities pertaining to storm water pollution control measures.



               f.   Correct deficiencies in storm water and
erosion and sediment control measures.



      (10)   Certification.



         (a)   Approved Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control,
and Storm Water Management Plan.  Plans for grading, stripping, excavating,
and filling work, bearing the approval of the Public Works Director, shall be
maintained at the site during the progress of the work.



         (b)   Procedure.  The city will withhold issuance of
building permits until the approved certified Grading Plan and Site
Development Plan are on file with the city, all securities as required by
this division are received, conservation posts are installed, and all erosion
control measures are in place as determined by the Public Works Director.



         (c)   As-built Grading Plan and Development Plan. 
Within 60 days after completion of site development, as per the approved
Grading, Erosion and Sediment, and Storm Water Management Plan, the developer
shall provide the city with an As-built Grading Plan and Development Plan as
defined in the City Zoning Ordinance.



         (d)   Removal of erosion control measures.  The
above-specified requirements will be authorized for removal upon the sodding
of the rear yards, completion of punch list items involving ponds and slopes,
final stabilization, completion of proper turf establishment, and placement
of the proper conservation easement posts and signs as specified. Inspection
is required after the removal of erosion control measures to verify proper
restoration. Please refer to City Zoning Ordinance for specifications.



      (11)   Enforcement.



         (a)   Notice of violation.



            1.   In the event that any work on the site does
not conform to the approved erosion and sediment control plan, or any of the
requirements listed in the provisions of this article, the Public Works
Director, or his or her designee, shall issue a written notice of violation
to the applicant, detailing the corrective actions necessary for compliance.



            2.   The applicant shall conduct the corrective
actions within the time period determined by the city and stated in the
notice.



            3.   If an imminent hazard exists, the city may
require that the corrective work begin immediately.



         (b)   Stop work order/revocation of site development
permit.



            1.   In the event that any person holding a site
development permit pursuant to this article violates the terms of the permit
or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely
affect the health, welfare, environment, or safety of persons residing or
working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in
the neighborhood, the city may suspend or revoke the site development permit
through the issuance of a stop work order, or the revocation of the site
development or building permit.



            2.   The city may draw down on the grading permit
security, with 30 days written notice to developer, for any violation of the
terms of this contract related to landscaping, if the violation is not cured
within such 30-day period, or if the security is allowed to lapse prior to
the end of the required term. If the security is drawn down, the proceeds
shall be used to cure the default.



            3.   No development, utility or street
construction will be allowed and no building permits will be issued unless
the development is in full compliance with the requirements of this
subdivision.



         (c)   Violation and penalties.



            1.   No person shall construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this division. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions
of this division is committed, continued, or permitted, shall constitute a
separate offense.



            2.   Upon conviction of any such violation, such
person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine as specified
by the city ordinance for fee schedule for  each offense. In addition to any
other penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or
corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this division
shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration.



(Ord. 1428, passed 5-29-01; Am. Ord. 1460, passed 10-13-03; Am. Ord. 1507,
passed 3-27-06; Am. Ord. 1517, passed 10-23-06; Am. Ord. 1523, passed
5-29-07; Am. Ord. 1524, passed 4-23-07; Am. Ord. 1530, passed 9-24-07; Am.
Ord. 1531, passed 9-24-07; Am. Ord. 1536, passed 3-24-08; Am. Ord. 1547,
passed 6-23-08; Am. Ord. 1553, passed 8-25-08; Am. Ord. 1554, passed 8-25-08;
Am. Ord. 1555, passed 8-25-08; Am. Ord. 1556, passed 8-25-08; Am. Ord. 1575,
passed 1-25-10; Am. Ord. 1588, passed 2-14-11; Am. Ord. 1593, passed 4-25-11;
Am. Ord. 1594, passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord. 1609, passed 9-24-12; Am. Ord. 1612,
passed 6-24-13; Am. Ord. 1619, passed 2-9-15)



§ 9.107  SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to establish
specific development standards that provide supplemental regulations to
address the unique characteristics of certain land use.



   (B)   Applicability.  The regulations set forth in this section
shall apply to the specific use listed, whether it is identified as
permitted, conditional or accessory within the applicable zoning district.
These regulations shall be in addition to all other applicable regulations.



   (C)   Specific development standards.  The following uses are
subject to specific development standards:



      (1)   Adult entertainment use.



         (a)   Activities classified as obscene as defined by
M.S. § 617.241 or successor statute, are prohibited.



         (b)   The use shall be located at least 1,000 feet from
any other adult entertainment use.



         (c)   The use shall be located at least 1,000 feet from
any facility with an on- or off-sale liquor, wine or beer license.



         (d)   The use shall be located at least 500 feet from
any of the following protected uses: residentially-zoned property or
residential use; licensed day care facility; public or private educational
facility classified as an elementary, middle or junior high or senior high
school; public library; public park; or religious institution or place of
worship.



         (e)   An adult entertainment use lawfully operating as a
conforming use is not rendered nonconforming by the subsequent location of
any use listed above within 500 feet. If the adult entertainment use is
abandoned for a period of 90 days or more, it shall be deemed discontinued
and subsequent use of the premises for adult entertainment will be required
to meet the separation requirement.



         (f)   No more than one adult entertainment use shall be
located on the property.



         (g)   The use shall not be located on any property that
has a liquor license.



         (h)   Sign messages shall be generic in nature and shall
only identify the type of business which is being conducted; signs shall not
contain material classified as advertising.



      (2)   Animal kennel or shelter.



         (a)   Any activity conducted outdoors, including but not
limited to play areas, outdoor runs, etc. shall be approved by the City
Council through a Conditional Use Permit on a case-by-case basis.



         (b)   Outdoor kennels shall be prohibited.



         (c)   All outdoor activity space shall be completely
screened from abutting neighboring residential zoning districts or uses by a
six-foot tall privacy fence that is at least 80% opaque.



         (d)   All indoor activity shall include soundproofing
and odor control.



      (3)   Automobile convenience facility.



         (a)   The use shall be served by a major collector or
higher functional classification of roadway.



         (b)   All buildings, canopies and pump islands shall
meet the setback requirements for a principal structure in the zoning
district in which the use is located.



         (c)   The storage of inoperable vehicles on the site is
prohibited.



         (d)   The sale or repair of vehicles shall be prohibited.



         (e)   A landscape buffer with a minimum depth of ten
feet shall be installed and maintained along all abutting public
rights-of-way.



         (f)   Canopy light fixtures shall be completely recessed
within the canopy so that the lenses do not extend below the bottom surface
of the canopy.



         (g)   Wherever fuel pumps are installed, pump islands
shall be installed.



         (h)   A transportation management plan shall be
submitted to address off-street parking, bus loading and unloading, traffic
control, and the impact of the facility on surrounding roadways.



         (i)   An environmental management plan, including a
storm water management and drainage plan, shall be submitted to address the
impact of the facility on the environment.



         (j)   The use shall employ best management practices
regarding the venting of odors, gas and fumes. Such vents shall be located a
minimum of ten feet above grade and shall be directed away from residential
uses. All storage tanks shall be equipped with vapor-tight fittings to
eliminate the escape of gas vapors.



         (k)   There shall be no exterior display of merchandise
for sale exceeding 50 square feet in area.



         (l)   The premises, all adjacent streets, sidewalks and
alleys, and all sidewalks and alleys within 100 feet of the use shall be
inspected regularly for the purposes of removing any litter found thereon.



         (m)   A minimum of two access points for vehicular
traffic shall be provided. Curb cuts shall be located no less than 50 feet
from the intersecting right-of-way line on collector roadways and no less
than 80 feet from the intersecting right-of-way line on arterial roadways.



         (n)   All new automobile convenience facilities must be
located on a minimum of one acre of land.



      (4)   Automobile and motorcycle repair, major.



         (a)   All vehicles waiting for repair or pick-up shall
be stored within an enclosed building or in designated off-street parking
spaces.



         (b)   All work shall be performed within a completely
enclosed building.



         (c)   All vehicles parked or stored on site shall
display a current license plate with a current license tab. Outside storage
of automobile and motorcycle parts or storage of inoperable or salvage
vehicles shall be prohibited.



         (d)   The sale of vehicles shall be prohibited, unless
permitted by this article or allowed by conditional use.



         (e)   The use shall employ best management practices
regarding the venting of odors, gas and fumes. Such vents shall be located a
minimum of ten feet above grade and shall be directed away from, residential
uses. All storage tanks shall be equipped with vapor-tight fittings to
eliminate the escape of gas vapors.



         (f)   An environmental management plan, including a
storm water management and drainage plan, shall be submitted to address the
impact of the facility on the environment.



         (g)   Any fuel sales or automobile convenience
activities shall be subject to the applicable standards for automobile
convenience facilities.



         (h)   All new major automobile and motorcycle repair
facilities must be located on a minimum of one acre of land.



      (5)   Automobile and motorcycle repair, minor.



         (a)   All vehicles waiting for repair or pick-up shall
be stored within an enclosed building or in designated off-street parking
spaces.



         (b)   All work shall be performed within a completely
enclosed building.



         (c)   All vehicles parked or stored on site shall
display a current license plate with a current license tab. Outside storage
of automobile and motorcycle parts or storage of inoperable or salvage
vehicles shall be prohibited.



         (d)   The sale of vehicles shall be prohibited, unless
permitted by this article or allowed by conditional use.



         (e)   The use shall employ best management practices
regarding the venting of odors, gas and fumes. Such vents shall be located a
minimum of ten feet above grade and shall be directed away from residential
uses. All storage tanks shall be equipped with vapor-tight fittings to
eliminate the escape of gas vapors.



         (f)   An environmental management plan, including a
storm water management and drainage plan, shall be submitted to address the
impact of the facility on the environment.



         (g)   Any fuel sales or automobile convenience
activities shall be subject to the applicable standards for automobile
convenience facilities.



         (h)   All new minor automobile and motorcycle repair
facilities must be located on a minimum of one acre of land.



      (6)   Automobile and motorcycle sales/rental, new.



         (a)   The use shall be served by a major collector or
higher classification of roadway.



         (b)   Outdoor vehicle display for used cars and
motorcycles shall be limited to 30% of the total outdoor display area for a
new car or motorcycle dealership.  The display area shall be defined as the
total number of parking spaces devoted to the sale of vehicles only, not
including the required off-street parking spaces needed for the public and
employees.



         (c)   Outdoor vehicle display areas shall meet the
setback requirements for a principal structure in the zoning district in
which the use is located.



         (d)   Outdoor vehicle display areas within the public
right-of-way are prohibited.



         (e)   A landscape buffer with a minimum depth of ten
feet shall be installed and maintained along all abutting public
rights-of-way.



         (f)   Outdoor vehicle display shall be within a
designated area that is hard-surfaced.



         (g)   Outdoor vehicle display shall be in an orderly
fashion, with access aisles provided as needed.  The storage of inoperable,
junk vehicles with expired tabs is prohibited.



         (h)   Music or amplified sounds shall not be audible
from adjacent residential properties.



         (i)   Outdoor vehicle display shall not reduce the
amount of off-street parking provided on site below the level required for
the principal use.



         (j)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



         (k)   Fuel pumps for the purpose of retail sale and
dispensing of fuel to the general public shall be prohibited. If the use
includes dispensing of fuel for the automobiles maintained on site, the use
shall employ best management practices regarding the venting of odors, gas
and fumes. Such vents shall be located a minimum of ten feet above grade and
shall be directed away from residential uses. All storage tanks shall be
equipped with vapor-tight fittings to eliminate the escape of gas vapors.



         (l)   All new automobile and motorcycle sales/rental,
(new) facilities must be located on a minimum of one acre of land.



      (7)   Automobile and motorcycle sales/rental, used.



         (a)   The use shall be served by a major collector or
higher classification or roadway.



         (b)   An open-aired used auto, motorcycle and truck
sales or rental lot as a stand-alone business is prohibited.



         (c)   Used automobiles and motorcycles may be sold or
rented as a stand-alone business if the business if the used automobiles,
motorcycles and associated business are contained within a building.



         (d)   Used automobiles and motorcycles may not be sold
accessory to businesses other than new car and motorcycle dealerships.



         (e)   Outdoor vehicle display areas within the public
right-of-way are prohibited.



         (f)   A landscape buffer with a minimum depth of ten
feet shall be installed and maintained along all abutting public
rights-of-way.



         (g)   The outdoor storage of inoperable, junk vehicles
and vehicles with expired tabs is prohibited.



         (h)   Music or amplified sounds shall not be audible
from adjacent residential properties.



         (i)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



         (j)   Fuel pumps for the purpose of retail sale and
dispensing of fuel to the general public shall be prohibited.  If the use
included dispensing of fuel for the automobiles maintained on site, the use
shall employ best management practices regarding the venting of odors, gas,
and fumes.  Such vents shall be located a minimum of ten feet above grade
and shall be directed away from residential uses.  All storage tanks shall
be equipped with vapor-tight fittings to eliminate the escape of gas vapors.



         (k)   All new automobile and motorcycle sales/rental,
(used) facilities must be located on a minimum of one acre of land.



      (8)   Barbed wire fences.



         (a)   Barbed wire fences may only utilize a projecting
arm to support the barbed wire, commencing at a point no less than six feet
above the ground.



         (b)   At no point shall the projecting arm encroach into
the city right-of-way or neighboring properties.



      (9)   Bed and breakfast home.



         (a)   The bed and breakfast home shall be part of an
owner occupied residential structure and be operated by the property owner.



         (b)   No more than one non-resident shall be employed in
the operation of the facility.



         (c)   The exterior appearance of the structure shall not
be altered from its single-family residential character.



         (d)   The total number of guestrooms shall not exceed
four in the R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts and six in the LB Zoning District.
All guest rooms shall be located within the principal structure.



         (e)   Separate kitchen facilities shall not be available
for guests. Meals shall be prepared and served by the operator and shall be
available to registered guests only.



         (f)   Guest stays shall be limited to no more than 14
consecutive days.



         (g)   Parking shall be accommodated on the property.
Parking requirements for guests are in addition to those required for the
principal residential use.



         (h)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



         (i)   The facility shall meet all applicable housing,
building and fire codes and be licensed as required by the State of Minnesota.



      (10)   Car wash.



         (a)   Water from the car wash shall not drain across any
sidewalk or into any public right-of- way.



         (b)   Vacuum facilities shall be located in an enclosed
structure or located at least 50 feet from any residential property line to
avoid noise impacts.



         (c)   The premises, all adjacent streets, sidewalks and
alleys, and all sidewalks and alleys within 100 feet of the use shall be
inspected regularly for the purposes of removing litter found thereon.



      (11)   Clinic, veterinary.



         (a)   All activity shall be within a completely enclosed
building with soundproofing and odor control.



         (b)   Outdoor kennels shall be prohibited.



      (12)   Concrete, asphalt, rock crushing operation.



         (a)   The use shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet
from any residentially-zoned property or any residential use.



         (b)   An air quality plan shall be submitted describing
stationary and mobile source air emissions, their quantities and
compositions, and indicating conformance with all applicable regulation.



         (c)   A dust management plan shall be submitted
describing dust emissions sources, their quantities and compositions, how
dust will be collected, managed and disposed of and indicating conformance
with all applicable regulations.



         (d)   A sound attenuation plan shall be submitted
describing sources of sound and indicating conformance with all applicable
regulations.



         (e)   A vibration-dampening plan shall be submitted
describing sources of vibration and indicating conformance with all
applicable regulations.



         (f)   A transportation management plan shall be
submitted to address off-street parking, bus loading and unloading, traffic
control, and the impact of the facility on surrounding roadways.



         (g)   An environmental management plan, including a
storm water management and drainage plan, shall be submitted to address the
impact of the facility on the environment.



      (13)   Community center.



         (a)   The use shall be served by a minor collector or
higher functional classification of roadway.



         (b)   The parcel upon which the use is located shall
have a lot area no less than four times the area of the building footprint.



         (c)   To the extent practical, new construction or
additions to existing buildings shall be complementary and compatible with
the scale and character of the surroundings and exterior materials shall be
compatible with those used in the immediate neighborhood.



         (d)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening and other site
improvements consistent with the character of the community.



         (e)   All accessory residential, school or day care uses
shall be subject to the provisions of this article.



      (14)   Consignment/secondhand store.



         (a)   Consignment/secondhand stores shall be identified
as stores whose primary existence is derived from more than 50% used,
consigned, or secondhand merchandise.  The use shall be located at least
3,000 feet from all existing consignment/secondhand stores, currency
exchanges, pawnshops and precious metal dealerships.



         (b)   The window and door area of any existing first
floor facade along a public street or sidewalk shall not be reduced, nor
shall changes be made to such windows and doors that block views into and out
of the building at eye level.



         (c)   For new construction, at least 30% of the first
floor facade along a public street or sidewalk shall be windows or doors of
clear or lightly tinted glass that allows views into and out of the building
at eye level.



         (d)   The use of bars, chains or similar security
devices that are visible from a public street or sidewalk shall be prohibited.



         (e)   Consignors shall not be paid for merchandise until
the merchandise has been sold to a third party.



         (f)   An appointment or set hours shall be required for
the acceptance of consignment or donated merchandise.



         (g)   All receipt, sorting and processing of goods shall
occur within a completely enclosed building.



         (h)   The premises, all adjacent streets, sidewalks and
alleys, and all sidewalks and alleys within 100 feet of the use shall be
inspected regularly for the purposes of removing litter found thereon.



      (15)   Currency exchange.



         (a)   The use shall be located at least 3,000 feet from
all existing currency exchanges, consignment/secondhand stores, pawnshops and
precious metal dealerships.



         (b)   The window and door area of any existing first
floor facade along a public street or sidewalk shall not be reduced, nor
shall changes be made to such windows and doors that block views into and out
of the building at eye level.



         (c)   For new construction, at least 30% of the first
floor facade along a public street or sidewalk shall be windows or doors of
clear of lightly tinted glass that allows views into and out of the building
at eye level.



         (d)   The use of bars, chains or similar security
devices that are visible from a public street or sidewalk shall be prohibited.



         (e)   The premises, all adjacent streets, sidewalks and
alleys, and all sidewalks and alleys within 100 feet of the use shall be
inspected regularly for the purposes of removing litter found thereon.



      (16)   Day care center.



         (a)   The building and any exterior fenced areas shall
meet the setback requirements for a principal structure in the zoning
district in which the use is located.



         (b)   The play area shall be located away from the main
entrance to day care, and shall be contained with a fence constructed of
masonry, painted or treated wood or metal, at least five feet in height.



         (c)   For child day care facilities, at least 75 square
feet of outside play area shall be provided for each child under care.



         (d)   For adult day care facilities, at least 150 square
feet of outdoor area for seating or exercise shall be provided. If 150 square
feet of outdoor is not available on the site, the property owner must submit
a written proposal that demonstrates that recreational activities for adults
under the facility’s care will be provided off-site. The City Manager, or
his or her designee, is authorized to approve or deny this proposal.



         (e)   The use shall provide a designated area for the
short-term parking of vehicles engaged in loading and unloading of children
or adults under care. The designated area shall be located as close as
practical to the principal entrance of the building and shall be connected to
the building by a sidewalk.



         (f)   To the extent practical, new construction or
additions to existing buildings shall be complementary and compatible with
the scale and character of the surroundings and exterior materials shall be
compatible with those used in the immediate neighborhood.



         (g)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



         (h)   The facility shall meet all applicable housing,
building and fire codes and be licensed as required by the State of Minnesota.



         (i)   Day care centers located in a school or religious
institution building originally constructed for use as a school or religious
institution shall be considered a permitted accessory use, provided the
standards contained herein are met.



         (j)   Day care centers located within an existing
commercial or industrial facility and used only by employees of the operation
conducted on the site shall be considered a permitted accessory use, provided
the standards contained herein are met.



      (17)   Day care, home.



         (a)   The building and any exterior fenced areas shall
meet the setback requirements for a principal structure in the zoning
district in which the use is located.



         (b)   The designated play area shall be contained with a
fence constructed of masonry, painted or treated wood or metal, at least five
feet in height.



         (c)   The exterior appearance of the structure shall not
be altered from its single-family residential character.



         (d)   For child day care facilities, at least 50 square
feet of outside play area shall be provided for each child under care.



         (e)   For adult day care facilities, at least 150 square
feet of outdoor area for seating or exercise shall be provided for each adult
under care.



         (f)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



         (g)   The facility shall meet all applicable housing,
building and fire codes and be licensed as required by the State of Minnesota.



      (18)   Drive-up facility.



         (a)   The drive-up function shall be accessory to a
conforming use.



         (b)   The use shall be served by a major collector or
higher functional classification of roadway.



         (c)   The site shall accommodate vehicle stacking in
accordance with the provisions of this article.



         (d)   Any speaker system shall not be audible from any
residentially zoned property or any residential use.



      (19)   Drop-in facility.



         (a)   The use shall be located at least 3,000 feet from
all existing drop-in facilities, consignment/secondhand stores, currency
exchanges and pawnshops.



         (b)   The use shall conspicuously post legible signs at
the public entrance advising patrons of the hours of operation of the
facility and its meal service, if applicable.



         (c)   A waiting area for clients shall be provided which
shall be available to clients one hour prior to the posted opening of the use
and shall include toilet facilities.



         (d)   Trash receptacles shall be located at the public
entrances.



         (e)   The premises, all adjacent streets, sidewalks and
alleys, and all sidewalks and alleys within 100 feet of the use shall be
inspected regularly for the purposes of removing litter found thereon.



      (20)   Employment agencies–temporary (day labor).  The use
shall be located at least 3,000 feet from all existing temporary employment
agencies, consignment/secondhand stores, currency exchanges and pawnshops.



      (21)   Firearms dealer/shooting range.



         (a)   The use shall be located at least 300 feet from
any residentially zoned property or any residential use.



         (b)   The use shall be located at least 500 feet from
the following protected uses: licensed daycare facility; public or private
educational facility classified as an elementary, middle or junior high or
senior high school; public library; public park; or religious institution or
place of worship.



         (c)   No firearms or ammunition shall be displayed in
window areas or any area where they can be viewed from any public street or
sidewalk.



      (22)   Fireworks tents.



         (a)   The fireworks tent, display area, access aisles,
and surrounding area shall be reviewed by the Community Development
Department and the Fire Department.



         (b)   The sale of fireworks shall meet all requirements
of Chapter 24 of the Fire Code and NFPA Chapter 1124.



         (c)   The fireworks tent shall be accessory to a
commercial use.



         (d)   Fireworks tents located within the public
right-of-way are prohibited.



         (e)   All goods shall be displayed on a designated
impervious surface area.



         (f)   All goods shall be displayed in an orderly
fashion, with access aisles provided as needed.



         (g)   Music or amplified sounds shall not be audible
from adjacent residential properties.



         (h)   The fireworks tent shall not reduce the amount of
off-street parking provided one-site below the level required for the
principal use.



         (i)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



         (j)   Signage shall be limited to two professionally
made signs, with a combined square footage not exceeding 32 square feet.



         (k)   Fireworks tents may be allowed for a maximum of 90
days per calendar year.



      (23)   Food service, convenience (fast food).



         (a)   The use shall be served by a major collector or
higher functional classification of roadway.



         (b)   A landscape buffer with a minimum depth of ten
feet shall be installed and maintained along all abutting public
rights-of-way.



         (c)   A transportation management plan shall be
submitted to address off-street parking, bus loading and unloading, traffic
control, and the impact of the facility on surrounding roadways.



         (d)   The premises, all adjacent streets, sidewalks and
alleys, and all sidewalks and alleys within 100 feet of the use shall be
inspected regularly for the purposes of removing any litter found thereon.



         (e)   Curb cuts shall be located no less than 50 feet
from the intersecting right-of-way line on collector roadways and no less
than 80 feet from the intersecting right-of-way line on arterial roadways.



         (f)   A drive-up facility shall also be subject to the
standards for a drive-up facility.



      (24)   Food service, limited (coffee shop/deli/bakery/and the
like).



         (a)   Music or amplified sounds shall not be audible
from adjacent residential uses.



         (b)   The premises, all adjacent streets, sidewalks and
alleys, and all sidewalks and alleys within 100 feet of the use shall be
inspected regularly for the purposes of removing litter found thereon.



      (25)   Food service, full-service (restaurant/nightclub).



         (a)   Where alcoholic beverages are served, not less
than 60% of the total gross sales revenue shall be from the sale of food and
non-alcoholic beverages.



         (b)   Music or amplified sounds shall not be audible
from adjacent residential uses.



         (c)   The premises, all adjacent streets, sidewalks and
alleys, and all sidewalks and alleys within 100 feet of the use shall be
inspected regularly for the purposes of removing litter found thereon.



      (26)   Freight terminal.



         (a)   Loading and unloading activities shall be located
no less than 200 feet from any residential zoning district or residential use.



         (b)   Overnight facilities for drivers shall provide
on-site management 24 hours a day. The name and telephone number of the
on-site manager shall be filed with the city.



      (27)   Funeral home.



         (a)   The use shall be served by a minor collector or
higher functional classification of roadway.



         (b)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



      (28)   Greenhouses (residential).



         (a)   A residential greenhouse shall only be allowed for
one- and two-family dwellings.



         (b)   A residential greenhouse shall meet all setbacks
requirements of an accessory structure in the zoning district it is located.



         (c)   A residential greenhouse structure shall not count
against the total number of detached accessory structures allowed on a
residential property.



         (d)   A residential greenhouse structure shall not count
against the total allowable combined square footage of accessory structures
allowed on a residential property.



         (e)   A residential greenhouse shall be allowed during
the normal growing season only.



         (f)   When not in use, a residential greenhouse shall be
dismantled.



      (29)   Hospital.



         (a)   The use shall be served by a minor collector or
higher functional classification of roadway.



         (b)   Emergency vehicle access shall not be adjacent to
or located across the street from any residential use.



         (c)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



      (30)   Multi-family in CBD.



         (a)   The residential use is secondary to and located
above the ground floor commercial use.



         (b)   The maximum number of units allowed shall be
limited to the area of the parcel divided by 2,000, times the number of
floors above the ground floor commercial use.



         (c)   A minimum of one parking space shall be provided
per residential unit within 400 feet of the most commonly used entrance.



      (31)   Nursing home.



         (a)   The use shall be served by a minor collector or
higher functional classification of roadway.



         (b)   On-site services shall be for residents of the
facility only.



         (c)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



      (32)   Outdoor agricultural/produce sales.



         (a)   The outdoor agricultural/produce sales lot shall
be accessory to a commercial use.



         (b)   Outdoor agricultural/produce sales located within
the public right-of-way are prohibited.



         (c)   All goods shall be displayed in a designated area
that is hard surfaced.



         (d)   All goods shall be displayed in an orderly
fashion, with access aisles provided as needed.



         (e)   Music or amplified sounds shall not be audible
from adjacent residential properties.



         (f)   The outdoor agricultural/produce sales lot shall
not reduce the amount of off-street parking provided one-site below the level
required for the principal use.



         (g)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



         (h)   Signage shall be limited to two professionally
made signs per structure, not exceeding 32 square feet per sign.



         (i)   Outdoor agricultural/produce sales facilities may
be allowed for a maximum of 90 days per calendar year.



      (33)   Outdoor Christmas tree sales.



         (a)   Outdoor Christmas tree sales lots shall be
accessory to a commercial use.



         (b)   Outdoor Christmas tree sales located within the
public right-of-way are prohibited.



         (c)   All goods shall be displayed in a designated area
that is hard surfaced.



         (d)   All goods shall be displayed in an orderly
fashion, with access aisles provided as needed.



         (e)   Music or amplified sounds shall not be audible
from adjacent residential properties.



         (f)   Outdoor Christmas tree sales lots shall not reduce
the amount of off-street parking provided one-site below the level required
for the principal use.



         (g)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



         (h)   Signage shall be limited to two professionally
made signs, with a combined square footage not exceeding 48 square feet.



         (i)   Outdoor Christmas tree sales lots may be allowed
for a maximum of 90 days per calendar year.



      (34)   Outdoor sales/display.



         (a)   The outdoor sales/display use shall be accessory
to a commercial use.



         (b)   All outdoor sales/display areas shall meet the
setback requirements for a principal structure in the zoning district in
which it is located.



         (c)   Outdoor sales/display areas within the public
right-of-way are prohibited.



         (d)   A landscape buffer with a minimum depth of ten
feet shall be installed and maintained along all abutting public
rights-of-way.



         (e)   All goods shall be displayed in a designated area
that is hard-surfaced.



         (f)   All goods shall be displayed in an orderly
fashion, with access aisles provided as needed.



         (g)   Music or amplified sounds shall not be audible
from adjacent residential properties.



         (h)   The outdoor sales/display area shall not reduce
the amount of off-street parking provided on-site below the level required
for the principal use.



         (i)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



      (35)   Outdoor storage.



         (a)   The outdoor storage area shall be accessory to a
commercial or industrial use.



         (b)   Outdoor storage within the public right-of-way is
prohibited.



         (c)   All outdoor storage areas shall meet the setback
requirements for a principal structure in the zoning district in which the
use is located.



         (d)   Outdoor storage areas shall be located in rear
yards or in the side yard behind the front building line of the principal
structure.



         (e)   The storage area shall be fenced and screened from
adjacent uses and the public right- of-way. Required screening shall consist
of a fence, wall, earth berming and/or vegetation no less than six feet in
height and no less than 80% opaque on a year round basis.



         (f)   All goods, materials and equipment shall be stored
on an impervious surface.



         (g)   All goods, materials and equipment shall be stored
in an orderly fashion, with access aisles of sufficient width to accommodate
emergency vehicles as needed.



         (h)   The height of materials stored, excluding operable
vehicles and equipment, shall not exceed the height of the screening provided.



      (36)   Parking ramp.



         (a)   Parking ramp structures shall meet the setback
requirements for a principal structure in the zoning district in which the
use is located.



         (b)   Exterior facade materials shall be compatible with
surrounding buildings.



      (37)   Pawnshop.



         (a)   The use shall be located at least 3,000 feet from
all existing pawnshops, currency exchanges, consignment/secondhand stores and
precious metal dealerships.



         (b)   The window and door area of any existing first
floor facade along a public street or sidewalk shall not be reduced, nor
shall changes be made to such windows and doors that block views into and out
of the building at eye level.



         (c)   For new construction, at least 30% of the first
floor facade along a public street or sidewalk shall be windows or doors of
clear or lightly-tinted glass that allows views into and out of the building
at eye level.



         (d)   The use of bars, chains or similar security
devices that are visible from a public street or sidewalk shall be prohibited.



         (e)   All receipt, sorting and processing of goods shall
occur within a completely enclosed building.



         (f)   The premises, all adjacent streets, sidewalks and
alleys, and all sidewalks and alleys within 100 feet of the use shall be
inspected regularly for the purposes of removing litter found thereon.



      (38)   Precious metal dealership.



         (a)   The use shall be located at least 3,000 feet from
all existing precious metal dealerships, pawnshops, currency exchanges and
consignment/secondhand stores.



         (b)   The window and door area of any existing first
floor façade along a public street or sidewalk shall not be reduced, nor
shall changes be made to such windows and doors that block views into and out
of the building at eye level.



         (c)   For new construction, at least 30% of the first
floor façade along a public street or sidewalk shall be windows or doors of
clear or lightly-tinted glass that allows views into and out of the building
at eye level.



         (d)   The use of bars, chains or similar security
devices that are visible from a public street or sidewalk is prohibited.



         (e)   All receipt, sorting and processing of goods shall
occur within a completely enclosed building.



      (39)   Recreational vehicle sales.



         (a)   The use shall be served by a major collector or
higher classification of roadway.



         (b)   Outdoor vehicle display areas shall meet the
setback requirements for a principal structure in the zoning district in
which the use is located.



         (c)   Outdoor vehicle display areas within the public
right-of-way are prohibited.



         (d)   A landscape buffer with a minimum depth of ten
feet shall be installed and maintained along all abutting public
rights-of-way.



         (e)   Outdoor vehicle display shall be within a
designated area that is hard-surfaced.



         (f)   Outdoor vehicle display shall be in an orderly
fashion, with access aisles provided as needed.



         (g)   Music or amplified sounds shall not be audible
from adjacent residential properties.



         (h)   Outdoor vehicle display shall not reduce the
amount of off-street parking provided on site below the level required for
the principal use.



         (i)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



         (j)   Fuel pumps for the purpose of retail sale and
dispensing of fuel to the general public shall be prohibited. If the use
includes dispensing of fuel for the automobiles maintained on site, the use
shall employ best management practices regarding the venting of odors, gas
and fumes. Such vents shall be located a minimum of ten feet above grade and
shall be directed away from residential uses. All storage tanks shall be
equipped with vapor-tight fittings to eliminate the escape of gas vapors.



      (40)   Recreational facility, indoor.



         (a)   The use shall be served by a minor collector or
higher classification of roadway.



         (b)   The parcel upon which the use is located shall
have a lot area no less than four times the area of the building footprint.



         (c)   To the extent practical, new construction or
additions to existing buildings shall be complementary and compatible with
the scale and character of the surroundings and exterior materials shall be
compatible with those used in the immediate neighborhood.



         (d)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



      (41)   Recreational facility, outdoor.



         (a)   The use shall be served by a minor collector or
higher classification of roadway.



         (b)   The site shall be no less than five acres in size.



         (c)   The principal use of the site shall be the outdoor
recreation facility, except for athletic fields that are accessory to an
educational or community facility.



         (d)   The use shall be situated in such a way as to
minimize the effects of lighting and noise on surrounding properties.



         (e)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



         (f)   The premises, all adjacent streets, sidewalks and
alleys, and all sidewalks and alleys within 100 feet of the use shall be
inspected regularly for the purposes of removing litter found thereon.



      (42)   Religious institution/place of worship.



         (a)   The facility shall be served by a minor collector
or higher functional classification of roadway.



         (b)   The parcel upon which the use is located shall
have a lot area no less than four times the area of the building footprint.



         (c)   To the extent practical, new construction or
additions to existing buildings shall be complementary and compatible with
the scale and character of the surroundings and exterior materials shall be
compatible with those used in the immediate neighborhood.



         (d)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



         (e)   All accessory residential, school or day care uses
shall be subject to the provisions of this article.



      (43)   Residential care facility.



         (a)   The use shall be located at least 1/4 mile (1,320
feet) from all existing residential care facilities or correctional
residential care facilities, regardless of the licensing status of such
facilities.



         (b)   The use shall not be located in a two-family or
multiple-family dwelling unless it occupies the entire structure.



         (c)   The facility shall be located on a parcel meeting
the minimum lot size for a single- family dwelling plus an area of 300 square
feet for each resident over six. The maximum number of residents may be
specified as a condition of the conditional use permit in order to meet this
requirement.



         (d)   On-site services shall be for residents of the
facility only.



         (e)   The building and any exterior fenced areas shall
meet the setback requirements of the zoning district in which the use in
located.



         (f)   To the extent practical, all new construction or
additions to existing buildings shall be compatible with the scale and
character of the surroundings, and exterior building materials shall be
compatible with other buildings in the neighborhood.



         (g)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening and other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



         (h)   The primary purpose of the facility cannot be to
treat juveniles who have violated criminal statutes relating to sex offenses
or who have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation
of criminal statutes relating to sex offenses.



         (i)   The facility shall not provide accommodations to
treat persons whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health
and safety of other individuals.



         (j)   The facility shall not accept court ordered
referrals for treatment in lieu of incarceration without adequate security.



         (k)   The facility shall meet all applicable housing,
building and fire codes and be licensed as required by the State of Minnesota.



         (l)   If the size, location, licensing or purpose of the
facility changes, a new or amended conditional use permit may be required.



      (44)   Residential care facility, correctional.



         (a)   The use shall be located at least 1/4 mile (1,320
feet) from all existing residential care facilities and correctional
residential care facilities, regardless of the licensing status of such
facilities measured from property line to property line.



         (b)   The use shall only be located in the I-1, Light
Industrial District and the I-2, General Industrial District parcels
throughout the city.



         (c)   The use shall not be located in a two-family or
multiple-family dwelling unless it occupies the entire structure.



         (d)   The facility shall be located on a parcel meeting
the minimum lot size for single-family dwelling plus an area of 300 square
feet for each resident over two. The maximum number of residents shall not
exceed four.



         (e)   On-site services shall be for residents of the
facility only.



         (f)   The building and any exterior fenced areas shall
meet the setback requirements of the zoning district in which the use in
located.



         (g)   To the extent practical, all new construction or
additions to existing buildings shall be compatible with the scale and
character of the surroundings, and exterior building materials shall be
compatible with other buildings in the neighborhood.



         (h)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening and other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



         (i)   The facility shall meet all applicable housing,
building and fire codes and be licensed as required by the State of Minnesota.



         (j)   If the size, location, licensing or purpose of the
facility changes, a new or amended conditional use permit may be required.



      (45)   Salvage operation/transfer station.



         (a)   The use shall be located at least 500 feet from
any residentially zoned property or any residential use.



         (b)   The use must comply with the minimum standards for
operation, safety, storage and all waste management as identified in the most
current version of MPCA Motor Vehicle Salvage Facility Environmental
Compliance Manual or successor manual.



         (c)   The use must be served by a minor collector or
higher functional classification of roadway.



         (d)   Buildings, parking areas, loading areas and any
exterior storage shall meet the setback requirements for a principal
structure in the zoning district in which the use is located.



         (e)   No vehicles or vehicle parts may be placed within
the public right-of-way or on public property.



         (f)   Exterior storage shall be limited to a maximum
height of 12 feet and shall be fully screened so that items stored do not
exceed the height of the screening provided.



         (g)   An environmental management plan, including a
storm water management and drainage plan, shall be submitted to address the
impact of the facility on the environment.



         (h)   The salvage facility operator shall maintain a
written record of all vehicles received, including the date received, date
when fluids were removed and date removed from the facility. The record shall
also include the vehicle identification number, make and model and shall be
initiated on the date the vehicle is received at the facility.



         (i)   All fluids, including but not limited to motor
oil, transmission and/or transfer case lubricants, differential lubricants,
fuel, antifreeze, refrigerants and window washing fluids shall be removed
from the vehicle within three days of receipt.



         (j)   All lead acid batteries, mercury containing
devices and other hazardous materials shall be removed from the vehicle
within three days of receipt.



         (k)   On-site burning of trash, refuse, garbage or other
waste materials is prohibited.



         (l)   Salvage of materials by fire, burning, explosives
or chemical decomposition is prohibited.



      (46)   School, K-12.



         (a)   The use shall include a regular course of study
accredited by the State of Minnesota.



         (b)   The site shall be served by a major collector or
higher classification of roadway.



         (c)   The parcel upon which the use is located shall
have a lot area no less than four times the area of the building footprint.



         (d)   A transportation management plan shall be
submitted to address off-street parking, bus loading and unloading, traffic
control, and the impact of the facility on surrounding roadways.



         (e)   To the extent practical, all new construction or
additions to existing buildings shall be complementary and compatible with
the scale and character of the surroundings and exterior materials shall be
compatible with those used in the immediate neighborhood.



         (f)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



      (47)   School, vocational/business.



         (a)   The site shall be served by a minor arterial or
higher classification of roadway.



         (b)   The parcel upon which the use is located shall
have a lot area no less than four times the area of the building footprint.



         (c)   A master plan shall be submitted that describes
proposed physical development for the next five years and for the following
five years. Said plan shall include a description of proposed development
phases and plans, development priorities, the probable sequence of proposed
development, estimated dates of construction and the anticipated interim use
of property waiting to be developed.



         (d)   A transportation management plan shall be
submitted to address off-street parking, bus loading and unloading, traffic
control, and the impact of the facility on surrounding roadways.



         (e)   New construction or additions to existing
buildings shall be complementary and compatible with the scale and character
of the surroundings and exterior materials shall be compatible with those
used in the immediate neighborhood.



         (f)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



      (48)   School, performing/visual/martial arts.



         (a)   The site shall be served by a minor collector or
higher classification of roadway.



         (b)   A transportation management plan shall be
submitted to address off-street parking, bus loading and unloading, traffic
control, and the impact of the facility on surrounding roadways.



         (c)   To the extent practical, all new construction or
additions to existing buildings shall be complementary and compatible with
the scale and character of the surroundings and exterior materials shall be
compatible with those used in the immediate neighborhood.



         (d)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



      (49)   Shopping center.



         (a)   Only uses that are allowed within the zoning
district in which the shopping center is located, shall be allowed in the
shopping center.



         (b)   Uses that require a conditional use permit, site
plan review or other land use approval shall comply with all review and
approval requirements of this article.



         (c)   The premises, all adjacent streets, sidewalks and
alleys, and all sidewalks and alleys within 100 feet shall be inspected
regularly for purposes of removing any litter found thereon.



      (50)   Smoke shops.



         (a)   The smoke shop must have an entrance door opening
directly to the outdoors.



         (b)   Greater than 90% of the business’s gross revenue
must be from the sale of tobacco, tobacco products or smoking related
accessories.



         (c)   A tobacco department or section of any individual
business establishment with any type of liquor, food or restaurant license
shall not be considered a smoke shop.



         (d)   The total number of city-issued smoke shop
licenses shall at no time exceed five.



         (e)   Any existing smoke shops at the time of the
passage of Ord. 1570 shall comply fully with the ordinance by December 31,
2010.



      (51)   Transitional/emergency housing.



         (a)   Transitional/emergency housing shall be located at
least 1/4 mile from all existing transitional/emergency housing.



         (b)   The maximum number of persons served shall not
exceed 32.



         (c)   On-site services shall be for residents of the
facility only, except where part of a regimen of scheduled post-residential
treatment/service.



         (d)   To the extent practical, all new construction or
additions to existing buildings shall be complementary and compatible with
the scale and character of the surroundings and exterior materials shall be
compatible with those used in the immediate neighborhood.



         (e)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening or other site
improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



      (52)   Two-family and twinhome dwellings.



         (a)   Street-facing garage doors must be recessed behind
either the front facade of the living area portion of the dwelling or a
covered porch, measuring at least six feet by eight feet, by at least five
feet.



         (b)   If located on a corner lot, each unit of the
duplex or twinhome shall have its address and entrance oriented to a separate
street frontage.



         (c)   Vehicle access to a lot must be from an alley if
the lot abuts an alley.



      (53)   Brewer taprooms and brew pubs.



         (a)   All malt liquor production shall be within a
completely enclosed structure.



         (b)   Mechanical equipment shall be placed and/or
screened so as to minimize the visual impact on adjacent properties and from
public streets.



         (c)   In zoning districts where off-street parking is
required, a transportation management plan shall be submitted to address
off-street parking, bus and freight loading, and traffic control.



         (d)   Loading areas shall not be oriented toward a
public street, nor shall loading docks be located on the side of any building
facing an adjacent lot that is zoned residential. Where these districts or
streets abut all sides of the property, the loading areas shall be screened
by a solid wall or opaque fence with a minimum height of six feet, in
addition to any required landscape buffer.



         (e)   Trash and/or recycling collection areas shall be
enclosed on at least three sides by an opaque screening wall or fence no less
than six feet in height. The open side of the enclosure shall not face any
public street or the front yard of any adjacent property.



         (f)   By-products and waste from the production of malt
liquor shall be properly disposed of off the property.



         (g)   The premises, all adjacent streets, sidewalks and
alleys, and all sidewalks and alleys within 100 feet of the use shall be
inspected regularly for the purposes of removing litter found thereon.



         (h)   The facility shall meet all applicable building
and fire codes, and shall be licensed as required by the state or county.



      (54)   Banquet halls.



         (a)   To the extent practical, new construction or
additions to existing buildings shall be complementary and compatible with
the scale and character of the surroundings, and exterior materials shall be
compatible with those used in the immediate neighborhood.



         (b)   An appropriate transition area between the use and
adjacent property shall be provided by landscaping, screening and other site
improvements consistent with the character of the community.



         (c)   The facility shall meet all applicable building
and fire codes, and shall be licensed as required by the state or county.



         (d)   A transportation management plan shall be
submitted to address off-street parking, bus loading and unloading, traffic
control, and the impact of the facility on surrounding roadways.



         (e)   The premises, all adjacent streets, sidewalks and
alleys, and all sidewalks and alleys within 100 feet of the use shall be
inspected regularly for the purposes of removing any litter found thereon.



         (f)   Music or amplified sounds shall not be audible
from adjacent residential uses and must meet the requirements of city
ordinances, to ensure consistent enforcement by the Police Department.



(Ord. 1428, passed 5-29-01; Am. Ord. 1502, passed 1-9-06; Am. Ord. 1515,
passed 11-13-06; Am. Ord. 1516, passed 10-23-06; Am. Ord. 1530, passed
9-24-07; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 9-28-09; Am. Ord. 1594, passed 4-25-11; Am.
Ord. 1595, passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord. 1606, passed 4-23-12; Am. Ord. 1626,
passed 5-9-16; Am. Ord. 1638, passed 2-27-17; Am. Ord. 1641, passed 6-12-17;
Am. Ord. 1653, passed 2-25-19; Am. Ord. 1654, passed 2-25-19)



§ 9.108  GENERAL DISTRICT PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Establishment of zoning districts.



      (1)   Primary districts.  In order to carry out the purposes
and provisions of this article, all of the property within the City of
Columbia Heights is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:



 


Residential Districts



R-1
 
Single-Family Residential District


R-2
 
Two-Family Residential District


R-3
 
Limited Multiple-Family Residential District


R-4
 
Multiple-Family Residential District



 



 




Commercial Districts



LB
 
Limited Business District


GB
 
General Business District


CBD
 
Central Business District



Industrial Districts



I-1
 
Light Industrial District


I-2
 
General Industrial District



Mixed Used Planned Development District



MXD
 
Mixed Use District




 



      (2)   Overlay districts.  In order to carry out the purposes
and provisions of this article, property within the City of Columbia Heights
may also be subject to the following overlay zoning districts:



 


Overlay Districts



FP
 
Floodplain Management District


SH
 
Shoreland Management District (reserved)



 



   (B)   Official zoning map.



      (1)   Designation of map.  The location and boundaries of the
zoning districts established by this section are hereby established on the
“Zoning Map of Columbia Heights, Minnesota,” dated March 2001, which is
hereby adopted as the official zoning map of the city. This map and all of
the notations, references, amendments and other information shown thereon
shall have the same force and effect as though fully set forth and described
in this article.



      (2)   Maintenance of map.  The Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for maintaining the official zoning map. All amendments to the
district boundaries as shown on the map shall be recorded within a reasonable
time after official publication of the amendment. The official zoning map
shall be kept in the Community Development Department and shall be open to
public inspection at all times during which the city offices are customarily
open.



   (C)   District boundaries.



      (1)   Interpretation.  The following rules shall be used to
determine the precise location of any zoning district or overlay district
boundary, as shown on the official map:



         (a)   Boundary lines shown as following or approximately
following the corporate limits shall be construed as following such limits.



         (b)   Boundary lines shown as following or approximately
following streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way shall be construed as
following the centerlines of such rights-of-way.



         (c)   Boundary lines shown as following or approximately
following platted lot lines or other property lines shall be construed as
following such lines.



         (d)   Boundary lines shown as following or approximately
following railroad lines shall be construed as following the centerline of
the main tracks of such railroad lines.



         (e)   Boundary lines shown as following or approximately
following shorelines of any lakes shall be construed as following the
ordinary high water level of such lakes. In the event that the ordinary high
water level changes, the boundary shall be construed as moving with the
ordinary high water level.



         (f)   Boundary lines shown as following or approximately
following streams, rivers or other waterways shall be construed as following
the channel centerline of such waterways. In the event that the location of
such waterway naturally moves, the boundary shall be construed as moving with
the channel centerline.



         (g)   Boundaries shown as separated from and parallel or
approximately parallel to any of the features listed herein shall be
construed as parallel to such features and at such distances as actually
shown on the official map.



         (h)   If district boundary lines do not follow any of
the above described lines, the district boundary lines are established as
drawn on the zoning map and shown by written dimension.



      (2)   Property in multiple districts.  Where a boundary line
divides a lot of record which was in single ownership at the time of
enactment of this article into two or more zoning districts, any portion of
such lot within 50 feet of either side of such a dividing boundary line may
be used for any use of either district; provided, however, if any portion of
such lot shall extend beyond the 50-foot limitation, the boundary line as
shown shall prevail.



      (3)   Appeal of interpretations.  Appeals from the Zoning
Administrator's determination and questions of doubt concerning the exact
location of boundary lines shall be heard by the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments.



   (D)   Designation of annexed property.  Annexed property shall be
placed in the R-1, Single-Family Residential District, unless specific action
is taken at the time of annexation to designate it otherwise.



(Ord. 1428, passed 5-29-01)



§ 9.109  RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The residential zoning districts are established to
preserve and enhance the quality of living in residential neighborhoods;
provide a range of housing types and densities consistent with the
comprehensive plan; regulate structures and uses which may affect the
character or desirability of these residential areas; and provide directly
related complementary uses that support the residential areas while
safeguarding the residential character of these areas.



   (B)   General provisions.



      (1)   Compliance with applicable regulations.  Any use
established in a residential district after the effective date of this
article shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal standards
for such uses.



      (2)   Administration.  The administration and enforcement of
this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of § 9.104,
Administration and Enforcement.



      (3)   Nonconformities.  Nonconforming uses, structures, lots
and signs within a residential district shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 9.105, Nonconformities.



      (4)   Compliance with general development standards.  Any use
established, expanded or modified in a residential district after the
effective date of this article shall comply with the applicable provisions of
§ 9.106, General Provisions.



      (5)   Compliance with specific development standards.  Any
use established, expanded or modified in a residential district after the
effective date of this article that is identified in § 9.107, Specific
Development Standards, shall comply with the applicable provisions of that
section.



      (6)   State licensed residential facility.  State licensed
residential facilities are allowed in all residential districts pursuant to
M.S. § 462.357, as it may be amended from time to time.



      (7)   Prohibited uses.  Any use not listed as either
permitted, conditional or accessory in a particular district or any use not
determined by the Zoning Administrator to be substantially similar to a use
listed as permitted, conditional or accessory shall be prohibited in that
district.



   (C)   Lot dimension, height, and bulk requirements.  Lot area,
setback, height and lot coverage requirements for uses in the residential
districts shall be as specified in the following table:



 




 

R-1

 

R-2A

 

R-2B

 

R-3

 

R-4





Minimum Lot Area



   Single-family dwelling

 
8,400 sq. ft.
 
6,500 sq. ft.
 
6,500 sq. ft.
 
6,500 sq. ft.
 
6,500 sq. ft.



   Two-family and twinhome dwellings

 

 
12,000 sq. ft.
 
Existing on January 1, 2005 - 5,100 sq. ft.

Established after January 1, 2005 - 12,000 sq. ft.
 
8,400 sq. ft.
 
8,400 sq. ft.



   Multiple-family dwelling

 

 

 

 
10,000 sq. ft.
 
10,000 sq. ft.



   Non-residential structure

 
8,400 sq. ft.
 
6,500 sq. ft.
 
6,500 sq. ft.
 
10,000 sq. ft.
 
10,000 sq. ft.


Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit



   Multiple-family dwelling




      Efficiency

 

 

 

 
1,200 sq. ft.
 
800 sq. ft.



      One bedroom

 

 

 

 
1,800 sq. ft.
 
1,000 sq. ft.



      Two bedroom

 

 

 

 
2,000 sq. ft.
 
1,200 sq. ft.



      Three bedroom

 

 

 

 
2,500 sq. ft.
 
1,500 sq. ft.



      Additional bedroom

 

 

 

 
400 sq. ft.
 
200 sq. ft.



      Congregate living units

 

 

 

 
400 sq. ft.
 
400 sq. ft.


Minimum Lot Width
 
70 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
70 ft.
 
70 ft.




 



 




 

R-1

 

R-2A

 

R-2B

 

R-3

 

R-4





Minimum Lot Depth



   Residential Building Setbacks




      Front yard

 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
1 & 2 Family - 25 ft.

Multi- Family - 30 ft.
 
15 ft.



      Side yard

 
7 ft.*
 
5 ft.*
 
5 ft.*
 
1 & 2 Family - 5 ft.

Multi- Family - 20 ft.
 
10 ft.



      Corner side yard

 
12 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
1 & 2 Family - 10 ft.

Multi- Family - 30 ft.
 
15 ft.



      Rear yard

 
20% of lot depth
 
20% of lot depth
 
20% of lot depth
 
1 & 2 Family - 25 ft.

Multi- Family - 30 ft.
 
15 ft.


   Non-Residential Building Setbacks



      Front yard

 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
15 ft.



      Side yard

 
40 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
10 ft.



      Corner side yard

 
12 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
15 ft.



      Rear yard

 
40 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
10 ft.


   Single- and Two-Family Parking Setbacks



      Front yard (excluding drives/pads)

 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
30 ft.



      Side yard

 
3 ft.
 
3 ft.
 
3 ft.
 
3 ft.
 
3 ft.



      Corner side yard

 
3 ft.
 
3 ft.
 
3 ft.
 
3 ft.
 
3 ft.



      Rear yard

 
3 ft.
 
3 ft.
 
3 ft.
 
3 ft.
 
3 ft.


   Multiple-Family Parking Setbacks



      Front yard

 

 

 

 
30 ft.
 
30 ft.



      Side yard

 

 

 

 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.



      Corner side yard

 

 

 

 
30 ft.
 
30 ft.



      Rear yard

 

 

 

 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.




 



 




 

R-1

 

R-2A

 

R-2B

 

R-3

 

R-4





   Non-Residential Parking Setbacks


      Front yard
 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
30 ft.



      Side yard

 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.



      Corner side yard

 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
30 ft.



      Rear yard

 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.


Maximum Height


   Residential structures
 
28 ft.
 
28 ft.
 
28 ft.
 
35 ft.
 
35 ft.


   Non-residential structures
 
35 ft.
 
35 ft.
 
35 ft.
 
35 ft.
 
35 ft.


Non-Residential Floor Area Ratio
 

 

 

 

 
2.2


* The side yard setback for structures in excess of two stories shall be
increased to 10 feet.




 



   (D)   Zero lot line setback provisions.  In the R-2, R-3 and R-4
districts, the yard for a single-family attached dwelling may be reduced to
zero feet, provided that the following conditions are satisfactorily met:



      (1)   The wall of the dwelling unit shall be placed upon said
property line in a manner that does not encroach upon another property.



      (2)   The applicant records all required agreements, easements
and deed restrictions against all properties that abut the zero lot line.



      (3)   The minimum front, side and rear building setbacks shall
be applied to the structure as a whole, rather than to individual units.



      (4)   The minimum lot area requirement shall be applied by
dividing the sum of the area of all parcels occupied by the structure by the
total number of dwelling units.



   (E)   R-1, Single-Family Residential District.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the R-1, Single-Family
Residential District is to provide appropriately located areas for detached
single-family dwellings and directly related complementary uses.



      (2)   Permitted uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses are permitted within the R-1, Single-Family Residential
District:



         (a)   Single-family dwelling, detached.



         (b)   State licensed residential care facility serving
six or fewer persons.



         (c)   Licensed day care facility serving 12 or fewer
persons.



         (d)   Licensed group family day care facility serving 14
or fewer children.



         (e)   Public parks and playgrounds.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  Except as specifically limited
herein, the following uses may be allowed in the R-1, Single-Family
Residential District, subject to the regulations set forth for conditional
uses in § 9.104, Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for
specific uses set forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:



         (a)   Religious facility/place of worship.



         (b)   Convent or monastery, when accessory to a
religious facility.



         (c)   School, public or private, K-12.



         (d)   Government office.



         (e)   Government protective service facility.



         (f)   Golf course.



         (g)   Joint driveway use between adjoining property
owners.



         (h)   Fences greater than six feet in height.



      (4)   Interim uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses may be allowed in the R-1, Single-Family Residential
District, subject to the regulations set forth for interim uses in § 9.104,
Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for specific uses set
forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:  Greenhouse.



      (5)   Permitted accessory uses.  Except as specifically
limited herein, the following accessory uses shall be in the R-1,
Single-Family Residential District:



         (a)   Private garages, carports and parking spaces.



         (b)   Accessory buildings.



         (c)   Home occupations.



         (d)   Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two
persons.



         (e)   Private swimming pools, tennis courts and other
recreational facilities operated for the sole use and convenience of the
residents of the principal use and their guests.



         (f)   Decorative landscaping, gardening and other
horticultural uses.



         (g)   Temporary construction buildings.



         (h)   Signs as regulated by § 9.106.



   (F)   R-2A and R-2B, Two-Family Residential District.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the R-2A and R-2B Two-Family
Residence District is to provide appropriately located areas for
single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings (duplexes) and directly related
complementary uses.



      (2)   Permitted uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses are permitted within the R-2A and R-2B, Two-Family
Residential District:



         (a)   Single-family dwelling, detached.



         (b)   State-licensed residential care facility serving
six or fewer persons.



         (c)   Licensed day care facility serving 12 or fewer
persons.



         (d)   Licensed group family day care facility serving 14
or fewer children.



         (e)   Public parks and playgrounds.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  Except as specifically limited
herein, the following uses may be allowed in the R-2A and R-2B, Two-Family
Residential District, subject to the regulations set forth for conditional
uses in § 9.104, Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for
specific uses set forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:



         (a)   Two-family dwelling.



         (b)   Twinhome dwelling.



         (c)   Religious facility/place of worship.



         (d)   Convent or monastery, when accessory to a
religious facility.



         (e)   School, public or private, K-12.



         (f)   Government office.



         (g)   Government protective service facility.



         (h)   Golf course.



         (i)   Off-street parking for an adjacent conforming
commercial or industrial use, provided the lots are under common ownership,
is not separated by a public right-of-way and front on the same public
right-of-way.



         (j)   Joint driveway use between adjoining property
owners.



         (k)   Fences greater than six feet in height.



      (4)   Interim uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses may be allowed in the R-2-A and R-2B, Two-Family
Residential District, subject to the regulations set forth for interim uses
in § 9.104, Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for specific
uses set forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:  Greenhouse.



      (5)   Permitted accessory uses.  Except as specifically
limited herein, the following accessory uses shall be in the R-2A and R-2B,
Two-Family Residential District:



         (a)   Private garages, carports and parking spaces.



         (b)   Accessory buildings.



         (c)   Home occupations.



         (d)   Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two
persons.



         (e)   Private swimming pools, tennis courts and other
recreational facilities operated for the sole use and convenience of the
residents of the principal use and their guests.



         (f)   Decorative landscaping, gardening and other
horticultural uses.



         (g)   Temporary construction buildings.



         (h)   Signs as regulated by § 9.106.



   (G)   R-3, Limited Multiple-Family Residential District.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the R-3, Limited
Multiple-Family Residential District is to provide appropriately located
areas for small lot single-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings with
up to eight units per structure (town homes, condominiums and apartments),
congregate living arrangements and directly related complementary uses.



      (2)   Permitted uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses are permitted within the R-3, Limited Multiple-Family
Residential District:



         (a)   Single-family dwelling, detached.



         (b)   Two-family dwelling.



         (c)    Twinhome dwelling.



         (d)   Town home dwelling with up to eight units per
structure.



         (e)   Multiple-family dwelling with up to eight units
per structure.



         (f)   State licensed residential care facility serving
six or fewer persons.



         (g)   Licensed day care facility serving 12 or fewer
persons.



         (h)   Licensed group family day care facility serving 14
or fewer children.



         (i)   Public park and/or playground.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  Except as specifically limited
herein, the following uses may be allowed in the R-3, Limited Multiple-Family
Residential District, subject to the regulations set forth for conditional
uses in § 9.104, Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for
specific uses set forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:



         (a)   Religious facility/place of worship.



         (b)   Convent or monastery, when accessory to a
religious facility.



         (c)   School, public or private, K-12.



         (d)   Government office.



         (e)   Government protective service facility.



         (f)   Off-street parking for an adjacent conforming
commercial or industrial use, provided the lots are under common ownership,
is not separated by a public right-of-way and front on the same public
right-of-way.



         (g)   State licensed residential care facility serving 7
to 16 persons.



         (h)   Licensed day care facility serving more than 12
persons.



         (i)   Congregate living facilities, including rooming
houses, group living quarters, nursing homes, senior housing, assisted living
facilities, transitional housing and emergency housing.



         (j)   Bed and breakfast home, when accessory to a
single-family dwelling.



         (k)   Community center.



         (l)   Recreational facility, indoor.



         (m)   Recreational facility, outdoor.



         (n)   Day care center, adult or child.



         (o)   Joint driveway use between adjoining property
owners.



         (p)   Fences greater than six feet in height.



      (4)   Interim uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses may be allowed in the R-3, Limited Multiple-Family
Residential District, subject to the regulations set forth for interim uses
in § 9.104, Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for specific
uses set forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:  Greenhouse.



      (5)   Permitted accessory uses.  Except as specifically
limited herein, the following accessory uses shall be in the R-3, Limited
Multiple-Family Residential District:



         (a)   Private garages, carports and parking spaces.



         (b)   Accessory buildings.



         (c)   Home occupations.



         (d)   Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two
persons.



         (e)   Private swimming pools, tennis courts and other
recreational facilities operated for the sole use and convenience of the
residents of the principal use and their guests.



         (f)   Decorative landscaping, gardening and other
horticultural uses.



         (g)   Temporary construction buildings.



         (h)   Signs as regulated by § 9.106.



   (H)   R-4, Multiple-Family Residential District.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the R-4, Multiple-Family
Residential District is to provide for appropriately located areas for high
density multiple-family dwellings, congregate living arrangements and
directly related complementary uses.



      (2)   Permitted uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses are permitted within the R-4, Multiple-Family Residential
District:



         (a)   Single-family dwelling, detached.



         (b)   Two-family dwelling.



         (c)   Twinhome dwelling.



         (d)   Town home dwelling with up to eight units per
structure.



         (e)   Multiple-family dwelling.



         (f)   State licensed residential care facility serving
six or fewer persons.



         (g)    Licensed day care facility serving 12 or fewer
persons.



         (h)   Licensed group family day care facility serving 14
or fewer children.



         (i)   Public park and/or playground.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  Except as specifically limited
herein, the following uses may be allowed in the R-4, Multiple-Family
Residential District, subject to the regulations set forth for conditional
uses in § 9.104, Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for
specific uses set forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:



         (a)   Religious facility/place of worship.



         (b)   Convent or monastery, when accessory to a
religious facility.



         (c)   School, public or private, K-12.



         (d)   School, vocational or business.



         (e)   Licensed day care facility serving more than 12
persons.



         (f)   Government office.



         (g)   Government protective service facility.



         (h)   Off-street parking for an adjacent conforming
commercial or industrial use, provided the lots are under common ownership,
is not separated by a public right-of-way and front on the same public
right-of-way.



         (i)   State licensed residential care facility serving
more than six persons.



         (j)   Congregate living facilities, including rooming
houses, group living quarters, nursing homes, senior housing, assisted living
facilities, transitional housing and emergency housing.



         (k)   Bed and breakfast home, when accessory to a
single-family dwelling.



         (l)   Community center.



         (m)   Recreational facility, indoor.



         (n)   Recreational facility, outdoor.



         (o)   Day care center, adult or child.



         (p)   Manufactured home park.



         (q)   Joint driveway use between adjoining property
owners.



         (r)   Fences greater than six feet in height.



      (4)   Interim uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses may be allowed in the R-4, Multiple-Family Residential
District, subject to the regulations set forth for interim uses in § 9.104,
Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for specific uses set
forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:  Greenhouse.



      (5)   Permitted accessory uses.  Except as specifically
limited herein, the following accessory uses shall be in the R-4,
Multiple-Family Residential District:



         (a)   Private garages, carports and parking spaces.



         (b)   Accessory buildings.



         (c)   Home occupations.



         (d)   Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two
persons.



         (e)   Private swimming pools, tennis courts and other
recreational facilities operated for the sole use and convenience of the
residents of the principal use and their guests.



         (f)   Decorative landscaping, gardening and other
horticultural uses.



         (g)   Temporary construction buildings.



         (h)   Signs as regulated by § 9.106.



(Ord. 1428, passed 5-29-01; Am. Ord. 1502, passed 1-9-06; Am. Ord. 1530,
passed 9-24-07; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 3-22-10; Am. Ord. 1588, passed 2-14-11;
Am. Ord. 1594, passed 4-25-11)



§ 9.110  COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The commercial districts are established to provide
for a wide range of goods and services in locations throughout the community;
provide employment opportunities; and enhance the livability of the community
by providing convenient access to goods and services.



   (B)   General provisions.



      (1)   Compliance with applicable regulations.  Any use
established in a commercial district after the effective date of this article
shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal standards for such
uses.



      (2)   Administration.  The administration and enforcement of
this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of § 9.104,
Administration and Enforcement.



      (3)   Nonconformities.  Nonconforming uses, structures, lots
and signs within a commercial district shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 9.105, Nonconformities.



      (4)   Compliance with general development standards.  Any use
established, expanded or modified in a commercial district after the
effective date of this article shall comply with the applicable provisions of
§ 9.106, General Development Standards.



      (5)   Compliance with specific development standards.  Any
use established, expanded or modified in a commercial district after the
effective date of this article shall comply with the applicable provisions of
§ 9.107, Specific Development Standards.



      (6)   Prohibited uses.  Any use not listed as either
permitted, conditional or accessory in a particular district or any use not
determined by the Zoning Administrator to be substantially similar to a use
listed as permitted, conditional or accessory shall be prohibited in that
district.



   (C)   Lot dimension, height, and bulk requirements.  Lot area,
setback, height and lot coverage requirements for uses in the commercial
districts shall be as specified in the following table.



 




 

LB

 

GB

 

CBD




Minimum Lot Area

 

6,000 sq. ft.

 

6,000 sq. ft.

 






Minimum Lot Width

 

50 ft.

 

40 ft.

 

20 ft.




 



 




 

LB

 

GB

 

CBD






Minimum Lot Depth




   Lot area per dwelling unit




      Single-family dwelling

 

6,500 sq. ft.

 



 






      Multiple-family dwelling




         Efficiency

 

1,200 sq. ft.

 



 

1,200 sq. ft.




         One bedroom

 

1,800 sq. ft

 



 

1,800 sq. ft.




         Two bedroom

 

2,000 sq. ft.

 



 

2,000 sq. ft.




         Three bedroom

 

2,500 sq. ft.

 



 

2,500 sq. ft.




         Additional bedroom

 

400 sq. ft.

 



 

400 sq. ft.




      Congregate living units

 

400 sq. ft.

 



 

400 sq. ft.




      Hotel or motel

 

400 sq. ft.

 



 






      Hospital

 

600 sq. ft.

 



 






Building Setback Requirements




   Nonresidential/mixed-use front yard

 

none

 



 






   Residential front yard

 

5 ft.

 



 






   Front yard

 



 

15 ft.

 

none




   Side yard

 

15 ft.

 

none

 

none




   Corner side yard

 

10 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

1 ft.




   Rear yard

 

20 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

10 ft.




Parking Setback Requirements




   Front yard

 

12 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

1 ft.




   Side yard

 

5 ft.

 

5 ft.

 

none




   Corner side yard

 

12 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

1 ft.




   Rear yard

 

5 ft.

 

5 ft.

 

5 ft.




Maximum Height

 

35 ft.

 

35 ft.

 






Maximum Lot Coverage




   Floor area ratio

 



 

1.0

 

6.0





 



   (D)   LB, Limited Business District.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the LB, Limited Business
District is to provide appropriate locations for limited retail sales and
services for the convenience of adjacent residential neighborhoods. These
areas are located along collector or arterial roadways in close proximity to
residential neighborhoods, arranged and designed to be a functional and
harmonious part of the neighborhood, and accessible by public sidewalks or
trails as well as by roadways.



      (2)   Permitted uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses are permitted within the LB, Limited Business District:



         (a)   Multiple-family dwelling.



         (b)   Government office.



         (c)   Government protective service facility.



         (d)   Public park and/or playground.



         (e)   Clinic, medical or dental.



         (f)   Clinic, veterinary.



         (g)   Funeral home.



         (h)   Office, not exceeding 4,000 square feet in area.



         (i)   Studio, professional.



         (j)   Service, professional.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  Except as specifically limited
herein, the following uses may be allowed in the LB, Limited Business
District, subject to the regulations set forth for conditional uses in §
9.104, Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for specific uses
set forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:



         (a)   School, vocational or business.



         (b)   School, performing/visual/martial arts.



         (c)   Licensed day care facility, child or adult.



         (d)   Government maintenance facility.



         (e)   State licensed residential care facility.



         (f)   Congregate living facility, including rooming
houses, group living quarters, nursing homes, senior housing, assisted living
facility, traditional housing and emergency housing.



         (g)   Bed and breakfast home, when accessory to a
single-family dwelling.



         (h)   Community center.



         (i)   Recreational facility, indoor.



         (j)   Recreational facility, outdoor.



         (k)   Single-family dwelling, when accessory to a
commercial use.



         (l)   Food service, limited (coffee shop/deli).



         (m)   Hospital.



         (n)   Museum/gallery.



         (o)   Retail sales, not exceeding 2,500 square feet in
area.



         (p)   Hotel or motel.



         (q)   Fences greater than six feet in height.



         (r)   Brewer taproom, not exceeding 2,000 barrels of
malt liquor a year.



         (s)   Brew pub, not exceeding 2,000 barrels of malt
liquor a year.



      (4)   Permitted accessory uses.  Except as specifically
limited herein, the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the LB,
Limited Business District:



         (a)   Private garages, parking spaces and loading areas.



         (b)   Accessory buildings.



         (c)   Private swimming pools, tennis courts and other
recreational facilities operated for the sole use and convenience of the
residents of the principal use and their guests.



         (d)   Landscaping and other horticultural uses.



         (e)   Temporary construction buildings.



         (f)   Signs as regulated by § 9.106.



   (E)   GB, General Business District.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the GB General Business
District is to provide appropriate locations for general retail sales,
services and other commercial developments that benefit from their proximity
to other commercial uses. These areas are located away from residential
neighborhoods, along arterial roadways and are accessible primarily by
automobile.



      (2)   Permitted uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses are permitted within the GB, General Business District:



         (a)   Government office.



         (b)   Government protective service facility.



         (c)   Public park and/or playground.



         (d)   School, vocational or business.



         (e)   School, performing/visual/martial arts.



         (f)   Auditorium/place of assembly.



         (g)   Automobile convenience facility.



         (h)   Automobile and motorcycle repair, minor.



         (i)   Billiards hall.



         (j)   Bowling alley.



         (k)   Car wash.



         (l)   Clinic, medical or dental.



         (m)   Clinic, veterinary.



         (n)   Day care facility, adult or child.



         (o)   Financial institution.



         (p)   Food service, convenience (fast food).



         (q)   Food service, limited (coffee shop/deli).



         (r)   Food service, full service (restaurant/nightclub).



         (s)   Funeral home.



         (t)   Greenhouse/garden center.



         (u)   Health or fitness club.



         (v)   Hotel/motel.



         (w)   Laboratory, medical.



         (x)   Liquor store, off-sale.



         (y)   Museum or gallery.



         (z)   Office.



         (aa)   Retail sales.



         (bb)   Service, professional.



         (cc)   Shopping center.



         (dd)   Studio, professional.



         (ee)   Studio, radio and television.



         (ff)   Theater, live performance.



         (gg)   Theater, movie.



         (hh)   Motor vehicle parts store.



         (ii)   Brewer taproom.



         (jj)   Brew pub.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  Except as specifically limited
herein, the following uses may be allowed in the GB, General Business
District, subject to the regulations set forth for conditional uses in §
9.104, Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for specific uses
set forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:



         (a)   Community center.



         (b)   Recreational facility (indoor and outdoor).



         (c)   Banquet hall.



         (d)   Government maintenance facility.



         (e)   Arcade.



         (f)   Automobile and motorcycle sales/rental, new.



         (g)   Automobile and motorcycle sales, used (in
building).



         (h)   Recreational vehicle sales, new.



         (i)   Recreational vehicle sales, used (in building).



         (j)   Firearms dealer/shooting range.



         (k)   Hospital.



         (l)   Outdoor sales or display.



         (m)   Outdoor storage.



         (n)   Parking ramp.



         (o)   Assembly, manufacturing and/or processing.



         (p)   Printing and/or publishing.



         (q)   Consignment/secondhand store.



         (r)   Club or lodge.



         (s)   Currency exchange.



         (t)   Pawnshop.



         (u)   Drop-in facility.



         (v)   Fences greater than six feet in height.



         (w)   Animal kennel and/or shelter.



         (x)   Precious metal dealerships.



      (4)   Interim uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses may be allowed in the GB, General Business District,
subject to the regulations set forth for interim uses in § 9.104,
Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for specific uses set
forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:



         (a)   Fireworks tents.



         (b)   Outdoor agricultural/produce sales.



         (c)   Outdoor Christmas tree sales.



      (5)   Permitted accessory uses.  Except as specifically
limited herein, the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the GB,
General Business District:



         (a)   Private garages, parking spaces and loading areas.



         (b)   Accessory buildings.



         (c)   Landscaping and other horticultural uses.



         (d)   Incidental repair or processing necessary to
conduct the permitted principal use, provided the accessory use does not
exceed 30% of the floor area.



         (e)   Temporary construction buildings.



         (f)   Signs as regulated by § 9.106.



   (F)   CBD, Central Business District.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the CBD, Central Business
District is to provide for the development and redevelopment of the
established downtown core, including a mix of retail, financial, office,
service and entertainment uses. Residential units are allowed within this
district when located above a first floor commercial use.



      (2)   Permitted uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses are permitted within the CBD, Central Business District:



         (a)   Multiple-family residential, when located above a
first floor commercial use.



         (b)   Government offices.



         (c)   Government protective services facility.



         (d)   Public parks and/or playgrounds.



         (e)   School, vocational or business.



         (f)   School, performing/visual/martial arts.



         (g)   Auditorium/place of assembly.



         (h)   Billiards hall.



         (i)   Bowling alley.



         (j)   Clinic, medical or dental.



         (k)   Clinic, veterinary.



         (l)   Licensed day care facility, adult or child.



         (m)   Financial institution.



         (n)   Food service, convenience (fast food).



         (o)   Food service, limited (coffee shop/deli).



         (p)   Food service, full service (restaurant/nightclub).



         (q)   Health or fitness center.



         (r)   Hotel or motel.



         (s)   Laboratory, medical.



         (t)   Liquor store, off-sale.



         (u)   Museum or gallery.



         (v)   Office.



         (w)   Retail sales.



         (x)   Service, professional.



         (y)   Studio, professional.



         (z)   Studio, radio or televisions.



         (aa)   Theater, live performance.



         (bb)   Theater, movie.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  Except as specifically limited
herein, the following uses may be allowed in the CBD, Central Business
District, subject to the regulations set forth for conditional uses in §
9.104, Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for specific uses
set forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:



         (a)   Arcade.



         (b)   Outdoor sales and/or display.



         (c)   Outdoor storage.



         (d)   Parking ramp.



         (e)   Club or lodge.



         (f)   Fences greater than six feet in height.



         (g)   Community center.



         (h)   Recreational facility (indoor/outdoor).



         (i)   Banquet hall.



         (j)   Brewer taproom.



         (k)   Brew pub.



      (4)   Interim uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses may be allowed in the CBD, Central Business District,
subject to the regulations set forth for interim uses in § 9.104,
Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for specific uses set
forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:



         (a)   Fireworks tents.



         (b)   Outdoor agricultural/produce sales.



         (c)   Outdoor Christmas tree sales.



      (5)   Permitted accessory uses.  Except as specifically
limited herein, the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the CBD,
Central Business District:



         (a)   Private garages, parking spaces and loading areas.



         (b)   Landscaping and other horticultural uses.



         (c)   Incidental repair or processing necessary to
conduct the permitted principal use, provided the accessory use does not
exceed 30% of the floor area.



         (d)   Temporary construction buildings.



         (e)   Signs as regulated by § 9.106.



      (6)   Off-street parking.  The CBD, Central Business
District, shall be considered an off-street parking district in which
off-street parking is not required for nonresidential land uses. 
Residential uses, including those in mixed-use buildings, shall meet the
parking requirements of § 9.106.



(Ord. 1428, passed 5-29-01; Am. Ord. 1460, passed 10-13-03; Am. Ord. 1505,
passed 1-30-06; Am. Ord. 1515, passed 11-13-06; Am. Ord. 1530, passed
9-24-07; Am. Ord. 1594, passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord. 1595, passed 4-25-11; Am.
Ord. 1606, passed 4-23-12; Am. Ord. 1626, passed 5-9-16; Am. Ord. 1638,
passed 2-27-17Am. Ord. 1649, passed 6-25-18; Am. Ord. 1653, passed 2-25-19;
Am. Ord. 1654, passed 2-25-19)



§ 9.111  INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The industrial districts are established to enhance
the community’s tax base; provide employment opportunities; and accommodate
industrial development while maintaining compatibility with surrounding areas.



   (B)   General provisions.



      (1)   Compliance with applicable regulations.  Any use
established in an industrial district after the effective date of this
chapter shall comply will all applicable local, state and federal standards
for such uses.



      (2)   Administration.  The administration and enforcement of
this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of § 9.104,
Administration and Enforcement.



      (3)   Nonconformities.  Nonconforming uses, structures, lots
and signs within an Industrial District shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 9.105, Nonconformities.



      (4)   Compliance with general development standards.  Any use
established, expanded or modified in an industrial district after the
effective date of this article shall comply with the applicable provisions of
§ 9.106, General Development Standards.



      (5)   Compliance with specific development standards.  Any
use established, expanded or modified in an industrial district after the
effective date of this chapter that is identified in § 9.107, Specific
Development Standards, shall comply with the applicable provisions of that
section.



      (6)   Prohibited uses.  Any use not listed as either
permitted, conditional or accessory in a particular district or any use not
determined by the Zoning Administrator to be substantially similar to a use
listed as permitted, conditional or accessory shall be prohibited in that
district.



   (C)   Lot dimension, height, and bulk requirements.  Lot area,
setback, height and lot coverage requirements for uses in the industrial
districts shall be as specified in the following table:



 




 

I-1

 

I-2






Minimum Lot Area

 

10,000 sq. ft.

 

10,000 sq. ft.




Minimum Lot Width

 

80 ft.

 

80 ft.




Minimum Lot Depth




   Building Setback Requirements




      Front yard

 

20 ft.

 

20 ft.




      Side yard

 

12 ft.

 

12 ft.




      Corner side yard

 

15 ft.

 

15 ft.




      Rear yard

 

24 ft.

 

24 ft.




   Parking Setback Requirements




      Front yard

 

20 ft.

 

20 ft.




      Side yard

 

5 ft.

 

5 ft.




      Corner side yard

 

20 ft.

 

20 ft.




      Rear yard

 

5 ft.

 

5 ft.




Maximum Height

 



 






Maximum Lot Coverage




   Floor Area Ratio

 

1.0

 

1.0





 



   (D)   I-1, Light Industrial District.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the I-1, Light Industrial
District is to provide appropriate locations for industrial enterprises
engaged in activities such as assembly, storage, warehousing and light
manufacturing and further processing of materials first handled by general
industry. These areas are located with easy access to arterial roadways and
should be separated from residential uses by natural or manmade barriers.



      (2)   Permitted uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses are permitted within the I-1, Light Industrial District:



         (a)   Community center.



         (b)   Government office.



         (c)   Government maintenance facility.



         (d)   Government protective service facility.



         (e)   Public park and/or playground.



         (f)   Recreational facility, indoor.



         (g)   Recreational facility, outdoor.



         (h)   Automobile and motorcycle repair, major.



         (i)   Automobile and motorcycle repair, minor.



         (j)   Laboratory, medical.



         (k)   Office.



         (l)   Studio, radio or television.



         (m)   Assembly, manufacturing and/or processing.



         (n)   Freight terminal.



         (o)   Maintenance facility.



         (p)   Office/showroom.



         (q)   Office/warehouse.



         (r)   Printing and/or publishing.



         (s)   Self-service storage facility.



         (t)   Warehousing and/or distribution.



         (u)   Pawnshops.



         (v)   Tattoo shops.



         (w)   Body piercing shops.



         (x)   Motor vehicle parts store.



         (y)   Brewer taproom.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  Except as specifically limited
herein, the following uses may be allowed in the I-1, Light Industrial
District, subject to the regulations set forth for conditional uses in §
9.104, Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for specific uses
set forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:



         (a)   Caretaker's residence.



         (b)   Outdoor sales and/or display.



         (c)   Outdoor storage.



         (d)   Parking ramp.



         (e)   Concrete, asphalt or rock crushing operation.



         (f)   Salvage operation/transfer station.



         (g)   Adult entertainment use.



         (h)   State licensed residential care facility,
correctional.



         (i)   Fences greater than seven feet in height.



         (j)   Barbed wire fences.



      (4)   Permitted accessory uses.  Except as specifically
limited herein, the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the I-2,
Light Industrial District:



         (a)   Off-street parking and loading areas.



         (b)   Landscaping and other horticultural uses.



         (c)   Temporary construction buildings.



         (d)   Signs as regulated by § 9.106.



   (E)   I-2, General Industrial District.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the I-2, General Industrial
District is to provide appropriate locations for industrial enterprises
engaged in activities such as manufacturing, processing, assembly, storage
and warehousing, which, because of their size and/or nature, require
isolation from non- industrial uses. These areas are located with easy access
to arterial roadways or railroads and should be separated from non-industrial
uses by natural or manmade barriers.



      (2)   Permitted uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses are permitted within the I-2, General Industrial District:



         (a)   Community center.



         (b)   Government office.



         (c)   Government maintenance facility.



         (d)   Government protective service facility.



         (e)   Public park and/or playground.



         (f)   Recreational facility, indoor.



         (g)   Recreational facility, outdoor.



         (h)   Automobile and motorcycle repair, major.



         (i)   Automobile and motorcycle repair, minor.



         (j)   Laboratory, medical.



         (k)   Office.



         (l)   Studio, radio or television.



         (m)   Assembly, manufacturing and/or processing.



         (n)   Freight terminal.



         (o)   Maintenance facility.



         (p)   Office/showroom.



         (q)   Office/warehouse.



         (r)   Printing and/or publishing.



         (s)   Self-service storage facility.



         (t)   Warehousing and/or distribution.



         (u)   Pawnshops.



         (v)   Tattoo shops.



         (w)   Body piercing shops.



         (x)   Motor vehicle parts store.



         (y)   Brewer taproom.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  Except as specifically limited
herein, the following uses may be allowed in the I-2, General Industrial
District, subject to the regulations set forth for conditional uses in §
9.104, Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for specific uses
set forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:



         (a)   Caretaker’s residence.



         (b)   Outdoor sales and/or display.



         (c)   Outdoor storage.



         (d)   Parking ramp.



         (e)   Concrete, asphalt or rock crushing operation.



         (f)   Salvage operation/transfer station.



         (g)   Adult entertainment use.



         (h)   State licensed residential care facility,
correctional.



         (i)   Fences greater than seven feet in height.



         (j)   Barbed wire fences.



      (4)   Permitted accessory uses.  Except as specifically
limited herein, the following accessory uses shall be permitted in the I-2,
Light Industrial District:



         (a)   Off-street parking and loading areas.



         (b)   Landscaping and other horticultural uses.



         (c)   Temporary construction buildings.



         (d)   Signs as regulated by § 9.106.



(Ord. 1428, passed 5-29-01; Am. Ord. 1516, passed 10-23-06; Am. Ord. 1594,
passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord. 1626, passed 5-9-16; Am. Ord. 1638, passed 2-27-17)



§ 9.112  MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the MXD Mixed Use Development
District is to promote efficient use of existing city infrastructure; ensure
sensitivity to surrounding neighborhoods; create linkages between compatible
areas of the city; provide appropriate transitions between uses; ensure high
quality design and architecture; create good pedestrian circulation and
safety; promote alternative modes of transportation; and increase the quality
of life and community image of Columbia Heights. The intent of this district
is to encourage a flexible high-quality design strategy for development
and/or redevelopment of specific areas within the community.



   (B)   General provisions.



      (1)   Application of district.  The Mixed Use Development
District shall only be applied to those areas identified as being within one
of three mixed-use districts in the city’s comprehensive plan.



      (2)   Compliance with applicable regulations.  Any use
established in Mixed Use District after the effective date of this article
shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal standards for such
uses, unless specifically modified by the approved development agreement.



      (3)   Administration.  The administration and enforcement of
this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of § 9.104,
Administration and Enforcement. Development proposals for a mixed-use
development shall require a zoning amendment and site plan review and
approval. Development proposals for a mixed-use development may also require
the re-subdivision of land.



      (4)   Development agreement.  A development agreement is
required as part of the final mixed- use development approval. The
development agreement shall address approved site and building design
criteria, approved sign locations and design criteria, construction phasing,
and bonding or other financial surety for construction of on- and off-site
improvements.



   (C)   Mixed use development district types.  The city’s
comprehensive plan identifies three distinct mixed-use development
opportunities with the city.



      (1)   Transit Oriented Mixed-Use.  The purpose of the
Transit-Oriented Mixed Use is to promote development and redevelopment that
facilitates linkages and interaction of transit services, housing and
neighborhood services. The focus of land use within this district is to
ensure a pedestrian friendly environment and pedestrian connections to and
from residential development and transit facilities. The mix of land use
shall be flexible to help facilitate a successful development (12 units/acre
minimum)



      (2)   Community Center Mixed-Use.  The purpose of the
Community Center Mixed-Use is to encourage a mix of land use and
redevelopment located near the existing City Hall and other city offices and
to strengthen the community image of Columbia Heights. Commercial/retail uses
will be service- oriented and at a neighborhood scale. Residential uses will
be medium to high density (six units/acre minimum). The mix of land use shall
be flexible to help facilitate a successful development. The minimum floor
area of any land use shall be 20% and the maximum floor area of any land use
shall be 80%.



      (3)   Transitional Mixed-Use.  The purpose of the
Transitional Mixed-Use is to target redevelopment opportunities along the
40th Avenue corridor and provide opportunities to strengthen the connection
between the downtown commercial core and city offices adjacent to Huset Park.
The mix of land use shall consist of 60% medium to high density residential
(12 units/acre minimum) and 40% office and/or commercial/retail. Land use
should complement and strengthen the current residential character of the
area and provide new opportunities for service oriented development.
Commercial/retail uses should not compete with the downtown core and
therefore primarily serve local residents.



   (D)   Uses.  Mixed-use developments shall contain at least two of
the following three land use categories:



      (1)   Residential uses.  All permitted, conditional, and
permitted accessory residential uses identified in § 9.109, Residential
Districts, and § 9.110, Commercial Districts, which are consistent with the
comprehensive plan shall be treated as potentially allowable uses within the
Mixed Use Development District.



      (2)   Commercial uses.  All permitted, conditional, and
permitted accessory commercial uses identified in § 9.110, Commercial
Districts, which are consistent with the comprehensive plan shall be treated
as potentially allowable uses within the Mixed Use Development District.



      (3)   Institutional uses.  All permitted, conditional, and
accessory institutional uses identified in § 9.109, Residential Districts,
and § 9.110, Commercial Districts, which are consistent with the
comprehensive plan shall be treated as potentially allowable uses within the
Mixed Use Development District.



   (E)   Performance standards.  The following performance standards
shall be applied to all mixed-use developments.



      (1)   The minimum size of a mixed-use development shall be
flexible to help facilitate a successful development.



      (2)   The maximum non-residential density is 6.0 FAR and the
maximum residential density is 20 units/acre. Maximum densities may be
increased by up to 50% at the sole discretion of the City Council if one of
more of the following are provided:



         (a)   At least 50% of the required parking is provided
by underground parking or parking in ramps;



         (b)   Housing is provided above ground floor
retail/service commercial and the total floor area of the housing is at least
twice the floor area of the retail/service commercial use;



         (c)   Office space is provided above ground floor
retail/service commercial and the total floor area of the office space is at
least twice the floor area of the retail/service commercial use;



         (d)   At least 50% of the building ground coverage is
concentrated in structures four or more stories in height, thereby conserving
open space within the mixed-use development area.



      (3)   The design of the mixed-use development is sensitive to
adjacent usable open space and includes design of pedestrian/bicycle
connections to enhance existing circulation patterns.



      (4)   Building setbacks shall be regulated by the final site
plan and development agreement approved by the City Council, based on the
following findings:



         (a)   The setbacks provided adequate distances from uses
in adjacent districts.



         (b)   The setbacks maintain and enhance the character of
the neighborhood in which the mixed-use development is located.



      (5)   Cumulative parking requirements may be reduced by up to
30% of required spaces at the sole discretion of the Council if one or more
of the following are provided:



         (a)   Joint or shared parking arrangements between uses;



         (b)   Proof of parking;



         (c)   Car/van pooling and/or provision of employee or
resident transit passes;



         (d)   Superior pedestrian, bicycle and/or transit access.



      (6)   Buildings shall be oriented to the street or a common
open area with minimal setbacks.



      (7)   Building facades shall be varied to create visual
interest.



      (8)   All trash handling and loading areas shall be interior
or utilize architectural screening of the same exterior materials as the
principal building.



      (9)   Signage shall be allowed in conformance with the
approved site plan and development agreement, and reflect the following
standards:



         (a)   Pylon signs are prohibited;



         (b)   Freestanding monument signs shall utilize the same
exterior materials as the principal building.



(Ord. 1428, passed 5-29-01; Am. Ord. 1460, passed 10-13-03)



§ 9.113  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the PUD, Planned Unit Development
District is to provide greater flexibility with development and
redevelopment; preserve historical, environmental, and aesthetically
significant features; promote a high quality of design; and encourage more
technological and energy efficient developments. This is achieved by
undertaking a process that results in a development outcome that exceeds the
typical development achievable through standard zoning controls.



   (B)   General provisions.



      (1)   Relationship to other applicable regulations.



         (a)   Property located within a PUD District shall be
subject to the land use controls described in the primary zoning district, as
well as the rules and regulations prescribed in the PUD District plan. Where
the provisions of the primary zoning district and the PUD District plan are
in conflict, the PUD District plan shall govern.



         (b)   The PUD District plan review process, in
accordance with the provisions of this section, constitute and supersede the
requirements set forth in § 9.104(N)(2).



      (2)   Right of application. Any person having a legal interest
in the property may file an application for the establishment of a PUD
District with the Zoning Administrator.



      (3)   Authority. The city retains absolute authority and
discretion to establish a PUD District, and reserves the right to deny the
establishment of a PUD District if the City Council determines that the
proposed benefits of the development do not justify the requested
flexibilities of a PUD District.



      (4)   Administration. The administration and enforcement of
this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of § 9.104 .



      (5)   Application.  An application for establishment of a PUD
District shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on the approved form,
and shall be accompanied by an application fee as set forth



in § 9.104 (C)(5). An application shall include a narrative; a vicinity map;
an accurately scaled site plan showing the locations of proposed and existing
buildings, existing and proposed topography, vehicular access and parking
areas, landscaping, and other site features; a stormwater management plan;
elevation views of all proposed buildings and structures; and any other
information determined by the Zoning Administrator to be necessary.



      (6)   Approval. Approval of a PUD District plan shall be by
ordinance, a simple majority vote, and in full force and effect from and
after 30 days after its passage.



      (7)   Physical development contract. After City Council
approval of a PUD District plan, a physical development contract shall be
required prior to site development. The physical development contract shall
reference all the approved plans and specify permitted uses; allowable
densities; development phasing if applicable; required public improvements;
construction commencement and completion dates of the minimum improvements;
an irrevocable letter of credit, or cash deposit in an amount sufficient to
ensure the provision or development of public improvements; and any other
requirements determined by the Zoning Administrator to be necessary. The
physical development contract shall be signed by the applicant or an
authorized representative within 60 days after its approval by City Council.



      (8)   Time limits.  An established PUD District shall be
validated by the construction commencement of the minimum improvements
pursuant to the physical development contract. If the construction
commencement fails to meet the deadline specified in the physical development
contract, the approval of the PUD District plan by the City Council shall be
rendered invalid and void. Notwithstanding the construction commencement time
limitations, the City Council may, at its own discretion, approve an
extension by approval of an amendment to the physical development contract if
requested by the applicant in writing.



   (C)   Areas of flexibility. Development flexibility provided through
the establishment of a PUD District will not be approved in avoidance of the
regulations set forth by the primary zoning district. However, if a
development is able to achieve a higher quality of design, efficiency, and
technology than what current market conditions allow, the establishment of a
PUD District will provide flexibility to the following areas:



      (1)   Building heights;



      (2)   Building materials;



      (3)   Building and parking setbacks;



      (4)   Landscaping requirements;



      (5)   Multiple building placement;



      (6)   Parking and vehicular requirements;



      (7)   Public art requirements;



      (8)   Public spaces;



      (9)   Signage requirements;



      (10)   Site density.



   (D)   Review procedure.



      (1)   Pre-application meeting. Prior to filing an application
with the Zoning Administrator for the establishment of a PUD District, the
applicant shall meet with city staff for a pre-application meeting. The
primary purpose of the pre-application meeting is to allow the applicant and
city staff to discuss land use controls, appropriate uses of the site,
specific development design standards, the application process, and required
information that shall be submitted with an application, as well as
evaluating how the development will achieve a higher quality of design,
efficiency and technology.



      (2)   Development Review Committee. After a completed
application has been filed, the Development Review Committee, comprised of
the Zoning Administrator, Building Official, Fire Chief, City Engineer, and
his or her appointee, shall conduct an administrative review of the
application. All findings and determinations by the Development Review
Committee shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission.



      (3)   Neighborhood meeting.  Prior to the consideration of a
PUD District plan or a major amendment to a PUD District plan by the Planning
Commission, the applicant shall hold a neighborhood meeting within city
limits, and mail a notification of the neighborhood meeting to all property
owners and tenants within 350 feet surrounding the proposed PUD District. The
purpose of the meeting is to inform the neighborhood of the proposed
development, and to obtain input from the affected property owners and
tenants.



      (4)   Planning Commission.



         (a)   Informal public hearing. The Planning Commission
shall hold an informal public hearing for the consideration of a completed
application for the establishment of a PUD District in accordance with the
requirements of this section. The Planning Commission shall make the
following findings of fact before approving the establishment of a PUD
District:



            1.   The PUD District plan conforms to all
applicable requirements of this article;



            2.   The PUD District plan is consistent with the
applicable provisions of the comprehensive plan;



            3.   The PUD District plan is consistent with any
applicable area plan;



            4.   The PUD District plan minimizes any adverse
impacts on property in the immediate vicinity and the public right-of-way.



         (b)   Recommendation. The findings and recommendation of
the Planning Commission shall be forwarded to the City Council. The Planning
Commission may impose conditions of recommended approval or modifications to
any PUD District plan, and require guarantees deemed necessary to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this section.



      (5)   City Council.



         (a)   Formal public hearing. The City Council shall hold
a formal public hearing for the consideration of a completed application for
the establishment of a PUD District in accordance with the requirements of
this section.



         (b)   Action. The City Council shall review and consider
the recommendations of the Planning Commission, the Development Review
Committee, and the public before approval or denial, in whole or in part, is
made for establishment of the PUD District. A denial shall only be based on
findings of fact that the PUD District plan is not in substantial compliance
with the provisions of this section, or if the City Council determines that
the proposed benefits of the development do not justify the requested
flexibilities of a PUD District.



   (E)   Amendments. An approved PUD District plan may not be changed
or modified without prior approval by City Council. A request for an
amendment to an approved PUD District plan shall be submitted and reviewed by
the Zoning Administrator to determine if it is a minor or major amendment.



      (1)   Minor amendments.



         1.   An amendment shall be deemed minor in nature if a
change or modification to the approved PUD District plan increases or
decreases a provision to be in conformance with the primary zoning district;
increases the density of units per acre or gross floor area in any structure
by less than or equal to 10%; demolishes or adds an accessory structure;
significantly alters the original intent of the landscape plans or elevation
views; or is not determined by the Zoning Administrator to be major in nature.



         2.   A minor amendment shall be placed on the consent
agenda of City Council without the review by the Planning Commission. The
City Council may remove the minor amendment from the consent agenda for
discussion before approval or denial.



      (2)   Major amendments.



         (a)   An amendment shall be deemed major in nature if a
change or modification to the approved PUD District plan increases or
decreases a provision to not be in conformance with the primary zoning
district; increases the density of units per acre or gross floor area in any
structure by more than 10%; demolishes or adds a principal structure; alters
the placement of buildings or roads; introduces a new use; decreases the
amount of public spaces by more than or equal to 3%, or alters it in such a
way to change its original intent; creates a conflict with the original
conditions of recommended approval; eliminates, substantially diminishes, or
compromises the original intent of the PUD District as prescribed in division
(A) of this section; or is not determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
minor in nature.



         (b)   A major amendment shall require the submittal of a
revised PUD District plan to the Zoning Administrator for full review and
approval in accordance with the provisions of this section.



   (F)   Cancellations. An approved PUD District plan shall be
cancelled and revoked only upon City Council approving a resolution
rescinding the PUD District. Cancellation of a PUD District plan shall
include findings of fact that demonstrate that the district is no longer
necessary due to changes in local regulations; has become inconsistent with
the comprehensive plan of the city; threatens public safety, health, or
welfare; or at the request of the applicant or assignee in writing.



(Ord. 1647, passed 6-25-18)



§ 9.114  OVERLAY DISTRICTS.



   (A)   General provisions.



      (1)   Purpose.  Overlay districts are established in
recognition of the unique characteristics of land and land use within certain
parts of the city, including those properties within flood-prone areas and
shoreland areas. Overlay districts are further intended to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare by preserving environmentally sensitive and
unique areas of the community.



      (2)   Relationship to other applicable regulations.  Property
located within an overlay district shall be subject to the provisions of both
the primary zoning district and the overlay district. Where the provisions of
the primary zoning district and the overlay zoning district are in conflict,
the most restrictive provisions shall govern.



      (3)   Establishment of boundaries.  Overlay district
boundaries shall be as specified in the individual overlay district
regulations.



      (4)   Establishment of overlay district.  The following
overlay districts are established:



         (a)   Floodplain Management Overlay District.



         (b)   Shoreland Management Overlay District.



         (c)   Design Overlay District.



   (B)   Floodplain Management Overlay District.



      (1)   Statutory authorization, findings of fact and purpose.



         (a)   Statutory authorization. The legislature of the
state has, in M.S. Chapter 103F and Chapter 462 delegated the responsibility
to local government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood
losses.  Therefore, the City Council of the city, does ordain as follows.



         (b)   Purpose.



            1.   This section regulates development in the
flood hazard areas of the city. These flood hazard areas are subject to
periodic inundation, which may result in loss of life and property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base. It is the purpose of this section to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare by minimizing these losses and
disruptions.



            2.   National Flood Insurance Program compliance.
This section is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 C.F.R. Parts 59 through 78,
as amended, so as to maintain the community's eligibility in the National
Flood Insurance Program.



            3.   This section is also intended to preserve the
natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in
order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve water quality,
reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide
recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community
and economic development.



      (2)   General provisions.



         (a)   How to use this section. This section adopts the
floodplain maps applicable to the city and includes three floodplain
districts: Floodway, Flood Fringe, and General Floodplain.



            1.   Where Floodway and Flood Fringe districts are
delineated on the floodplain maps, the standards in divisions (B)(4) or
(B)(5) will apply, depending on the location of a property.



            2.   Locations where Floodway and Flood Fringe
districts are not delineated on the floodplain maps are considered to fall
within the General Floodplain district. Within the General Floodplain
district, the Floodway District standards in division (B)(4) apply unless the
floodway boundary is determined, according to the process outlined in
division (B)(6). Once the floodway boundary is determined, the Flood Fringe
District standards in division (B)(5) may apply outside the floodway.



         (b)   Lands to which section applies. This section
applies to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Columbia Heights
shown on the Official Zoning Map and/or the attachments to the map as being
located within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General
Floodplain Districts.



            1.   The Floodway, Flood Fringe and General
Floodplain Districts are overlay districts that are superimposed on all
existing zoning districts.



            2.   The standards imposed in the overlay
districts are in addition to any other requirements in this section. In case
of a conflict, the more restrictive standards will apply.



         (c)   Incorporation of maps by reference. The following
maps together with all attached material are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of the Official Zoning Map and this section.  The
attached material includes the Flood Insurance Study for Anoka County,
Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas and the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated
below, all dated December 16, 2015 and all prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.  These materials are on file in the Office of the City
Planner.



            1.   27003C0384E.



            2.   27003C0392E.



            3.   27003C0403E.



            4.   27003C0411E.



         (d)   Regulatory flood protection elevation. The
regulatory flood protection elevation (RFPE) is an elevation no lower than
one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in
flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from
designation of a floodway.



         (e)   Interpretation. The boundaries of the zoning
districts are determined by scaling distances on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.



            1.   Where a conflict exists between the
floodplain limits illustrated on the official zoning map and actual field
conditions, the flood elevations shall be the governing factor. The Zoning
Administrator must interpret the boundary location based on the ground
elevations that existed on the site on the date of the first National Flood
Insurance Program map showing the area within the regulatory floodplain, and
other available technical data.



            2.   Persons contesting the location of the
district boundaries will be given a reasonable opportunity to present their
case to the Board of Adjustment and to submit technical evidence.



         (f)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not
intended by this section to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or other private agreements.  However, where this
section imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this section
prevail.  All other ordinances inconsistent with this section are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.



         (g)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. This section
does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses
permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood
damages.  This section does not create liability on the part of the city or
its officers or employees for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this section or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



         (h)   Severability. If any section, clause, provision,
or portion of this section is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court
of law, the remainder of this section shall not be affected and shall remain
in full force.



         (i)   Definitions. Unless specifically defined below,
words or phrases used in this section must be interpreted according to common
usage and so as to give this section its most reasonable application.



            ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the
same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.



            BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the "regional
flood." The term BASE FLOOD ELEVATION is used in the flood insurance survey.



            BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl
spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four
sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level.



            CONDITIONAL USE. A specific type of structure or land
use listed in the official control that may be allowed but only after an
in-depth review procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as
provided in the official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding
that:



               a.   Certain conditions as detailed in the
zoning ordinance exist.



               b.   The structure and/or land use conform
to the comprehensive land use plan if one exists and are compatible with the
existing neighborhood.



            CRITICAL FACILITIES. Facilities necessary to a
community's public health and safety, those that store or produce highly
volatile, toxic or water-reactive materials, and those that house occupants
that may be insufficiently mobile to avoid loss of life or injury.  Examples
of critical facilities include hospitals, correctional facilities, schools,
daycare facilities, nursing homes, fire and police stations, wastewater
treatment facilities, public electric utilities, water plants, fuel storage
facilities, and waste handling and storage facilities.



            DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials.



            EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining
the location of floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of
a stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.



            FARM FENCE. A fence as defined by M.S. § 344.02,
subd. 1(a)-(d). An open type fence of posts and wire is not considered to be
a structure under this section. Fences that have the potential to obstruct
flood flows, such as chain link fences and rigid walls, are regulated as
structures under this section.



            FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a
stream or in the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of
normally dry areas.



            FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is
expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.



            FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside
of the floodway.  Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe"
used in the Flood Insurance Study for Anoka County, Minnesota.



            FLOOD PRONE AREA . Any land susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see FLOOD).



            FLOODPLAIN. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a
wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by
the regional flood.



            FLOODPROOFING. A combination of structural
provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to
flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.



            FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the
channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which
are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.



            LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed
area (including basement).  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other
than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor.



            MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities.  The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include the term
"recreational vehicle."



            OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee,
dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert,
building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in,
along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory
floodplain which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of
water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such
water.



            ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOODPLAIN. Lands inundated by the
"regional flood" (see definition).



            PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE. All uses or structures
that are not accessory uses or structures.



            REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a
longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made
obstruction.  In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two
consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.



            RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a
single chassis, is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.  For the purposes of this section, the
term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE is synonymous with the term "travel trailer/travel
vehicle."



            REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of
large floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably
characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in
the magnitude of the 1% chance or 100-year recurrence interval.  Regional
flood is synonymous with the term "base flood" used in a flood insurance
study.



            REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (RFPE). An
elevation not less than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood
plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the
floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.



            REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten year period for which the
cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.



            SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. A term used for flood
insurance purposes synonymous with "one hundred year floodplain."



            STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the
ground or attached to the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not
limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins,
manufactured homes, recreational vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria
specified in division (B)(9)(b)2. of this section and other similar items.



            SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by
a structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.



            SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any consecutive
365-day period, any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal
maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. 
This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage,"
regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does not, however,
include either:



               a.   Any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions.



               b.   Any alteration of a "historic
structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a "historic structure."  For the purpose of this
ordinance, "historic structure" is as defined in 44 C.F.R. Part 59.1.



         (j)   Annexations. The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels
adopted by reference into division (B)(2)(c) above may include floodplain
areas that lie outside of the corporate boundaries of the City of Columbia
Heights at the time of adoption of this section.  If any of these floodplain
land areas are annexed into the city after the date of adoption of this
section, the newly annexed floodplain lands will be subject to the provisions
of this section immediately upon the date of annexation.



      (3)   Establishment of zoning districts.



         (a)   Districts.



            1.   Floodway District.  The Floodway District
includes those areas designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in division (B)(2)(c).  For lakes, wetlands and other basins, the
Floodway District includes those areas designated as Zone A on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map that are at or below the ordinary high water level as
defined in M.S. § 103G.005, subd. 14.



            2.   Flood Fringe District.  The Flood Fringe
District includes those areas designated as floodway fringe on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map adopted in division (B)(2)(c), as being within Zone AE but
being located outside of the floodway.  For lakes, wetlands and other basins
(that do not have a floodway designated), the Flood Fringe District includes
those areas designated as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels
adopted in division (B)(2)(c) that are below the 1% annual chance (100-year)
flood elevation but above the ordinary high water level as defined in M.S. §
103G.005, subd. 14.



            3.   General Floodplain District.  The General
Floodplain District includes those areas designated as Zone A or Zone AE
without a floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in division
(B)(2)(c), but not subject to the criteria in divisions (B)(3)(a)1. and 2.
above.



         (b)   Compliance. Within the floodplain districts
established in this section, the use of any land, the use, size, type and
location of structures on lots, the installation and maintenance of
transportation, utility, water supply and waste treatment facilities, and the
subdivision of land must comply with the terms of this section and other
applicable regulations.  All uses not listed as permitted uses or
conditional uses in division (B)(4), (5) and (6), respectively, are
prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here that:



            1.   New and replacement manufactured homes and
certain recreational vehicles are subject to the general provisions of this
section and specifically division (B)(9).



            2.   Modifications, additions, structural
alterations, normal maintenance and repair, or repair after damage to
existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures or
land are regulated by the general provisions of this section and specifically
division (B)(11).



            3.   All structures must be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.



            4.   As-built elevations for elevated or
floodproofed structures must be certified by ground surveys and
flood-proofing techniques must be designed and certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect as specified in the general provisions of
this ordinance and specifically as stated in division (B)(10) of this section.



            5.   Critical facilities, as defined in division
(B)(2)(i), are prohibited in all floodplain districts.



      (4)   Floodway District (FW).



         (a)   Permitted uses. The following uses, subject to the
standards set forth in division (B)(4)(b), are permitted uses if otherwise
allowed in the underlying zoning district or any applicable overlay district:



            1.   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor
plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild
crop harvesting.



            2.   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking
areas, and airport landing strips.



            3.   Open space uses, including but not limited to
private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife
and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves,
hunting and fishing areas, and single or multiple purpose recreational trails.



            4.   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas,
and play areas.



            5.   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility
transmission lines and pipelines, provided that the Department of Natural
Resources' Area Hydrologist is notified at least ten days prior to issuance
of any permit, and that the standards in divisions (B)(4)(d)1., (d)3.a. and
(d)6. of this section are met.



         (b)   Standards for floodway permitted uses.



            1.   The use must have a low flood damage
potential.



            2.   With the exception of the uses listed in
division (B)(4)(a)5., the use must not obstruct flood flows or increase flood
elevations and must not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations
or storage of materials or equipment.



            3.   Any facility that will be used by employees
or the general public must be designed with a flood warning system that
provides adequate time for evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth



and velocity such that the depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in
feet per second) would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of the
regional (1% chance) flood.



         (c)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be
allowed as conditional uses following the standards and procedures set forth
in division (B)(10)(d) of this section and further subject to the standards
set forth in division (B)(4)(d), if otherwise allowed in the underlying
zoning district or any applicable overlay district.



            1.   Structures accessory to the uses listed in
division (B)(4)(a) above and the uses listed in division (B)(4)(c)2. through
7. below.



            2.   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and
other materials.



            3.   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves,
and water control structures.



            4.   Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or
materials.



            5.   Placement of fill or construction of fences
that obstruct flood flows. Farm fences, as defined in division (B)(2)(i), are
permitted uses.



            6.   Travel-ready recreational vehicles meeting
the exception standards in division (B)(9)(b).



            7.   Levees or dikes intended to protect
agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the
ten-year frequency flood event.



         (d)   Standards for floodway conditional uses.



            1.   All uses.  A conditional use must not cause
any increase in the stage of the 1% chance or regional flood or cause an
increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.



            2.   Fill; storage of materials and equipment.



               a.   The storage or processing of materials
that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious
to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.



               b.   Fill, dredge spoil, and other similar
materials deposited or stored in the floodplain must be protected from
erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method. 
Permanent sand and gravel operations and similar uses must be covered by a
long-term site development plan.



               c.   Temporary placement of fill, other
materials, or equipment which would cause an increase to the stage of the 1%
chance or regional flood may only be allowed if the City Council has approved
a plan that assures removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the
flood warning time available.



            3.   Accessory structures.



               a.   Accessory structures must not be
designed for human habitation.



               b.   Accessory structures, if permitted,
must be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of flood waters:



                  i.   Whenever possible, structures
must be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of
flood flow; and



                  ii.   So far as practicable,
structures must be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those
of adjoining structures.



               c.   Accessory structures must be elevated
on fill or structurally dry floodproofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2
floodproofing classifications in the State Building Code. All floodproofed
accessory structures must meet the following additional standards:



                  i.   The structure must be adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement and designed to
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls; and



                  ii.   Any mechanical and utility
equipment in the structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation or properly floodproofed.



               d.   As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be internally/wet floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4
floodproofing classifications in the State Building Code, provided the
accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment and does not exceed 576
square feet in size. A detached garage may only be used for parking of
vehicles and limited storage.  All structures must meet the following
standards:



                  i.   To allow for the equalization of
hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of two "automatic" openings in
the outside walls of the structure, with a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
and



                  ii.   There must be openings on at
least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no
higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. 
Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not
satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.



            4.   Structural works for flood control that will
change the course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public
waters are subject to the provisions of M.S. § 103G.245.



            5.   A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the
floodway must not cause an increase to the 1% chance or regional flood. The
technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides
of a stream.



            6.   Floodway developments must not adversely
affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any
tributary watercourse or drainage system.



      (5)   Flood Fringe District (FF).



         (a)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses are those uses of
land or structures allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) that comply
with the standards in division (B)(5)(b). If no pre-existing, underlying
zoning districts exist, then any residential or nonresidential structure or
use of a structure or land is a permitted use provided it does not constitute
a public nuisance.



         (b)   Standards for flood fringe permitted uses.



            1.   All structures, including accessory
structures, must be elevated on fill so that the lowest floor, as defined, is
at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.  The finished fill
elevation for structures must be no lower than one foot below the regulatory
flood protection elevation and the fill must extend at the same elevation at
least 15 feet beyond the outside limits of the structure.



               a.   All service utilities, including
ductwork, must be elevated or water-tight to prevent infiltration of
floodwaters.



               b.   As an alternative to elevation on fill,
an accessory structure that constitutes a minimal investment and that does
not exceed 576 square feet in size may be internally floodproofed in
accordance with division (B)(4)(d)3.



            2.   The cumulative placement of fill or similar
material on a parcel must not exceed 1,000 cubic yards, unless the fill is
specifically intended to elevate a structure in accordance with division
(B)(5)(b)1. of this section, or if allowed as a conditional use under
division (B)(5)(c)3. below.



            3.   The storage of any materials or equipment
must be elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation.



            4.   The storage or processing of materials that
are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to
human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.



            5.   Fill must be properly compacted and the
slopes must be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or
other acceptable method.



            6.   All new principal structures must have
vehicular access at or above an elevation not more than two feet below the
regulatory flood protection elevation, or must have a flood warning/emergency
evacuation plan acceptable to the City Council.



            7.   Accessory uses such as yards, railroad
tracks, and parking lots may be at an elevation lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation.  However, any facilities used by employees or
the general public must be designed with a flood warning system that provides
adequate time for evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity
such that the depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second)
would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance)
flood.



            8.   Interference with normal
manufacturing/industrial plant operations must be minimized, especially along
streams having protracted flood durations.  In considering permit
applications, due consideration must be given to the needs of industries with
operations that require a floodplain location.



            9.   Flood fringe developments must not adversely
affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any
tributary watercourse or drainage system.



            10.   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles
must meet the standards of division (B)(9) of this section.



         (c)   Conditional uses. The following uses and
activities may be allowed as conditional uses, if allowed in the underlying
zoning district(s) or any applicable overlay district, following the
procedures in division (B)(10)(d) of this section.  Conditional uses must
meet the standards in divisions (B)(5)(b)4. through 10. and division
(B)(5)(d).



            1.   Any structure that is not elevated on fill or
floodproofed in accordance with division (B)(5)(b)1. of this section.



            2.   Storage of any material or equipment below
the regulatory flood protection elevation.



            3.   The cumulative placement of more than 1,000
cubic yards of fill when the fill is not being used to elevate a structure in
accordance with division (B)(5)(b)1. of this section.



         (d)   Standards for flood fringe conditional uses.



            1.   The standards listed in divisions (B)(5)(b)4.
through 10. apply to all conditional uses.



            2.   Basements, as defined by division (B)(2)(i)
of this section, are subject to the following:



               a.   Residential basement construction is
not allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation.



               b.   Non-residential basements may be
allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation provided the basement
is structurally dry floodproofed in accordance with division (B)(5)(d)4. of
this section.



            3.   All areas of nonresidential structures,
including basements, to be placed below the regulatory flood protection
elevation must be floodproofed in accordance with the structurally dry
floodproofing classifications in the State Building Code.  Structurally dry
floodproofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing classification in the
State Building Code, which requires making the structure watertight with the
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy.  Structures wet floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4
classification are not permitted.



            4.   The placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards
of fill or other similar material on a parcel (other than for the purpose of
elevating a structure to the regulatory flood protection elevation) must
comply with an approved erosion/sedimentation control plan.



               a.   The plan must clearly specify methods
to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of
the regional (1% chance) flood event.



               b.   The plan must be prepared and certified
by a registered professional engineer or other qualified individual
acceptable to the City Council.



               c.   The plan may incorporate alternative
procedures for removal of the material from the floodplain if adequate flood
warning time exists.



            5.   Storage of materials and equipment below the
regulatory flood protection elevation must comply with an approved emergency
plan providing for removal of such materials within the time available after
a flood warning.



            6.   Alternative elevation methods other than the
use of fill may be utilized to elevate a structure's lowest floor above the
regulatory flood protection elevation.  These alternative methods may
include the use of stilts, pilings, parallel walls, and the like, or
above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages.  The
base or floor of an enclosed area shall be considered above-grade and not a
structure's basement or lowest floor if: 1) the enclosed area is above-grade
on at least one side of the structure; 2) it is designed to internally flood
and is constructed with flood resistant materials; and 3) it is used solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The above-noted
alternative elevation methods are subject to the following additional
standards:



               a.   Design and certification. The
structure's design and as-built condition must be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect as being in compliance with the general
design standards of the State Building Code and, specifically, that all
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or be designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating
within these components during times of flooding.



               b.   Specific standards for above-grade,
enclosed areas. Above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or
tuck under garages must be designed to internally flood and the design plans
must stipulate:



                  i.   The minimum area of openings in
the walls where internal flooding is to be used as a floodproofing
technique.  There shall be a minimum of two openings on at least two sides
of the structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade.  The automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding unless a registered professional engineer or architect certifies
that a smaller net area would suffice.  The automatic openings may be
equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters
without any form of human intervention; and



                  ii.   That the enclosed area will be
designed of flood resistant materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4
classifications in the State Building Code and shall be used solely for
building access, parking of vehicles or storage.



      (6)   General Floodplain District (GF).



         (a)   Permitted uses.



            1.   The uses listed in division (B)(4)(a) of this
section, Floodway District permitted uses, are permitted uses.



            2.   All other uses are subject to the
floodway/flood fringe evaluation criteria specified in division (B)(6)(b)
below.  Division (B)(4) applies if the proposed use is determined to be in
the Floodway District. Division (B)(5) applies if the proposed use is
determined to be in the Flood Fringe District.



         (b)   Procedures for floodway and flood fringe
determinations.



            1.   Upon receipt of an application for a permit
or other approval within the General Floodplain District, the Zoning
Administrator must obtain, review and reasonably utilize any regional flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source.



            2.   If regional flood elevation and floodway data
are not readily available, the applicant must furnish additional information,
as needed, to determine the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether
the proposed use would fall within the Floodway or Flood Fringe District.
Information must be consistent with accepted hydrological and hydraulic
engineering standards and the standards in division (B)(6)(b)3. below.



            3.   The determination of floodway and flood
fringe must include the following components, as applicable:



               a.   Estimate the peak discharge of the
regional (1% chance) flood.



               b.   Calculate the water surface profile of
the regional flood based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and
overbank areas.



               c.   Compute the floodway necessary to
convey or store the regional flood without increasing flood stages more than
one-half (0.5) foot.  A lesser stage increase than 0.5 foot is required if,
as a result of the stage increase, increased flood damages would result.  An
equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach
must be assumed in computing floodway boundaries.



            4.   The Zoning Administrator will review the
submitted information and assess the technical evaluation and the recommended
Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District boundary. The assessment must include
the cumulative effects of previous floodway encroachments.  The Zoning
Administrator may seek technical assistance from a designated engineer or
other expert person or agency, including the Department of Natural
Resources.  Based on this assessment, the Zoning Administrator may approve
or deny the application.



            5.   Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe District
boundaries have been determined, the Zoning Administrator must process the
permit application consistent with the applicable provisions of divisions
(B)(4) and (5) of this section.



      (7)   Land development standards.



         (a)   In general. Recognizing that flood prone areas may
exist outside of the designated floodplain districts, the requirements of
this section apply to all land within the City of Columbia Heights.



         (b)   Subdivisions. No land may be subdivided which is
unsuitable for reasons of flooding or inadequate drainage, water supply or
sewage treatment facilities. Manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle
parks or campgrounds are considered subdivisions under this section.



            1.   All lots within the floodplain districts must
be able to contain a building site outside of the Floodway District at or
above the regulatory flood protection elevation.



            2.   All subdivisions must have road access both
to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two
feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation, unless a flood warning
emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the
regional (1% chance) flood has been approved by the City Council.  The plan
must be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual, and
must demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the
evacuation.



            3.   For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the
Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads must be
clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.



            4.   In the General Floodplain District,
applicants must provide the information required in division (B)(6)(b) of
this section to determine the regional flood elevation, the Floodway and
Flood Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory flood protection
elevation for the subdivision site.



            5.   If a subdivision proposal or other proposed
new development is in a flood prone area, any such proposal must be reviewed
to assure that:



               a.   All such proposals are consistent with
the need to minimize flood damage within the flood prone area;



               b.   All public utilities and facilities,
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed
to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and



               c.   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce
exposure of flood hazard.



         (c)   Building sites. If a proposed building site is in
a flood prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements
(including the placement of manufactured homes) must be:



            1.   Designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy;



            2.   Constructed with materials and utility
equipment resistant to flood damage;



            3.   Constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damage; and



            4.   Constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.



      (8)   Public utilities, railroads, roads, and bridges.



         (a)   Public utilities. All public utilities and
facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be
located in the floodplain must be floodproofed in accordance with the State
Building Code or elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation.



         (b)   Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks,
roads, and bridges to be located within the floodplain must comply with
divisions (B)(4) and (5) of this section.  These transportation facilities
must be elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation where failure
or interruption of these facilities would result in danger to the public
health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly
functioning of the area.  Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be
constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of
transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety.



         (c)   On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems.
Where public utilities are not provided: 1) On-site water supply systems must
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems; and 2) New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters and they must not
be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any
sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the state's current
statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment systems is considered to be
in compliance with this section.



      (9)   Manufactured homes, manufactured home parks, and
recreational vehicles.



         (a)   Manufactured homes. New manufactured home parks
and expansions to existing manufactured home parks are prohibited in any
floodplain district.  For existing manufactured home parks or lots of
record, the following requirements apply:



            1.   Placement or replacement of manufactured home
units is prohibited in the Floodway District.



            2.   If allowed in the Flood Fringe District,
placement or replacement of manufactured home units is subject to the
requirements of division (B)(5) of this section and the following standards.



               a.   New and replacement manufactured homes
must be elevated in compliance with division (B)(5) of this section and must
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.  Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors.  This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.



               b.   New or replacement manufactured homes
in existing manufactured home parks must meet the vehicular access
requirements for subdivisions in division (B)(7)(b)2.



         (b)   Recreational vehicles. New recreational vehicle
parks or campgrounds and expansions to existing recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds are prohibited in any floodplain district.  Placement of
recreational vehicles in existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds
in the floodplain must meet the exemption criteria below or be treated as new
structures meeting the requirements of this section.



            1.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the
provisions of this section if they are placed in any of the following areas
and meet the criteria listed in division (B)(9)(b)2.:



               a.   Individual lots or parcels of record.



               b.   Existing commercial recreational
vehicle parks or campgrounds.



               c.   Existing condominium-type associations.



            2.   Criteria for exempt recreational vehicles:



               a.   The vehicle must have a current license
required for highway use.



               b.   The vehicle must be highway ready,
meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system, attached to the site only
by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and
recreational vehicle parks.



               c.   No permanent structural type additions
may be attached to the vehicle.



               d.   The vehicle and associated use must be
permissible in any pre-existing, underlying zoning district.



               e.   Accessory structures are not permitted
within the Floodway District. Any accessory structure in the Flood Fringe
District must be constructed of flood-resistant materials and be securely
anchored, meeting the requirements applicable to manufactured homes in
division (B)(9)(b)2.



               f.   An accessory structure must constitute
a minimal investment.



            3.   Recreational vehicles that are exempt in
division (B)(9)(b)2. lose this exemption when development occurs on the site
that exceeds a minimal investment for an accessory structure such as a garage
or storage building.  The recreational vehicle and all accessory structures
will then be treated as new structures subject to the elevation and
floodproofing requirements of division (B)(5) of this section.  No
development or improvement on the parcel or attachment to the recreational
vehicle is allowed that would hinder the removal of the vehicle should
flooding occur.



      (10)   Administration.



         (a)   Zoning Administrator. A Zoning Administrator or
other official designated by the City Council must administer and enforce
this section.



         (b)   Permit requirements.



            1.   Permit required.  A permit must be obtained
from the Zoning Administrator prior to conducting the following activities:



               a.   The erection, addition, modification,
rehabilitation, or alteration of any building, structure, or portion
thereof.  Normal maintenance and repair also requires a permit if such work,
separately or in conjunction with other planned work, constitutes a
substantial improvement as defined in this section.



               b.   The use or change of use of a building,
structure, or land.



               c.   The construction of a dam, fence, or
on-site septic system, although a permit is not required for a farm fence as
defined in this section.



               d.   The change or extension of a
nonconforming use.



               e.   The repair of a structure that has been
damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source.



               f.   The placement of fill, excavation of
materials, or the storage of materials or equipment within the floodplain.



               g.   Relocation or alteration of a
watercourse - including new or replacement culverts and bridges, unless a
public waters work permit has been applied for.



               h.   Any other type of "development" as
defined in this section.



            2.   Application for permit.  Permit applications
must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the Zoning
Administrator. The permit application must include the following as
applicable:



               a.   A site plan showing all pertinent
dimensions, existing or proposed buildings, structures, and significant
natural features having an influence on the permit.



               b.   Location of fill or storage of
materials in relation to the stream channel.



               c.   Copies of any required municipal,
county, state or federal permits or approvals.



               d.   Other relevant information requested by
the Zoning Administrator as necessary to properly evaluate the permit
application.



            3.   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new,
altered, or nonconforming use.  No building, land or structure may be
occupied or used in any manner until a certificate of zoning compliance has
been issued by the Zoning Administrator stating that the use of the building
or land conforms to the requirements of this section.



            4.   Certification.  The applicant is required to
submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered
architect, or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building
elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this
section.  Floodproofing measures must be certified by a registered
professional engineer or registered architect.



            5.   Record of first floor elevation.  The Zoning
Administrator must maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new structures and alterations or additions to
existing structures in the floodplain.  The Zoning Administrator must also
maintain a record of the elevation to which structures and alterations or
additions to structures are floodproofed.



            6.   Notifications for watercourse alterations.
Before authorizing any alteration or relocation of a river or stream, the
Zoning Administrator must notify adjacent communities. If the



applicant has applied for a permit to work in public waters pursuant to M.S.
§ 103G.245, this will suffice as adequate notice.  A copy of the
notification must also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).



            7.   Notification to FEMA when physical changes
increase or decrease base flood elevations. As soon as is practicable, but
not later than six months after the date such supporting information becomes
available, the Zoning Administrator must notify the Chicago Regional Office
of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of the relevant technical or
scientific data.



         (c)   Variances.



            1.   Variance applications.  An application for a
variance to the provisions of this section will be processed and reviewed in
accordance with applicable state statutes and § 9.104(G) of the Zoning
Ordinance.



            2.   Adherence to state floodplain management
standards.  A variance must not allow a use that is not allowed in that
district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood
protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than
those required by state law.



            3.   Additional variance criteria. The following
additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must
be satisfied:



               a.   Variances must not be issued by a
community within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result.



               b.   Variances may only be issued by a
community upon:



                  i.   A showing of good and sufficient
cause;



                  ii.   A determination that failure to
grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



                  iii.   A determination that the
granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.



               c.   Variances may only be issued upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.



            4.   Flood insurance notice.  The Zoning
Administrator must notify the applicant for a variance that:



               a.   The issuance of a variance to construct
a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and



               b.   Such construction below the base or
regional flood level increases risks to life and property.  Such
notification must be maintained with a record of all variance actions.



            5.   General considerations.  The community may
consider the following factors in granting variances and imposing conditions
on variances and conditional uses in floodplains:



               a.   The potential danger to life and
property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments;



               b.   The danger that materials may be swept
onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others;



               c.   The proposed water supply and
sanitation systems, if any, and the ability of these systems to minimize the
potential for disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions;



               d.   The susceptibility of any proposed use
and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner;



               e.   The importance of the services to be
provided by the proposed use to the community;



               f.   The requirements of the facility for a
waterfront location;



               g.   The availability of viable alternative
locations for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding;



               h.   The compatibility of the proposed use
with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable
future;



               i.   The relationship of the proposed use to
the Comprehensive Land Use Plan and flood plain management program for the
area;



               j.   The safety of access to the property in
times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



               k.   The expected heights, velocity,
duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at
the site.



            6.   Submittal of hearing notices to the
Department of Natural Resources (DNR).  The Zoning Administrator must submit
hearing notices for proposed variances to the DNR sufficiently in advance to
provide at least ten days' notice of the hearing.  The notice may be sent by
electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.



            7.   Submittal of final decisions to the DNR.  A
copy of all decisions granting variances must be forwarded to the DNR within
ten days of such action.  The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S.
Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.



            8.   Record-keeping.  The Zoning Administrator
must maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance, and must report such variances in an annual or biennial
report to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program, when
requested by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



         (d)   Conditional uses.



            1.   Administrative review.  An application for a
conditional use permit under the provisions of this section will be processed
and reviewed in accordance with § 9.104(H) of the Zoning Ordinance.



            2.   Factors used in decision-making.  In passing
upon conditional use applications, the City Council must consider all
relevant factors specified in other sections of this section, and those
factors identified in division (B)(10)(c)5. of this section.



            3.   Conditions attached to conditional use
permits.  The City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of
conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this
section.  Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:



               a.   Modification of waste treatment and
water supply facilities.



               b.   Limitations on period of use,
occupancy, and operation.



               c.   Imposition of operational controls,
sureties, and deed restrictions.



               d.   Requirements for construction of
channel modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other
protective measures.



               e.   Floodproofing measures, in accordance
with the State Building Code and this section.  The applicant must submit a
plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood
protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.



            4.   Submittal of hearing notices to the
Department of Natural Resources (DNR).  The Zoning Administrator must submit
hearing notices for proposed conditional uses to the DNR sufficiently in
advance to provide at least ten days' notice of the hearing. The notice may
be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area
hydrologist.



            5.   Submittal of final decisions to the DNR. A
copy of all decisions granting conditional uses must be forwarded to the DNR
within ten days of such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or
U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.



      (11)   (a)   Nonconformities.



         (b)   Continuance of nonconformities. A use, structure,
or occupancy of land which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this
section but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this section
may be continued subject to the following conditions.  Historic structures,
as defined in division (B)(2)(i) of this section, are subject to the
provisions of divisions (B)(11)(b)1. through 6. of this section.



            1.   A nonconforming use, structure, or occupancy
must not be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases
its flood damage potential or degree of obstruction to flood flows except as
provided in division (B)(11)(b)2. below. Expansion or enlargement of uses,
structures or occupancies within the Floodway District is prohibited.



            2.   Any addition or structural alteration to a
nonconforming structure or nonconforming use that would result in increasing
its flood damage potential must be protected to the regulatory flood
protection elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or
floodproofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru FP-4 floodproofing classifications)
allowable in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in
divisions (B)(11)(b)3. and 7. below.



            3.   If the cost of all previous and proposed
alterations and additions exceeds 50% of the market value of any
nonconforming structure, then the entire structure must meet the standards of
division (B)(4) or (5) of this section for new structures depending upon
whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District,
respectively.  The cost of all structural alterations and additions must
include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed
on all manpower or labor.



            4.   If any nonconforming use, or any use of a
nonconforming structure, is discontinued for more than one year, any future
use of the premises must conform to this section.  The Assessor must notify
the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of nonconformities that have
been discontinued for a period of more than one year.



            5.   If any nonconformity is substantially
damaged, as defined in division (B)(2)(i) of this section, it may not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or new structures in
divisions (B)(4) or (5) will apply depending upon whether the use or
structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe, respectively.



            6.   If any nonconforming use or structure
experiences a repetitive loss, as defined in division (B)(2)(i) of this
section, it must not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this section.



            7.   Any substantial improvement, as defined in
division (B)(2)(i) of this section, to a nonconforming structure requires
that the existing structure and any additions must meet the requirements of
division (B)(4) or (5) of this section for new structures, depending upon
whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District.



      (12)   Penalties and enforcement.



         (a)   Violation constitutes a misdemeanor. Violation of
the provisions of this section or failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) constitute a
misdemeanor and will be punishable as defined by law.



         (b)   Other lawful action. Nothing in this section
restricts the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.  If the responsible party does not
appropriately respond to the Zoning Administrator within the specified period
of time, each additional day that lapses will constitute an additional
violation of this section and will be prosecuted accordingly.



         (c)   Enforcement. In responding to a suspected
ordinance violation, the Zoning Administrator and City Council may utilize
the full array of enforcement actions available to it including but not
limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders
for corrective measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program
for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party.  The city
must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct
ordinance violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its
eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.



            1.   When a violation is either discovered by or
brought to the attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning
Administrator shall immediately investigate the situation and document the
nature and extent of the violation of the official control. As soon as it is
reasonably possible, this information will be submitted to the appropriate
State Department of Natural Resources and Federal Emergency Management Agency
regional office along with the city's plan of action to correct the violation
to the degree possible.



            2.   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the
suspected party of the requirements of this chapter and all other official
controls and the nature and extent of the suspected violation of these
controls. If the structure and/or use is under construction or development,
the Zoning Administrator may order the construction or development
immediately halted until a proper permit or approval is granted by the city.
If the construction or development is already completed, the Zoning
Administrator may either:



               a.   Issue an order identifying the
corrective actions that must be made within a specified time period to bring
the use or structure into compliance with the official controls; or



               b.   Notify the responsible party to apply
for an after the fact permit/development approval within a specified period
of time not to exceed 30 days.



      (13)   Amendments.



         (a)   Floodplain designation - restrictions on removal.
The floodplain designation on the Official Zoning Map must not be removed
from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error
or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory
flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the
floodplain.  Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the
Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) if the Commissioner
determines that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for
the intended use.



         (b)   Amendments require DNR approval. All amendments to
this section must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of the
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) prior to adoption. The Commissioner
must approve the amendment prior to community approval.



         (c)   Map revisions require ordinance amendments. The
floodplain district regulations must be amended to incorporate any revisions
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to the floodplain maps adopted in
division (B)(2)(c) of this section.   



   (C)   Shoreland Management Overlay District.



      (1)   Purpose.



         (a)   The unregulated use of shorelands in the city
affects the public health, safety and general welfare not only by
contributing to pollution of public waters, but also by impairing the local
tax base. Therefore, it is in the best interests of the public health, safety
and welfare to provide for the wise use and development of shorelands of
public waters.



         (b)   Statutory authorization.  These shoreland
regulations are adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies contained
in M.S. Chapter 103F, Minnesota Regulations, Parts 6120.2500 through
6120.3900, and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in M.S. Chapter
462.



         (c)   Jurisdiction.  The provisions of this division
shall apply to shorelands of the public water bodies as classified in
subdivision (4)(b) of this division. A body of water created by a private
user where there was no previous shoreland may, at the discretion of the
governing body, be exempt from this code.



         (d)   Compliance.  The use of any shoreland of public
waters; the size and shape of lots; the use, size, type and location of
structures on lots; the grading and filling of any shoreland area; and the
cutting of shoreland vegetation shall be in full compliance with the terms of
this code and other applicable regulations.



         (e)   District application.  The Shoreland Overlay
District shall be superimposed (overlaid) upon all the zoning districts as
identified in Chapter 9 of this code as existing or amended by the text and
map of this code. The regulations and requirements imposed by the Shoreland
Overlay District shall be in addition to those established by the base zoning
district, which jointly apply. Under joint application of the districts, the
more restrictive requirements shall apply.



         (f)   Exemptions.



            1.   A structure or use which was lawful before
adoption of this article, but which is not in conformity with the provisions
of the Shoreland Overlay District, may be continued subject to § 9.105 of
this code.



            2.   A property located within the Shoreland
Overlay District that does not drain into a body of water listed in
subdivision (4)(b) of this division.



      (2)   District boundaries.  The boundaries of the Shoreland
Overlay District within the city consist of the first tier of riparian lots
abutting a protected lake or tributary identified in subdivision (4)(b) of
this division. The specific boundaries of the Shoreland Overlay District are
shown on the official Shoreland Overlay District Map in the Zoning Code.



      (3)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this division, certain
terms and words are hereby defined: Words use in the present tense shall
include the future; words in the singular include the plural, and the plural
the singular; the word BUILDING shall include the word STRUCTURE; and the
word LOT shall include the word PLOT; and the word SHALL is mandatory and not
directory; and the word INCLUDING shall mean "including, but not limited to".
For the purpose of this district, the following definitions shall apply:



         ACCESSORY BUILDING.  A subordinate building or use, which
is located on the same, lot as the principal building or use and is necessary
or incidental to the conduct of the principal building or use.



         COMMISSION.  The City of Columbia Heights Planning
Commission.



         COMMISSIONER.  The Commissioner of the Department of
Natural Resources of the State of Minnesota.



         COUNCIL.  The Columbia Heights City Council.



         DEVELOPMENT.  The making of any material change in the use
or appearance of any structure of land including reconstruction; alteration
of the size of any structure; alteration of the land; alteration of a shore
or bank of a river, stream, lake or pond; a commencement of drilling (except
to obtain soil samples); mining or excavation; demolition of a structure;
clearing of land as an adjunct to construction; deposit of refuse, solid or
liquid waste, or fill on a parcel of land; the dividing of land into two or
more parcels.



         IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.  A constructed hard surface that
either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil, and causes water
to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increase rate of flow
than existed prior to development. Examples include rooftops, sidewalks,
patios, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, and concrete, asphalt roads
and gravel areas.



         LOT COVERAGE.  The amount of impervious surface on a lot.



         ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL.  M.S. § 103G.005, subd. 14
defines ordinary high water level as the boundary of waterbasins,
watercourses, public waters, and public waters wetlands and:



            1.   The ordinary high water level is an elevation
delineating the highest water level that has been maintained for a sufficient
period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly the point where
the natural vegetation changes from predominately aquatic to predominately
terrestrial;



            2.   For watercourses, the ordinary high water
level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel; and



            3.   For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary
high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.



         SHORELAND.  Land located within the following distances
from the ordinary high water elevation of public waters:



            1.   Land within 1,000 feet from the normal high
watermark of a lake, pond, or flowage; and



            2.   Land within 300 feet if a river or stream or
the landward side of a floodplain delineated by ordinance on the river or
stream, whichever is greater.



         SHORE IMPACT ZONE.  The area between the ordinary high
water mark and 50 feet inland from the ordinary high water mark.



         STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected which requires
location on or underground or attachment to something having location on or
underground. This includes an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece
of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some
definite manner, whether of a temporary or permanent character.



      (4)   Shoreland classification system.



         (a)   Public waters.  The public waters of the city
have been classified below consistent with the criteria found in Minnesota
Regulations, Part 6120.3300, and the DNR Protected Waters Inventory Map for
Anoka County, Minnesota.



         (b)   Official Map.  The shoreland permit district for
the waterbodies listed below shall be shown on the Columbia Heights Map.



 


Recreational Development Lakes

 

Protected Waters Inventory ID. #



Silver Lake
 

83P




 



 


General Development Lakes

 

Protected Waters Inventory I.D. #



Sullivan Lake
 

80P



Highland Lake
 

79P



Hart Lake
 

81P



Clover Pond
 

686W



LaBelle Pond
 

687P




 



      (5)   Administration.



         (a)   Building permit required. A permit is required for
the construction of buildings or building additions (and including such
related activities as construction of decks and signs), and those grading and
filling activities not exempted by this code that occur within the shoreland
district. Application for a building permit shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator or any staff persons designated by the City Manager on an
official application form of the city, accompanied by a fee as set forth in
Chapter 6, Article II of the city code. Where required by law, the building
permit application shall be forwarded to the applicable watershed district
for review and comment. The application shall include the necessary
information so that the Zoning Administrator can determine the site's
suitability for the intended use.



         (b)   Variance.  Variances may only be granted in
accordance with § 9.104(G) of this code. A variance may not circumvent the
general purposes and intent of this code. No variance may be granted that
would allow any use that is prohibited in the underlying zoning district in
which the subject property is located.



         (c)   Conditional use permit.  Conditional use permits
may only be granted in accordance with § 9.014(H) of this code. Conditional
use permits are required to ensure specific development standards within the
Shoreland Overlay Districts.



         (d)   Notifications to the Department of Natural
Resources.



            1.   Public hearings.  Copies of all notices of
any public hearings to consider variances, amendments, conditional uses, or
special uses under local shoreland management controls must be sent to the
Commissioner or the Commissioner's designated representative and postmarked
at least ten days prior to the hearings. Notices of hearings to consider
proposed subdivisions/plats must include copies of the subdivision/plat.



            2.   Approval.  A copy of approved amendments and
subdivisions/plats, and final decisions granting variances and conditional
use permits under local shoreland management controls must be sent by the
city to the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designated representative and
postmarked within ten days of the final action.



      (6)   Land use district descriptions.  Allowed land uses
within the Shoreland District shall be determined by the underlying zoning
district, as listed within Chapter 9 of the city code.



      (7)   Lot area and width standards.  Lot area and width
standards for residential development shall be regulated per the underlying
zoning district in Chapter 9 of the city code.



      (8)   Placement, design, and height of structures.



         (a)   Placement of structures on lots.  When more than
one setback applies to a site, structures and facilities must be located to
meet all setbacks. Where structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides
of a proposed building site, structure setbacks may be altered without a
variance to conform to the adjoining setbacks from the ordinary high water
level, provided the proposed building site is not located in a shore impact
zone. Structures shall be located as follows:



            1.   Required setbacks.  All required rear yard,
side yard and front yard setbacks shall be met per the underlying zoning
district.



            2.   Ordinary high water level setback. 
Structure setbacks (in feet) from the ordinary high water level are:



 


Classes of Public Waters

 

Structure Setbacks



General Development Lake
 

50 feet



Recreational Development Lake
 

75 feet




 



            3.   Height of structures.  Maximum allowable
height for all structures shall be regulated per underlying zoning districts
in Chapter 9 of the city code.



         (b)   Shoreland alterations.  Alterations of vegetation
and topography will be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix
nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent
bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife habitat.



            1.   Vegetation alteration.  Removal or
alteration of vegetation is allowed subject to the following standards:



               a.   Intensive vegetation clearing within
the shore impact zones and on steep slopes is not allowed.



               b.   In shore impact zones and on steep
slopes, limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and
trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view to the water from the
principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and
landings, picnic areas, access paths, beach and watercraft access areas, and
permitted water-oriented accessory structures or facilities provided that:



                  (i)   The screening of structures,
vehicles, or other facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer,
leaf-on conditions, is not substantially reduced.



                  (ii)   The above provisions are not
applicable to the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead,
diseased, or pose safety hazards and the removal of plants deemed noxious
under the Minnesota Noxious Weed Law.



            2.   Building permit.  Grading and filling and
excavations necessary for the construction of structures and driveways under
validly issued building permits for these facilities do not require the
issuance of a separate shoreland grading and filling permit.



            3.   Conditional use permit.  Notwithstanding 
subdivision 2 above, a conditional use permit will be required for those
properties located in the Shoreland Overlay District for:



               a.   Placement, removal or grading of more
than 250 cubic yards of earthen material on developed property zoned R-1,
R-2A or R-2B.



               b.   Placement, removal or grading of more
than 500 cubic yards of earthen material on undeveloped property zoned R-1,
R-2A or R-2B.



               c.   Placement, removal or grading of more
than 750 cubic yards of earthen material on property zoned R-3, R-4 or LB.



               d.   Placement, removal or grading of more
than 1,000 cubic yards of earthen material on property zoned GB, CBD, I-1,
I-2, MXD, or PO.



            4.   Land alteration permit.  Notwithstanding
subdivision 2 above, a land alteration permit will be required for:



               a.   The movement of more than ten cubic
yards of material on steep slopes or within shore impact zones.



               b.   The movement of more than 50 cubic
yards of material outside of steep slopes and shore impact zones.



            5.   Conditions.  The following considerations
and conditions must be adhered to during the issuance of building permits,
land alteration permits, variances, conditional use permits, and subdivision
approvals:



               a.   Grading or filling in any type 2-8
wetland must be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity
would affect the following functional qualities of the wetland (This
evaluation shall also include a determination of whether the wetland
alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews, or approvals by other
local, state, or federal agencies such as a watershed district, the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources, or the United States Army Corps of
Engineers):



                  (i)   Sediment and pollutant trapping
and retention.



                  (ii)   Storage of surface runoff to
prevent or reduce flood damage.



                  (iii)   Fish and wildlife habitat.



                  (iv)   Recreational use.



                  (v)   Shoreline or bank stabilization.



                  (vi)   Noteworthiness, including
special qualities such as historic significance, critical habitat for
endangered plants and animals, or others.



               b.   Alterations must be designed and
conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is
exposed for the shortest time possible.



               c.   Mulches or similar materials must be
used, where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent
vegetation cover must be established as soon as possible.



               d.   Methods to minimize soil erosion and to
trap sediments before they reach any surface water feature must be used.



               e.   Altered areas must be stabilized to
acceptable erosion control standards consistent with the field office
technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts and the
United States Soil Conservation Service.



               f.   Fill or excavated material must not be
placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope.



               g.   Plans to place fill or excavated
material on steep slopes must be reviewed by qualified professionals for
continued slope stability and must create finished slopes of less than 3:1
slope.



               h.   Any alterations below the ordinary high
water level of public waters must first be authorized by the Commissioner
under M.S. § 103G.245.



               i.   Alterations of topography must only be
allowed if they are accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not
adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties.



               j.   Placement of natural rock rip rap,
including associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter
blanket, is permitted if the finished slope does not exceed three feet
horizontal to one foot vertical, the landward extent of the rip rap is within
ten feet of the ordinary high water level, and the height of the rip rap
above the ordinary high water level does not exceed three feet. Must be done
in accordance with other state and federal regulations. A permit from the DNR
is required.



            6.   Connections to public waters.  Excavations
where the intended purpose is connection to a public water, such as boat
slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, must be controlled by local shoreland
controls. Permission for excavations may be given only after written
authorization has been obtained from the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources approving the proposed connection to public waters.



         (c)   Stormwater management.  The following general and
specific standards shall apply:



            1.   General standards.



               a.   When possible, existing natural
drainage-ways, wetlands, and vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey,
store, filter, and retain stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters.



               b.   Development must be planned and
conducted in a manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas,
runoff velocities, erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff velocities,
erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must
be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods
used to retain sediment on the site.



               c.   When development density, topographic
features, and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately
handle stormwater runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types
of constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming
devices, dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference must be given to
designs using surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than
buried pipes and manmade materials and facilities.



            2.   Specific standards.



               a.   Impervious surface lot coverage shall
not exceed 35% of the lot area for all zoning districts with exception of the
CBD, Central Business District in which impervious surface lot coverage shall
not exceed 90%. These requirements may be amended through the variance
process and shall comply with the following standards:



                  (i)   All structures, additions or
expansions shall meet setback and other requirements of this code.



                  (ii)   The lot shall be served with
municipal sewer and water.



                  (iii)   The lot shall provide for the
collection and treatment of stormwater in compliance with Chapter 9 of the
city code if determined that the site improvements will result in increased
runoff directly entering a public water. All development plans shall require
review and approval by the City Engineer and the underlying watershed
district.



                  (iv)   Measures will be taken for the
treatment of stormwater runoff and/or prevention of stormwater from directly
entering a public water. The measures may include, but not limited to the
following:



                     A.   Appurtenances as
sedimentation basins, debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps.



                     B.   Installation of debris
guards and microsilt basins on store sewer inlets.



                     C.   Use where practical, oil
skimming devices or sump catch basins.



                     D.   Direct drainage away from
the lake and into pervious, grassed yards through site grading, use of
gutters and down spouts.



                     E.   Construction of sidewalks
of partially pervious raised materials such as decking, which has natural
earth or other pervious material beneath or between the planking.



                     F.   Use grading and
construction techniques that encourage rapid infiltration, such as sand and
gravel under impervious materials with adjacent infiltration swales graded to
lead into them.



                     G.   Install berms, water bars,
or terraces, which temporarily detain water before dispersing it into the
pervious area.



               b.   When constructed facilities are used
for stormwater management, documentation must be provided by a qualified
individual that the constructed facilities are designed and installed
consistent with the field office technical guide for the local soil and water
conservation districts.



               c.   Newly constructed stormwater outfall to
public waters must provide for filtering or settling or suspended solids and
skimming or surface debris before discharge.



            3.   Nonconformities.  All legally established
nonconformities as of the date of this section may continue, but they will be
managed according to § 9.105 of this code with the following exceptions:



               a.   Decks are allowed as a conforming use
provided all of the following criteria and standards are met:



                  (i)   The principal structure existed
on the date the structure setbacks were established.



                  (ii)   No other reasonable location
for the deck exists.



                  (iii)   The deck encroachment toward
the ordinary high water level maintains a minimum setback in accordance with
applicable code sections and a maximum encroachment of ten feet into the
Shore Impact Zone.



      (9)   Public nuisance: penalty.



         (a)   Any person who violates any provisions of this
district or fails to comply with any of its terms or requirements shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, and in addition shall pay all
costs of prosecution and expenses involved in the case. Each day the
violation continues shall be considered a separate offence.



         (b)   Every obstruction or use placed or maintained in
the Shoreland Overlay District in violation of this division is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and creation thereof may be enjoined and the
maintenance thereof abated by appointed judicial action.



         (c)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent, remedy or
remove any violation.



   (D)   Design Overlay District.



      (1)   Purpose.  The Design Overlay Districts are established
to increase the visual appeal and pedestrian orientation of certain major
street corridors within the city, thereby increasing the economic vitality of
these corridors, and to support the goals of the comprehensive plan.



      (2)   Establishment.  The following Design Overlay Districts
are established.



         (a)   Central Avenue Design District.



         (b)   40th Avenue Design District.



         (c)   Highway Design District.



      (3)   Design guidelines.  The city design guidelines shall
apply to development within the design districts.  The city design
guidelines are hereby incorporated into this section by reference in order to:



         (a)   Guide developers or business owners wishing to
propose expansions, renovations or new construction of buildings or parking
within the design districts; and



         (b)   Assist city officials and staff in reviewing
development proposals.



      (4)   Applicability of design guidelines.



         (a)   Design guidelines shall apply to all
nonresidential, mixed-use and/or multi-family buildings, and to the following
activities:



            1.   New construction;



            2.   Any exterior changes, including repainting,
with the exception of replacement or repair of existing materials;



            3.   Any internal remodeling or expansion activity
that increases the overall size of the building by 10% or more;



            4.   Any development or expansion of parking areas
that would result in a lot with more than four parking spaces; and



            5.   Minor alterations such as repainting, and the
installation of new signage on existing buildings may be handled
administratively, as determined by the City Planner.



         (b)   The guidelines are intended to be mandatory.  It
is assumed that the intent of the guidelines shall be met; however, it is
understood that there may be ways to achieve the same design objective.  The
city may permit alternative approaches that in its determination, meet the
objective(s) of the guideline(s) equally well.



         (c)   The guidelines shall apply only to the building or
site elements being developed or altered.  That is, a proposal for changes
to a building would be required to meet only those standards that pertain to
buildings, while changes to a parking area would be required to meet all
standards for parking areas, but not for buildings.  The City Planner will
make the initial determination as to which standards are applicable.



         (d)   Design review shall be conducted as part of the
site plan review process, as specified in § 9.104.



(Ord. 1428, passed 5-29-01; Am. Ord. 1460, passed 10-13-03; Am. Ord. 1550,
passed 6-23-08; Am. Ord. 1561, passed 3-23-09; Am. Ord. 1623, passed 11-23-15)



§ 9.115  PUBLIC AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The "P" Public and Open Space District is intended
to provide a district which will allow areas of the city to be retained and
utilized for, non-local jurisdiction public uses, open space, and provide a
"holding" zone for future development to ensure that development will be
staged to maintain reasonable economy in public expenditures for public
utilities and services.



   (B)   General provisions.



      (1)   Compliance with applicable regulations.  Any use
established in a public district after the effective date of this article
shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal standards for such
uses.



      (2)   Administration.  The administration and enforcement of
this article shall be in accordance with the provisions of § 9.104,
Administration and Enforcement.



      (3)   Nonconformities.  Nonconforming uses, structures, lots
and signs within a public district shall be subject to the provisions of §
9.105, Nonconformities.



      (4)   Compliance with general development standards.  Any use
established, expanded or modified in a public district after the effective
date of this article shall comply with the applicable provisions of § 9.106,
General Provisions.



      (5)   Compliance with specific development standards.  Any
use established, expanded or modified in a public district after the
effective date of this article that is identified in § 9.107, Specific
Development Standards, shall comply with the applicable provisions of that
article.



      (6)   Prohibited uses.  Any use not listed as either
permitted, conditional or accessory in a particular district or any use not
determined by the Zoning Administrator to be substantially similar to a use
listed as permitted, conditional or accessory shall be prohibited in that
district.



   (C)   Lot dimension, height, and bulk requirements.  Lot area,
setback, height and lot coverage requirements for uses in the public district
shall be as specified in the following table:



 

 
 

Public and Open Space





Minimum Lot Area
 
 


   All uses
 

None



Minimum Lot Width
 





   All uses
 

None



Building Setbacks
 





   Front yard
 

25 feet



   Side yard
 

5 feet



   Corner side yard
 

10 feet



   Rear yard
 

20% of lot depth



Parking Setbacks
 





   Front yard
 

5 feet



   Side yard
 

3 feet



   Corner side yard
 

3 feet



   Rear yard
 

3 feet



Maximum Height
 





   All structures
 

None



Floor Area Ratio
 

1.0





 



   (D)   Public and Open Space District.



      (1)   Permitted uses.  Except as specifically limited herein,
the following uses are permitted within the P, Public and Open Space District:



         (a)   County, regional and city parks.



         (b)   Playgrounds, athletic fields, recreational areas,
and parking areas.



         (c)   Cemeteries.



         (d)   Publicly owned and operated facilities.



         (e)   Essential services.



      (2)   Conditional uses.  Except as specifically limited
herein, the following uses may be allowed in the P, Public and Open Spaces
District, subject to regulations set forth for conditional uses in § 9.104,
Administration and Enforcement, and the regulations for specific uses set
forth in § 9.107, Specific Development Standards:



         (a)   Public or semi-public recreational buildings and
neighborhoods or community centers.



         (b)   Non-city governmental and public regulated utility
buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare
of the community.



      (3)   Permitted accessory uses. Except as specifically limited
herein, the following accessory uses may be allowed in the P, Public and Open
Space District:



         (a)   Operation and storage of such vehicles, equipment
and machinery, which are incidental to the permitted or conditional uses
allowed in this district.



         (b)   Living quarters for persons employed on the
premises.



         (c)   Recreational vehicles and equipment.



(Ord. 1537, passed 3-10-08)



§ 9.116  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to provide for the
orderly and economic development of land and urban facilities, and to promote
the public health, safety and general welfare of the community by
establishing physical standards and procedures for the subdivision of land.



   (B)   Authority.  The Council hereby established the following
rules and regulations pursuant to the authority provided in Minnesota
Statutes, to regulate, control and maintain streets and provide for platting
of property.



   (C)   Plats and data.



      (1)   Sketch plans.  Sketch plans shall contain as a minimum,
the following information:



         (a)   Tract boundaries.



         (b)   North point.



         (c)   Streets on and adjacent to the tract.



         (d)   Significant topographical and physical features.



         (e)   Proposed general street layout.



         (f)   Proposed general land use.



         (g)   Name of owner and/or developer.



         (h)   Zoning on and adjacent to tract.



      (2)   Preliminary plat.  A preliminary plat shall contain the
following information:



         (a)   Identification and description.



            1.   Proposed name of subdivision, which name
shall not duplicate or be similar to the name of any other plant.



            2.   Location by section, town, range or by other
legal description.



            3.   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider,
surveyor and designer of the plan.



            4.   Graphic scale.



            5.   North point.



            6.   Date of preparation.



            7.   Certification by surveyor certifying to
accuracy of survey.



         (b)   Existing conditions.



            1.   Boundary line of proposed subdivision clearly
indicated.



            2.   Existing zoning classification, if any.



            3.   Total acreage, including greenspace
percentage.



            4.   Location, widths and names of all existing or
previously platted streets or other public way, showing type, width and also
condition of improvements, if any, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks
and other public spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements and
section and corporate line within the tract, and to a distance of 100 feet
beyond the tract. Such data as grades, invert elevations and locations of
catch basins, manholes and hydrants, if any, shall also be known.



            5.   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or
subdivided land within 100 feet, identifying by name and ownership.



            6.   Topographical data, including contours at
vertical intervals of not more than 2 feet, except that contour lines shall
be no more than 100 feet apart. Watercourses, marshes, wooded areas, rock
outcrops, power transmission poles and lines, buildings and other significant
features shall also be shown.



            7.   All elevations, topography and vertical
control data shall be tied to sea level datum, 1929 General Adjustments.
Temporary benchmarks shall be established within the boundaries of the
subdivision. Descriptions, reference ties and elevations of the benchmarks
shall be furnished to the City Engineer.



            8.   Reference to recorded subdivision plat or
adjoining platted land by record, name, date and number.



            9.   The location and size of all existing
sanitary sewer, water or storm sewer, trunks, laterals or services on or
adjacent to the property.



         (c)   Design features.



            1.   Primary control points, with descriptions and
“ties” to such control points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings
and similar data on the plan shall be referred.



            2.   Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of
streets, easements, and other rights-of-way and property lines of residential
lots and other sites; with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles
and radii, arcs and central angles of all curves.



            3.   Name and right-of-way width of each street or
other right-of-way.



            4.   Location, dimensions and purpose of any
easements.



            5.   An identification system for all lots and
blocks.



            6.   Site data including number of residential
lots, typical lot size, and acres in park, and the like.



            7.   Sites, if any, to be reserved for parks or
other public uses.



            8.   Sites, if any, for multi-family dwellings,
shopping centers, churches, industry or other non-public uses exclusive of
single-family dwellings.



            9.   Minimum building setback line on all lots and
other sites with the width of lot shown at setback line.



            10.   Location and description of monuments.



         (d)   Preliminary grading and drainage plan.  Including
earthwork quantities, final grades (4:1 maximum slopes), building pad
elevations, existing and proposed topography at two- foot intervals, drainage
calculations, 10-year storm pipe design, 100-year storm level of protection,
direction of drainage around each building pad location, appropriate
easements as required.



         (e)   Preliminary erosion control plan. Including
method, location and detail of erosion control measures, consistent with §
9.106(I)(6)(g), where applicable.



         (f)   Preliminary utility and/or on-site sewage
treatment plan.



            1.   Plan and profile showing existing utilities,
proposed utilities, connection with existing utilities (watermain, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer) appropriate easements as required.



            2.   Note whether utilities will be publicly or
privately constructed, owned and maintained.



         (g)   Preliminary street plan.  Plan and profile
showing internal roads, grades, lengths of cul-de-sacs, curb data (horizontal
and vertical), connection to existing streets or platted right- of-way,
provisions for future extensions or connections to adjacent land, appropriate
easements of right-of-way.



         (h)   Preliminary wetland plan.  Plan showing fill or
draining of any wetland including sequencing justification and proposed
mitigation. All wetlands must be delineated in accordance with 1989 Federal
Manual for Identifying and Delineating Wetlands.



         (i)   Preliminary landscape plan.  Landscaping required
by city landscape policy. Plan must identify location, size species and
quantity of plant materials.



         (j)   Right-of-way requirements.  Letter from Anoka
County and/or MN/DOT containing recommendations and/or regulations on access
or right-of-way requirements, if the property abuts county or state roads or
right-of-way, or proposes access to a state of county road.



         (k)   Supplementary data to be supplied with preliminary
plat



            1.   Names or record owners of adjoining unplatted
land.



            2.   Protective covenants in form of recording, if
any.



            3.   Other information such as certificates,
affidavits, endorsements, photographs, traffic studies or other information
as may be required by the City Council and/or the Planning Commission and/or
the city staff in the enforcement of these regulations.



            4.   Soil borings and analysis, if required by the
City Engineer or Chief Building Official.



            5.   Evidence that ground water control is at
least ten feet below the level of finished grades or plan for solving ground
water problems, if required by the City Engineer.



            6.   The size and dimension of all lots.



            7.   Notarized certification by owner and by any
mortgage holder of record, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of
streets and other public area.



      (3)   Final plat.  The final plat shall be on sheets 20
inches wide by 30 inches long and shall be at a scale of 100 feet equals 1
inch or such other standard scale as approved by the City Engineer and in all
other respects shall comply with Minnesota Statutes. Where necessary, plat or
final plat may be on several sheets accompanied by a key map showing the
entire subdivision. For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted
for approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to the City
Council.



         (a)   The final plat shall contain the following
information:



            1.   Certifications showing that all taxes due on
the property to be subdivided have been paid in full.



            2.   An attorney’s opinion of title showing
title or control of the property to be subdivided in the application.



            3.   Name of the subdivision, which shall not
duplicate or too closely approximate the name of any existing subdivision.



            4.   Location of section, township, range, county
and state, and including descriptive boundaries of the subdivision, based on
an accurate traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions, which must
mathematically close. The allowable error closure of any portion of a final
plat shall be 1 in 7,500.



            5.   The location of monuments shall be shown and
described on the final plat. Locations of such monuments shall be shown in
reference to existing official monuments on the nearest established street
lines, including true angles and distances to such reference points or
monuments.



            6.   Location of lots, streets, public highways,
alleys, parks and other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and
decimals of feet, with the length of radii and/or arcs of all curbs, and with
all other information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground shall be
shown. Dimensions shall be shown from all angle points of curb to lot lines.



            7.   Lots shall be numbered clearly. Blocks are to
be numbered with numbers shown clearly in the center of the block.



            8.   The exact locations, widths and names of all
streets.



            9.   Location and width of all easements.



            10.   Name and address of surveyor making the plat.



            11.   Scale of plat (the scale to be shown
graphically on the bar scale), date and north arrow.



            12.   Statement dedicating all easements as
follows and drainage facilities are reserved over, under, and along the
strips marked “utility easements.”



            13.   Statement dedicating all streets, alleys and
other public areas not previously dedicated as follows: Streets, alleys and
other public areas shown on this plat and not heretofore dedicated to public
use are hereby so dedicated.



            14.   Certification by registered surveyor in the
form required by M.S. § 505.03, as amended.



            15.   Execution of all owners of any interest in
the land and any holders of an mortgage thereon of the certificates required
by M.S. § 505.03, as amended, and which certificate shall include a
dedication of the utility easements and other public areas in such form as
approved by the City Council.



            16.   Space for certificates of approval and
review to be filled in by the signatures of the City Engineer, City Clerk and
Anoka County Surveyor.



         (b)   Additional plans to be submitted with the final
plat include the following:



            1.   Final utility plan. Plan and profile showing
existing utilities, proposed utilities, connection with existing utilities
(watermain, sanitary sewer, storm sewer) appropriate easements as required. 
Note whether utilities will be publicly or privately constructed, owned and
maintained.



            2.   Final wetland plan. Plan showing fill or
draining of any wetland including sequencing justification and proposed
mitigation. All wetlands must be delineated in accordance with 1989 Federal
Manual for Identifying and Delineating Wetlands.



            3.   Landscape plan. Plan showing reforestation
required by this article and landscaping required by city landscape policy.
Plan must identify location, size, species and quantity of plant materials.



            4.   Final street plans for requirements
established in § 9.116(D).



            5.   Park dedication. It is deemed necessary and
consistent with sound city planning to provide in each new proposed plat or
subdivision, areas for future development of park and recreational
purposes.  Each plat shall hereafter provide for a dedication to the
municipality, an area not less than 10% of the total proposed area to be
subdivided.



               a.   Such area shall consist of developable
and usable land and shall be located so as to serve the present and future
needs of the community for recreational or park purposes.



               b.   The Planning Commission and the Council
shall consider the proposed location in relation to existing or contemplated
recreational and park sites in other parts of the community and as to the
suitability in meeting the requirements of the city’s comprehensive plan.



               c.   The following properties shall not be
accepted for purposes of the owner’s compliance with divisions
(C)(3)(b)5.a. or b. above:  Land dedicated or obtained as easements for
storm water retention, drainage, roadway and other utility purposes.



               d.   This requirement may be waived and/or
modified by the Council after recommendation by the Planning Commission for
one of the following reasons:



                  i.   The enforcement of this provision
would act as an extreme hardship to the property owner, because of the size
of the tract involved, the topography of the land (zoning areas involved) or
the owner has already dedicated comparable areas in other subdivisions in the
city.



                  ii.   The owner contributes the cash
equivalent to the city for the Parks Capital Improvement Fund of the city. 
A cash equivalent shall be a sum mutually agreed upon representing 10% of the
market value of the tract in an underdeveloped state on the date the
preliminary plat is presented to the city.



               e.   The city, at its sole discretion, may
consider a combination of an area dedication and cash contribution to total
the 10% park dedication contribution.



   (D)   Design standards.



      (1)   The following design standards are to be followed unless
the City Council shall permit a variance because of unusual circumstances due
to the topography, placement of buildings or other factors making it
reasonable to vary the standards set forth without nullifying the intent and
purpose of the comprehensive plan or this section.



      (2)   Streets.



         (a)   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade
and location of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan and shall
be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such
streets.



         (b)   Where such is not shown in the comprehensive plan,
the arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall either:



            1.   Provide for the continuation or appropriate
projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or



            2.   Conform to a plan for the neighborhood
approved or adopted by the City Council to meet a particular situation where
topography or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing
streets impractical.



(Ord. 1428, passed 5-29-01; Am. Ord.1470, passed 6-28-04; Am. Ord. 1537,
passed 3-10-08)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 10:  MISDEMEANORS



   Article



      I.   STATE LAW INCORPORATED



      II.   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY AND GROUNDS



      III.   GENERAL PROHIBITIONS



      IV.   VIOLATIONS



ARTICLE I:  STATE LAW INCORPORATED



Section



   10.101   General provisions



   10.102   Anticipatory crimes



   10.103   Crimes against the person, or family; sex crimes



   10.104   Crimes of compulsion



   10.105   Crimes against the government, the administration of
justice, or involving public officers or employees



   10.106   Crimes involving property



   10.107   Crimes against public safety and health



   10.108   Crimes involving public misconduct or nuisance



   10.109   Crimes involving gambling or fireworks



   10.110   Crimes involving obscenity



   10.111   Crimes involving public communications



   10.112   Crimes involving cruelty to animals



   10.113   Miscellaneous crimes



   10.114   Trespassing



   10.115   Possession of toxic substances



   10.116   Electronic sound amplification devices



   10.117   Consuming in public



   10.118   Loitering in possession of open bottle



§ 10.101  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The below-named provisions of Minnesota Statutes as are cited
in this chapter, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as
if fully set forth.



   (B)   M.S. § 609.05, as it may be amended from time to time,
defining liability for the crime of another, is incorporated herein.



(`77 Code, § 10.101)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.102  ANTICIPATORY CRIMES.



   The following Minnesota Statutes, as they may be amended from time to
time, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein:



   (A)   M.S. § 609.17 defining the crime of attempting a criminal
act, is incorporated herein.



   (B)   M.S. § 609.175, defining the crime of conspiracy, is
incorporated herein.



(`77 Code, § 10.102)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.103  CRIMES AGAINST THE PERSON, OR FAMILY; SEX CRIMES.



   The following Minnesota Statutes, as amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein:



   (A)   M.S. § 609.22, defining the crime of assault, is incorporated
herein.



   (B)   M.S. § 609.294, defining the crime of bestiality, is
incorporated herein.



   (C)   M.S. § 609.34, defining the crime of fornication, is
incorporated herein.



   (D)   M.S. §§ 609.37 and 609.375, defining crimes relating to
non-support of wife or child, is incorporated herein.



(`77 Code, § 10.103)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.104  CRIMES OF COMPULSION.



   The following Minnesota Statutes, as amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein:



   (A)   M.S. § 609.27, defining the crime of coercion, is
incorporated herein.



   (B)   M.S. § 609.28, defining the crime of interfering with a
religious observation, is incorporated herein.



(`77 Code, § 10.104)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.105  CRIMES AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT, THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, OR
INVOLVING PUBLIC OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES.



   The following Minnesota Statutes, as amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein:



   (A)   M.S. § 609.40, defining crimes against the flag, is
incorporated herein.



   (B)   M.S. § 609.435, defining crimes relating to the failure of a
public officer to file security, is incorporated herein.



   (C)   M.S. § 609.45, defining the crime of public officers
receiving unauthorized compensation, is incorporated herein.



   (D)   M.S. § 609.46, defining crimes by a Justice of the Peace or
Constable, is incorporated herein.



   (E)   M.S. § 609.475, defining the crime of impersonating an
officer, is incorporated herein.



   (F)   M.S. § 609.485, defining the crime of escaping from custody,
is incorporated herein.



   (G)   M.S. § 609.50, defining the crime of obstructing legal
process, is incorporated herein.



   (H)   M.S. § 609.505, defining the crime of falsely reporting a
crime, is incorporated herein.



   (I)   M.S. § 609.51, defining the crime of simulating legal process
is incorporated herein.



   (J)   M.S. § 609.575, defining crimes by a judicial or hearing
officer, is incorporated herein.



(`77 Code, § 10.105)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.106  CRIMES INVOLVING PROPERTY.



   The following Minnesota Statutes, as amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein:



   (A)   M.S. § 609.52, defining the crime of theft, is incorporated
herein.



   (B)   M.S. § 609.525, defining the crime of bringing stolen goods
into the state is incorporated herein.



   (C)   M.S. § 609.53, defining the crime of receiving stolen goods,
is incorporated herein.



   (D)   M.S. § 609.535, defining the crime of issuing a worthless
check, is incorporated herein.



   (E)   M.S. § 609.545, defining crimes relating to the misuse of a
credit card to secure services, is incorporated herein.



   (F)   M.S. §§ 609.555, 609.565, and 609.57, defining the crimes of
simple arson and attempted arson, are incorporated herein.



   (G)   M.S. § 609.575, defining crimes relating to culpable
negligence in causing fires, is incorporated herein.



   (H)   M.S. § 609.595, defining crimes relating to criminal damage
to property, is incorporated herein.



   (I)   M.S. § 609.605, together with all amendments thereto through
1978, is incorporated herein.



   (J)   M.S. § 609.615, defining crimes relating to defeating
security on realty, is incorporated herein.



   (K)   M.S. § 609.655, defining crimes relating to property
identification numbers, is incorporated herein.



   (L)   M.S. § 609.65, defining crimes by a notary public, is
incorporated herein.



   (M) M.S. § 168C.08, involving mutilation of bicycle identification, is
incorporated herein.



   (N)   M.S. § 168C.09, involving bicycle theft, is incorporated
herein.



   (O)   M.S. § 168C.10, involving bicycle tampering, is incorporated
herein.



(`77 Code, § 10.106)  (Am. Ord. 893, passed 8-15-78)  Penalty, see §
10.401



§ 10.107  CRIMES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY AND HEALTH.



   The following Minnesota Statutes, as amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein:



   (A)   M.S. § 609.66, defining crimes relating to weapons, is
incorporated herein.



   (B)   M.S. § 609.675, defining the crime of leaving unused
refrigerators exposed to children, is incorporated herein.



   (C)   M.S. § 609.68, defining the crime of depositing garbage or
other specified matter in a public place, is incorporated herein.



   (D)   M.S. § 609.685, defining crimes relating to the use of
tobacco by children, is incorporated herein.



(`77 Code, § 10.107)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.108  CRIMES INVOLVING PUBLIC MISCONDUCT OR NUISANCE.



   The following Minnesota Statutes, as amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein:



   (A)   M.S. §§ 609.705 and 609.715, defining crimes relating to
unlawful assembly, are incorporated herein.



   (B)   M.S. § 609.684, defining the crime of sale or abuse of toxic
substances.



   (C)   M.S. § 609.686, defining crimes relating to fire alarms, is
incorporated herein.



   (D)   M.S. § 609.72, defining the crime of disorderly conduct, is
incorporated herein.



   (E)   M.S. § 609.725, defining the crime of vagrancy, is
incorporated herein.



   (F)   M.S. § 609.735, defining the crime of concealing identity, is
incorporated herein.



   (G)   (1)   M.S. §§ 609.74 and 609.745, defining crimes
constituting public nuisances, are incorporated herein.



      (2)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, a
violation of M.S. § 609.74(2) shall be a petty misdemeanor subject to the
penalties set forth by resolution.



(`77 Code, § 10.108)  (Am. Ord. 1477, passed 10-25-04)  Penalty, see §
10.401



§ 10.109  CRIMES INVOLVING GAMBLING OR FIREWORKS.



   The following Minnesota Statutes, as amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein:



   (A)   M.S. §§ 609.75 and 609.755, together with all amendments
thereto through 1978, are incorporated herein.



   (B)   M.S. §§ 624.20 through 624.25, defining crimes relating to
fireworks, are incorporated herein.



(`77 Code, § 10.109)  (Am. Ord. 893, passed 8-15-78)  Penalty, see §
10.401



§ 10.110  CRIMES INVOLVING OBSCENITY.



   The following Minnesota Statutes, as amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein:



   (A)   M.S. § 617.23, defining the crime of indecent exposure, is
incorporated herein.



   (B)   M.S. §§ 617.24 and 617.243, defining crimes relating to the
distribution of obscene materials, are incorporated herein.



   (C)   M.S. § 617.26, defining crimes relating to the use of the
mail for transfer of obscene matter, is incorporated herein.



   (D)   M.S. §§ 617.28 and 617.29, defining crimes relating to
unlawful medical advertisements, are incorporated herein.



(`77 Code, § 10.110)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.111  CRIMES INVOLVING PUBLIC COMMUNICATIONS.



   The following Minnesota Statutes, as amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein:



   (A)   M.S. § 609.77, defining crimes relating to providing false
information to the news media, is incorporated herein.



   (B)   M.S. § 609.775, defining crimes relating to telephone or
telegraph workers, is incorporated herein.



   (C)   M.S. § 609.78, defining crimes relating to emergency
telephone calls, is incorporated herein.



   (D)   M.S. § 609.785, defining crimes relating to long distance
calls, is incorporated herein.



   (E)   M.S. § 609.79, defining crimes relating to anonymous
telephone calls, is incorporated herein.



   (F)   M.S. § 609.795, defining crimes relating to sealed letters,
telegrams or packages, is incorporated herein.



(`77 Code, § 10.111)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.112  CRIMES INVOLVING CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.



   The following Minnesota Statutes, as amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein:



   (A)   (1)   M.S. § 346.21, defining crimes constituting cruelty
to animals, is incorporated herein.



      (2)   The provisions of M.S. §§ 346.20, 346.215, and
346.216, defining terms, procedures for investigation of complaints, and
providing for expenses thereof, are also incorporated herein.



   (B)   M.S. § 346.22, defining crimes relating to cruelty in the
transportation of animals, is incorporated herein.



   (C)   M.S. §§ 346.23 and 346.24, defining crimes relating to
cruelty to horses, are incorporated herein.



   (D)   M.S. § 346.25, defining crimes relating to the poisoning of
animals, is incorporated herein.



   (E)   M.S. § 346.26 defining crimes relating to animals with
infectious disease, is incorporated herein.



   (F)   M.S. § 346.28, defining crimes relating to cruelty to birds,
is incorporated herein.



   (G)   M.S. § 346.29, defining crimes relating to conducting cock
fights or dog fights, is incorporated herein.



   (H)   M.S. § 346.34, defining crimes relating to contests involving
pigs, chickens or turkeys, is incorporated herein.



(`77 Code, § 10.112)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.113  MISCELLANEOUS CRIMES.



   The following Minnesota Statutes, as amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein:



   (A)   M.S. § 609.805, defining the crime of ticket scalping, is
incorporated herein.



   (B)   M.S. § 609.81, defining crimes relating to pawnbrokers is
incorporated herein.



   (C)   M.S. § 609.815, defining crimes relating to junk and
second-hand dealers, is incorporated herein.



   (D)   M.S. § 609.82, defining the crime of fraud in obtaining
credit, is incorporated herein.



   (E)   M.S. §§ 624.30 through 624.33, defining crimes relating to
tokens, checks and slugs, are incorporated herein.



   (F)   M.S. § 624.61, defining crimes relating to armed
associations, is incorporated herein.



   (G)   M.S. § 624.62, defining crimes relating to boarding moving
vehicles or engines, is incorporated herein.



   (H)   M.S. § 624.63, defining crimes relating to dangerous
exhibitions, is incorporated herein.



   (I)   M.S. § 624.65, defining crimes relating to itinerant
carnivals, is incorporated herein.



   (J)   M.S. § 624.66, defining crimes relating to endurance
contests, is incorporated herein.



   (K)   M.S. § 624.67, defining crimes relating to the false
registration of animals, is incorporated herein.



   (L)   M.S. § 624.64, defining crimes relating to acrobatic
exhibitions, is incorporated herein.



   (M) M.S. § 624.701, defining crimes relating to liquor in certain
prohibited places, is incorporated herein.



   (N)   M.S. § 624.714, defining crimes relating to engaging in
activities other than those for which a pistol permit has been issued, is
incorporated herein.



(`77 Code, § 10.113)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.114  TRESPASSING.



   (A)   No person shall intentionally trespass upon the land of
another and/or, without claim of right, refuse to depart therefrom on demand
of the lawful possessor thereof or the possessor's agent.  A demand to
depart may be made as follows:



      (1)   Orally or in writing by the lawful possessor or the
possessor's agent; or



      (2)   By conspicuously posting at reasonable intervals signs
which prohibit trespass on the affected land; or



      (3)   By conspicuously posting at reasonable intervals signs
which prohibit trespass on the affected land during certain hours.



   (B)   No person who has received a demand to depart pursuant to
subdivision (A)(1) of this section shall re-enter the lawful possessor's
land, without the written permission of the lawful possessor or possessor's
agent who provided said demand, for a period of up to 90 days from the date
of the demand.



(Ord. 1264, passed 4-26-93)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.115  POSSESSION OF TOXIC SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, TOXIC SUBSTANCE means:



      (1)   Glue, cement, or aerosol paint containing toluene,
benzene, xylene, amyl nitrate, butyl nitrate, nitrous oxide, or containing
other aromatic hydrocarbon solvents, but does not include glue, cement, or
paint contained in a packaged kit for the construction of a model automobile,
airplane, or similar item;



      (2)   Butane or a butane lighter; or



      (3)   Any similar substance declared to be toxic to the
central nervous system and to have a potential for abuse, by a rule adopted
by the Commissioner of Health.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years
to possess any toxic substance except while these persons are under the
direct supervision of a parent or guardian; or, are engaged in employment or
educational activities that require the use of these toxic substances.



   (C)   A violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor and
violators may be required to participate in a community service project in
addition to a fine.



(Ord. 1326, passed 6-10-96)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.116  ELECTRONIC SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICES.



   (A)   No person may operate or park, stop, or leave standing a motor
vehicle while using a radio or other electronic sound amplification device
emitting sound from or around the vehicle that is audible from a distance of
75 or more feet, unless the electronic sound amplification device is being
used to request assistance or warn against an unsafe condition.  This
section does not apply to any of the following:



      (1)   The operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to an emergency call, or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of the law, or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a
fire call.



      (2)   The operator of a vehicle of a public utility.



      (3)   The operator of a vehicle that is being used for
advertising purposes.



      (4)   The operator of a vehicle that is being used in a
licensed or permitted event or celebration, procession, or assemblage.



      (5)   The activation of a theft alarm signal device.



   (B)   A violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor.



(Ord. 1327, passed 6-10-96)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.117  CONSUMING IN PUBLIC.



   (A)   No person shall consume intoxicating liquor as defined by M.S.
§ 340A.101, subd. 14, or nonintoxicating malt liquor as defined by M.S. §
340A.101, subd. 19, as they may be amended from time to time, while:



      (1)   On a public street, highway, alley, sidewalk, boulevard,
or any place frequented by the public;



      (2)   On any private property without the consent of the owner
of such property; or



      (3)   While in a vehicle upon a public highway. 



   (B)   This section shall not prohibit the consumption of such
beverages at duly licensed on-sale premises, or if otherwise authorized by
law.



(Ord. 1401, passed 11-22-99)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.118  LOITERING IN POSSESSION OF OPEN BOTTLE.



   (A)   No person shall loiter in any public street, highway, alley,
sidewalk, boulevard, or any other public property, or on any private property
without consent of the owner of such property, while in possession of any
bottle or other receptacle containing intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating
malt liquor that has been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents
partially removed, with intent to consume such intoxicating liquor or
nonintoxicating malt liquor.



   (B)   This section shall not prohibit the possession of alcoholic
beverages at duly licensed on-sale premises if otherwise authorized by law.



(Ord. 1402, passed 11-22-99)  Penalty, see § 10.401



ARTICLE II:  MUNICIPAL PROPERTY AND GROUNDS



Section



   10.201   Prohibited conduct on park property



   10.202   Prohibited conduct on lakes, ice rinks, beaches



   10.203   Golf courses



   10.204   Other public right-of-way



   10.205   Library



   10.206   School buildings and grounds



   10.207   Skateboards, rollerblades, and the like



§ 10.201  PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON PARK PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall park, be or remain in any park or parkway, or
park or leave any vehicle in the park or parkway, between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless said person or vehicle is otherwise authorized to
remain in a park.



   (B)   No person shall in any way injure or deface any building,
facility, or any other feature of property upon or within any parks, or cut,
break, or in any way injure or deface any tree, shrub or plant within the
limits of any park.



   (C)   No person shall go on foot or otherwise upon the grass or turf
of any park where any sign is posted prohibiting such conduct.



   (D)   No person shall throw, deposit or leave in any park any paper,
rubbish, waste, or refuse of any kind, whether or not the same is offensive
to the senses or is injurious to health, except in the receptacles therein
provided for such paper, rubbish, waste and refuse.



   (E)   Any person, firm, group or organization who shall distribute
or display any circulars, cards, announcements or other items, either printed
or otherwise, shall cause the same to be distributed in an orderly manner. 
Further, that any such of the aforesaid items shall not be allowed to litter
any of the park property.



      (1)   Any person, firm, group or organization who so
distributes any of the aforesaid items shall be responsible to clean the park
property of such distributions.



      (2)   No person shall post, paste, fasten, paint or affix any
placard, bill, notice or sign upon any structure tree, stone, fence, thing or
enclosure along, or within any park without the written authorization of the
Park and Recreation Commission.



   (F)   No person shall at any time set, lay, prepare, or have in
possession any trap, snare, artificial light, net, bird line, or any
contrivance whatever, for the purpose of catching, taking, injuring or
killing any bird or wild animal in any park, except if authorized by the
Public Works Director.



   (G)   No person shall play golf, tennis or other ball games upon or
within any park, or parkway, except upon ball, tennis or appropriate athletic
grounds or golf links established by the Park and Recreation Commission. 
This section shall not prohibit persons from playing catch with a ball or
other object customarily used for that purpose so long as that activity does
not unreasonably interfere with the use of the park by other persons.



   (H)   No person shall move benches, seats and tables from their
places in any park or parkway, except that tables and benches placed in
picnic areas for picnics may be shifted in the picnic area within any single
park for use.



   (I)   No male, except for personnel in connection with their duties
of park maintenance, shall enter a toilet room set apart for females; no
female, except for personnel in connection with their duties of park
maintenance, shall enter a toilet room set apart for males.



   (J)   No person shall solicit, offer for sale, or sell to the public
any article or thing whatsoever in any park or parkway, except sales of
refreshments and other articles under the direction of the Park and
Recreation Commission.



   (K)   No person using a parkway as a pedestrian shall carelessly or
maliciously interfere with the passage of vehicles.



   (L)   No person shall be permitted to take any pet into any park
unless it is led by a suitable leash, and in no case shall any person allow
or bring any dog owned or attended by him upon any bathing beach or into any
park waters, or upon any skating rink, or in any park building whether the
dog is leashed or otherwise, unless so authorized in writing by the Public
Works Director.



   (M)   (1)   No entertainment or exhibitions shall be given in any
park or parkway except under the direction or by authority of the Park and
Recreation Commission.



      (2)   No public meeting of any kind shall be held in any park
or parkway, playground or athletic field, nor shall there be any public
speaking therein, without a written permit granted therefor by the Park and
Recreation Commission.



   (N)   No person shall start any fire in any park or upon any park
property, except that small fires may be made by picnic parties in parks
designated by the Park and Recreation Commission and in the places in said
parks provided for said purpose by the Public Works Director.



      (1)   Every person who starts any such fire and every person
using such fire is hereby charged with the duty of completely extinguishing
such fires or fire before leaving such park.



      (2)   Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or
restricting the enforcement of any ordinances regulating air pollution
control and setting ambient air quality standards.



   (O)   No person shall persistently interfere with the orderly
conduct of games or play by the participants therein.  Such interference
shall constitute disorderly conduct within the provisions of this chapter.



   (P)   No person shall have in his possession or consume any
intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating malt liquor in or upon any city park,
parkway, or bathing beach within the city.



      (1)   Provided, however, the City Council may by affirmative
vote grant permission to persons attending family gatherings, employees and
their families attending gatherings in conjunction with their employment, and
persons attending gatherings of or gatherings sponsored by non-profit public
service, charitable, educational, or religious organizations within the
community to possess and consume 3.2 malt liquor in city parks, except before
8:00 a.m. and after 9:30 p.m.  No such permission may be granted for such
possession or consumption in or upon any public bathing beach or anywhere in
Silver Lake Beach Park.



      (2)   The prohibitions of this division shall not apply on
Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays to Huset Park between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. and shall not apply to John Murzyn Hall
(Columbia Heights Fieldhouse) at any time.



   (Q)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed as limiting or
restricting Park and Recreation Commission or city agents and employees from
doing all acts necessary to the performance of their duties.



   (R)   (1)   The Park and Recreation Commission is hereby
authorized to post the Silver Lake Beach area, which includes the boat
landing, with signs indicating that the said beach area or designated portion
thereof is closed to the public.  Signs posted pursuant to this chapter must
clearly describe the area which is closed, the times at which such
restriction applies, and the penalty which may result to any person who
violates the prohibition of the sign.  The location of signs posted pursuant
to this section shall be reasonably calculated to give notice to persons of
the prohibition.  No sign shall be posted in accordance with this section
unless the Park and Recreation Commission shall first approve the message
placed upon the sign and the proposed location thereof.



      (2)   No person shall enter or be upon the beach property,
including the boat landing, in violation of the prohibitions of any sign
posted pursuant to this section.



(`77 Code, § 10.201)  (Am. Ord. 1019, passed 10-12-82; Am. Ord. 1077,
passed 3-26-84; Am. Ord. 1367, passed 12-8-97)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.202  PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON LAKES, ICE RINKS, BEACHES.



   (A)   No person shall fish in any lake other than those authorized
to be open for fishing by the Park and Recreation Commission and approved by
the State Department of Natural Resources.



      (1)   No person shall cut any hole in the ice of the city
lakes larger than ten inches in diameter.



      (2)   No person shall start a fire on the ice of any lake
under the jurisdiction of the Park and Recreation Commission provided,
however, that manufactured heaters burning liquid fuel may be used if a
written permit for such use is granted by the Public Works Director.



   (B)   No person shall be or remain in boats or otherwise upon the
lakes or any other water controlled by the Park and Recreation Commission
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m.



   (C)   No person shall navigate, direct or handle any boat in such
manner as to annoy, unnecessarily frighten, or endanger the occupants of
other boats.



   (D)   No person shall bathe in or enter the water of any park or
parkway except at bathing places designated by the Park and Recreation
Commission.  No person shall ride, drive, or send any animal into the waters
of any park or parkway without written authorization by the Park and
Recreation Commission.



   (E)   (1)   No person shall engage in racing or playing of any
game on skating rinks under Park and Recreation Commission supervision, which
interfere with the general use of the skating rink, except where such conduct
is in the course of organized sports' events under the supervision of the
Park and Recreation Commission.



      (2)   This section shall not be construed as prohibiting the
use of hockey sticks and pucks upon rinks designated or constructed as hockey
rinks by the Park and Recreation Commission.



   (F)   No person shall place, have or use, operate or navigate any
motor boat or any other boat mechanically propelled on any lake or body of
water situated within or partially within the city, except Silver Lake.



   (G)   No person shall expose himself to public view in any park or
parkway or on any lake unless properly clothed.  Swimming attire constitutes
proper clothing within the meaning of this chapter.



   (H)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed as limiting or
restricting Park and Recreation Commission or city agents and employees from
doing all acts necessary to the performance of their duties.



(`77 Code, § 10.202)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.203  GOLF COURSES.



   (A)   No person shall remove from any public or private golf course
in the city any golf balls or other golfing equipment lost or abandoned by
players on such golf course unless such actions are done while playing said
course, or are done with the authority of persons in charge of any such
course, or the persons who lost or abandoned said golf balls or equipment.



   (B)   No person shall sell or offer for sale upon any public or
private golf course in the city to any person or persons then being upon any
such golf course, any golf balls or other golfing equipment unless authorized
to do so by the person or persons in charge of such golf course.



(`77 Code, § 10.203)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.204  OTHER PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   No person may plant a tree, shrub or bush within the limits of
any street, or in any boulevard easement of any street without authorization
from the city, through the City Forester.



   (B)   No person shall remove, destroy, cut, deface, trim or in any
way injure any tree or shrub on any street or boulevard, and not otherwise
under Park and Recreation Commission jurisdiction, unless authorized to do so
by § 4.201 or with the permission of the City Forester.



   (C)   No person shall place or allow to be placed against any tree
on a street or the boulevard easement of a street, any wire conduit, building
material, or any other material which burns, cuts or chafes any part of such
tree, unless said tree is first sufficiently protected by a proper guard to
prevent possible injury.



   (D)   No person shall transport any diseased wood within the city
without written authorization from the city through the City Forester.  Such
authorization shall be provided only if the city's diseased tree program will
thereby be furthered.



   (E)   No person shall throw, discard, or deposit any leaves, grass,
other organic waste materials, or snow from private property to the traveled
way or paved portion of any street or alley within the city.



(`77 Code, § 10.204)  (Am. Ord. 1186, passed 6-12-89)  Penalty, see §
10.401



§ 10.205  LIBRARY.



   No person shall abuse the library services offered by the city by
failing to return borrowed books, records or other articles when due, subject
to the following provisions:



   (A)   The failure to return overdue articles shall not constitute an
offense under this section until a written warning notice has been sent to
the indicated address of the library cardholder and ten days have elapsed
from the date of mailing of such notice.



   (B)   The parent or legal guardian of any child under the age of 15
years shall be liable under this section for any violations hereunder by said
child.



   (C)   Full restitution shall be an absolute defense to this section;
to include the return of the borrowed article, or payment of the equivalent
value thereof, as determined by library personnel, together with payment of
all fines or overdue charges levied through normal library administrative
sanctions.



(`77 Code, § 10.205)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.206  SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS.



   (A)   No person shall mark with ink, paint, chalk or other
substance, or post handbills on, or in any other manner deface or injure
fences, trees, lawns or fixtures appurtenant to or located on the site of
such buildings, or post handbills on such fences, trees or fixtures.  No
signs shall be placed or posted anywhere on any such site without the express
permission of school authorities.



   (B)   No person in any school building or on any school property or
grounds shall make or assist in making any noise, disturbance, diversion or
activity by which peace, quiet and good order are disturbed.



   (C)   No person in any school building or on any school property or
grounds shall engage in, threaten to engage in or assist in engaging in any
riot, fight, brawl, tumultuous conduct or act of violence.



   (D)   No person shall use foul, offensive, obscene or indecent
language in any school building or on any school property or grounds.



   (E)   No person shall, in any school room or in any building or on
the premises adjacent to the same, disturb or interrupt the peace and good
order of such school while in session.  Any person not in immediate
attendance in such school and being in such building or upon the premises
belonging thereto who shall conduct or behave himself so as to disturb the
peace or good order of such school, or who upon the request of a teacher of
such school or the person in charge thereof to leave said building or
premises, shall neglect or refuse to do so, shall be in violation of this
section.



(`77 Code, § 10.206)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.207  SKATEBOARDS, ROLLERBLADES, AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Intent and purpose.  It is the intent and purpose of this
section to protect the public health and safety by the regulation of the use
of skateboards, rollerskis, rollerskates and rollerblades within the city and
to prohibit use of the same within designated areas and to provide penalties
for violations.



   (B)   Definitions.  The following definitions shall apply in the
interpretation and application of this section, and the following words and
terms, wherever they occur in this section, are defined as follows:



      ROLLERSKATE/ROLLERBLADE.  A non-motorized device with wheels
which is attached to a shoe or designed to be attached to a shoe.



      ROLLERSKI.  A non-motorized ski-like device mounted on wheels.



      SKATEBOARD.  A non-motorized platform mounted on wheels.



   (C)   Skateboards–prohibited conduct.  No person shall ride or
propel oneself upon skateboards within any of the following areas:



      (1)   That area within the following:  East of the East curb
line of Van Buren Street N.E. and North of the North curb line of 39th Avenue
N.E. and South of the South curb line of 41st Avenue N.E. and West of a line
300 feet East of the East curb line of Central Avenue.



      (2)   On or about any public tennis courts within the city
limits of Columbia Heights.



      (3)   On or about any public or private parking lot, ramp,
area or facility without the express written permission of the owner thereof.



      (4)   In any area within the city limits of Columbia Heights
while being pushed, pulled, or in any way propelled by any motorized vehicle
or by a person on a bicycle.



      (5)   In any area or in any manner which is contrary to the
statutory provisions applicable to the operation of bicycles.



   (D)   Rollerskis, rollerskates or rollerblades–prohibited
conduct.  No person shall ride or propel oneself upon rollerskis,
rollerskates or rollerblades within any of the following areas:



      (1)   On or about any public tennis courts within the city
limits of Columbia Heights.



      (2)   On or about any public or private parking lot, ramp,
area or facility without the express written permission of the owner thereof.



      (3)   In any area within the city limits of Columbia Heights
while being pushed, pulled, or in any way propelled by any motorized vehicle
or by a person on a bicycle.



   (E)   Exceptions.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary,
the provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   The owner of any property using such premises for
skateboards, rollerskis, rollerskates or rollerblades for the owner's own use
or for an organized event conducted with the owner's permission.



      (2)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit
the use of a wheelchair or any other wheeled device designed to assist a
disabled person on any of the places mentioned herein.



   (F)   Penalties.  Any violation of this section is a petty
misdemeanor and is subject to all penalties provided for such violation under
Minnesota Statutes.



   (G)   Impoundment.  The Columbia Heights Police Department may
impound any skateboard, rollerskis, rollerskates or rollerblades used,
ridden, operated, owned or possessed or otherwise existing upon any public or
private property within the City of Columbia Heights in violation of this
section.  Any skateboard, rollerskis, rollerskates and/or rollerblades
impounded by the city and which remains unclaimed by the owner for a period
of 60 days may be sold at public sale or auction following published notice.



(Ord. 1236, passed 11-23-92)  Penalty, see § 10.401



ARTICLE III:  GENERAL PROHIBITIONS



Section



   10.301   Commercial activities generally



   10.302   Liquor or beer establishments



   10.303   Curfew



   10.304   Drugs; glue



   10.305   Traffic, motor vehicles



   10.306   Nuisances



   10.307   Weapons



   10.308   Motor vehicles upon private property



   10.309   Bomb threats and evacuation



   10.310   Display to minors of indecent publications



   10.311   Dissemination to minors of unlawful materials



   10.312   Participation in loud parties or gatherings



   10.313   False alarm response



§ 10.301  COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES GENERALLY.



   (A)   No person shall maintain, operate or engage in any business,
commercial, vocational or occupational activity for which a license is
required under this code, without a license issued pursuant to the provisions
of this code and which has not been revoked or suspended.



   (B)   No person engaged in the commercial activities associated with
itinerant peddlers, transient merchants, or solicitors, as described in §
5.202, shall make any false and material misrepresentation or engage in any
act constituting fraud designed to obtain business or consummate sales.



   (C)   No person engaged in the commercial activities associated with
itinerant peddlers, transient merchants, or solicitors, shall:



      (1)   Call attention to his business or to his merchandise by
blowing a horn, ringing a bell, by the use of a voice amplifying device, or
by any other method of causing a loud noise, except as permitted by § 5.606
of this code; or



      (2)   Sell or solicit on Sunday, or after the hour of 9:00
p.m. unless an appointment with the customer has been arranged in advance; or



      (3)   Enter or conduct business upon premises where a sign or
plaque is conspicuously posted stating that no solicitors or peddlers are
allowed unless a prior appointment is arranged with a resident of said
premises.



   (D)   (1)   No person engaged in the business of selling new or
used cars, shall do any act in violation of the conditions and requirements
prescribed by § 5.205.



      (2)   The provisions of this section apply to any licensee,
his employees or agents, or any person engaged in such conduct without a
license, provided, no employee shall be liable under this section for any
acts of his employer of which said employee had no knowledge or reason to
know.



   (E)   No person operating a fresh food store or a food
establishment, as either licensee, owner, or employee, shall fail to abide by
any order of a health inspector designed to protect the health and welfare of
the public and patrons of the establishment.



   (F)   No person shall operate or maintain a fresh food store or a
food establishment in substantial and continuing disregard of prescribed
sanitation standards.  Three or more warning tags from a health inspector
within a six-month period shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this section.



   (G)   No person who has custody or control over the use of a game of
skill, as defined by § 5.402, shall allow such game to be used as a gambling
device.



   (H)   No person operating a taxicab shall charge, or attempt to
charge, a passenger a greater rate of fare than that established by Council
resolution.



   (I)   No person operating a taxicab shall knowingly deceive with
intent to defraud a passenger as to the whereabouts of said passenger's
destination, or the distance to be traveled.



   (J)   No person shall make a material and false misrepresentation on
a license application for the purpose of obtaining said license.



   (K)   No person, firm or corporation in charge of any place of
amusement, entertainment, or refreshment, or other place of business shall
knowingly and willfully condone or permit any minor under the age of 18 years
of loiter, loaf, or idle in such place during the hours prohibited by this
chapter.



      (1)   This section shall not be construed as permitting the
presence at any time of any person under the age of 18 years in any place
where his presence is now prohibited by any existing law or ordinance.



      (2)   Whenever the owner or person in charge or in control of
any place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment, or other place of
business shall find persons under the age of 18 years loitering, loafing, or
idling in such place of business, he shall immediately order such persons to
leave and if such person refuses to leave the said place of business, the
operator shall immediately notify the Police Department and inform them of
the violation.



   (L)   No person engaged in the business of leasing or renting motor
vehicles shall rent any such vehicle to any individual who does not have a
valid driver's license pursuant to M.S. Chapter 171, as it may be amended
from time to time, for the operation of said vehicle.



   (M) No licensee under Chapter 5 of this code or any other person
authorized to sell glue containing the intoxicating substances defined in §
10.304 shall sell such glue from a self-service display.



   (N)   No person shall fail to pay a taxicab operator the fare which
is due and owing, upon termination of any taxicab ride which was commenced
within the city, or terminated within the city, provided however:



      (1)   That in the event of a bona fide dispute as to the
amount of fare due and owing, such person shall be provided on demand the
name and license number of the taxicab operator, together with a written
receipt specifying the amount paid, the trip mileage and the place of
commencement and place of destination of the trip, and further provided;



      (2)   That refusal of the taxicab operator to provide the
above-described information, when so requested, shall be an absolute defense
to this section.



   (O)   No person shall loiter, engage in disorderly conduct or cause
any nuisance on the parking area of a restaurant so as to disturb the quiet
and good order of the neighborhood.



   (P)   No person shall operate or maintain a pool table, billiard
table, bowling alley, or game of skill, as defined by § 5.402, within 100
feet of the nearest point of any school or church premises within the limits
of the City of Columbia Heights.



(`77 Code, § 10.301)  (Am. Ord. 992, passed 3-22-82; Am. Ord. 977, passed
9-29-81; Am. Ord. 1127, passed 8-25-86)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.302  LIQUOR OR BEER ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   No person who owns or operates an establishment at which
liquor or beer is sold on-sale, shall permit any gambling or gambling devices
on the premises of such establishment except as otherwise permitted by law.



   (B)   No person who owns or operates an establishment at which beer
is sold on-sale, shall permit any gambling or gambling devices on the
premises of such establishment.



   (C)   No person, licensee, or his agent shall serve beer to a minor
or permit a minor to remain on the premises.



   (D)   No person, licensee or his agent, or manner of a club or his
agent shall permit the sale or consumption of intoxicating liquor or beer
other than during the hours specifically authorized in this code.



   (E)   No person who manages or operates a club for which an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license has been issued, or any agent of such person,
shall permit the consumption of intoxicating liquor or beer by any person who
is not a club member, or a guest of a club member.



(`77 Code, § 10.302)  (Am. Ord. 1129, passed 8-25-86; Am. Ord. 1135, passed
9-22-86)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.303  CURFEW.



   (A)   Findings and purpose.



      (1)   In recent years, there has been a significant increase
in juvenile victimization and crime. At the same time, the crimes committed
by and against juveniles have become more violent. A significant percentage
of juvenile crime occurs during curfew hours.



      (2)   Because of their lack of maturity and experience,
juveniles are particularly susceptible to becoming victims of older
perpetrators. The younger the person is, the more likely he is to be a victim
of crime.



      (3)   While parents have the primary responsibility to provide
for the safety and welfare of juveniles, Columbia Heights also has a
substantial interest in the safety and welfare of juveniles. Moreover, the
City of Columbia Heights has an interest in preventing juvenile crime,
promoting parental supervision, and providing for the well being of the
general public.



      (4)   An updated and enforceable curfew ordinance will reduce
juvenile victimization and crime and will advance public safety, health, and
general welfare.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EMERGENCY.  A circumstance or combination of circumstances
requiring immediate action to prevent property damage, serious bodily injury,
or loss of life.



      ESTABLISHMENT.  Any privately owned place of business to which
the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement,
entertainment, or refreshment.



      GUARDIAN.  An adult appointed pursuant to M.S. §§ 525.6155 or
525.6165, as they may be amended from time to time, who has the powers and
responsibilities of a parent as defined by M.S. § 525.619, as it may be
amended from time to time.



      JUVENILE.  A person under the age of 18. The term does not
include persons under 18 who are married or have been legally emancipated.



      PARENT.  Birth parents, adopting parents, and step parents.



      PROPRIETOR.  Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term
includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses,
office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.



      RESPONSIBLE ADULT.  A person over the age of 18 specifically
authorized by law or by a parent or guardian to have custody and control over
a juvenile.



      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY.  Bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any body part or organ.



   (C)   Prohibited acts.



      (1)   It is unlawful for a juvenile under the age of 16 to be
present in any public place or establishment within the city.



         (a)   Any time between 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and 5:00 a.m. on the following day.



         (b)   Any time between 11:00 p.m. on any Friday or
Saturday and 5:00 a.m. on the following day.



      (2)   It is unlawful for a juvenile, age 16 or 17 to be
present in any public place or establishment within the city:



         (a)   Any time between 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and 5:00 a.m. the following day.



         (b)   Any time between 12:01 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any
Saturday or Sunday.



      (3)   It is unlawful for a parent or guardian of a juvenile
knowingly, or through negligent supervision, to permit the juvenile to be in
any public place or establishment within the city during the hours prohibited
in subsections (1) and (2).



      (4)   (a)   It is unlawful for a proprietor of an
establishment within the city to knowingly permit a juvenile to remain in the
establishment's property during the hours prohibited in subsections (1) and
(2).



         (b)   If the proprietor is not present at the time of
the curfew violation, the responding officers shall leave written notice of
the violation with an employee of the establishment. A copy of the written
notice shall be served upon the establishment's proprietor personally or by
certified mail.



   (D)   Defenses.



      (1)   It is an affirmative defense for a juvenile to prove
that:



         (a)   The juvenile was accompanied by his parent,
guardian, or other responsible adult.



         (b)   The juvenile was engaged in a lawful employment
activity or was going to or returning from his place of employment.



         (c)   The juvenile was involved in an emergency
situation.



         (d)   The juvenile was going to, attending, or returning
home from an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
sponsored and/or supervised by a public entity or civic organization.



         (e)   The juvenile was on an errand at the direction of
a parent or guardian.



         (f)   The juvenile was exercising First Amendment rights
protected by the United States Constitution or Article I of the Constitution
of the State of Minnesota.



         (g)   The juvenile was engaged in interstate travel.



         (h)   The juvenile was on the public right-of-way,
boulevard or sidewalk abutting the property containing the juvenile's
residence or abutting a neighboring property, structure, or residence.



      (2)   It is an affirmative defense for a proprietor of an
establishment to prove that:



         (a)   The proprietor or employee reasonably and in good
faith relied upon a juvenile's representations of proof of age. Proof of age
may be established pursuant to M.S. § 340A.503, subd. 6, as it may be
amended from time to time, or other verifiable means, including but not
limited to, school identification cards and birth certificates.



         (b)   The proprietor or employee promptly notified the
city Police Department that a juvenile was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.



   (E)   Penalty.  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 1301, passed 7-10-95)



§ 10.304  DRUGS; GLUE.



   (A)   No person shall inhale, breathe, or drink, or be or become
intoxicated by reason of inhaling, breathing, or drinking any substances
commonly known as glue, adhesive, cement, mucilage, dope, solvents, lacquer,
drugs, fingernail polish and lacquer, nail polish remover, or thinners for
the above named substances, nor any substances containing toluol, hexane,
trichloroethylene, acetone, touene, ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl ketone,
trichoroathane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve
acetate, cyclohexanone, or any other substance which contains ketones,
aldehydes, organic acetates, ether, chlorinated-hydrocarbons, or any other
similar ingredient which releases toxic vapors for the purpose of inducing
symptoms of intoxication, elation, excitement, confusion, dizziness,
paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner change, distort or disturb
the balance, coordination, or the audio, visual, or mental processes.



   (B)   No person shall, for the purpose of violating or aiding
another to violate any provision of this section, intentionally possess, buy,
sell, transfer possession, or receive possession of any glue containing the
intoxicating substances defined in division (A) of this section.



   (C)   No person shall manufacture, grow, cultivate, sell, give away,
barter, deliver, exchange or distribute, or possess with intent to
manufacture, sell, give away, barter, deliver, exchange or distribute, or
possess for his own use, a small amount of marijuana.



      (1)   For purposes of this section, the definition of
marijuana shall be as prescribed by M.S. § 152.01, subd. 9, as it may be
amended from time to time; and



      (2)   A small amount of marijuana shall include 1.5 ounces
avoirdupois or less, excluding the resinous form of marijuana.



   (D)   No person who is the owner of a private motor vehicle or who
is the operator of a private motor vehicle in the absence of the owner, shall
knowingly keep or allow to be kept in such motor vehicle more than .05 ounce
of marijuana, provided however, that such provisions shall only apply to
those areas of the vehicle normally occupied by the driver or passengers, and
excluding the trunk area.



(`77 Code, § 10.304)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.305  TRAFFIC, MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   No person, except those exempted by law, shall
operate or drive any motor vehicle upon any street, alley, or highway in the
city, without a valid license for the type or class of vehicle driven issued
pursuant to the provisions of M.S. Chapter 171, as it may be amended from
time to time.



      (2)   For purposes of interpretation and enforcement of this
section, M.S. Chapter 171, as it may be amended from time to time, together
with all amendments thereto through 1978 is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated as if fully set forth herein.



   (B)   No person shall siphon gasoline from any motor vehicle unless
authorized to do so by the owner or other person in lawful custody of such
vehicle.



   (C)   (1)   No person in control of a motor vehicle, as owner or
operator, shall permit such vehicle to stand unattended anywhere within the
city, whether on public or private property, without first locking the
ignition and removing the key from the vehicle.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the above, this provision shall not
apply to any motor vehicle which is used in a police operation.



   (D)   (1)   No person shall violate any of the provisions of
Chapter 7 of this code.  Upon conviction for any such violation, except as
otherwise provided below, or where otherwise provided by M.S. Chapters 169 or
171, as they may be amended from time to time, such person shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the above, any person convicted of a
violation of § 7.206(C) shall be punishable as a misdemeanor violation.



(`77 Code, § 10.305)  (Am. Ord. 890, passed 8-15-78; Am. Ord. 1376, passed
9-14-98)



§ 10.306  NUISANCES.



   (A)   No person shall cause, create, or maintain a public nuisance,
or knowingly permit or acquiesce to any such nuisance upon any premises in
which such person has an ownership or possessory interest.  For purposes of
this section, the conditions prescribed by §§ 8.201 et seq., shall
constitute a public nuisance.



   (B)   No person shall interfere with, prevent, or delay any agent or
employee of the city while properly engaged in the performance of their
duties relating to the prevention, discovery, investigation or abatement of
any public nuisance.



   (C)   No person shall urinate in a public place.  A public place
includes any street or highway, alley, parking lot, driveway, sidewalk, mall,
boulevard, park, or any other place or enclosure not designed for use as a
toilet or lavatory.



(`77 Code, § 10.306)  (Am. Ord. 1118, passed 2-10-86)  Penalty, see §
10.401



§ 10.307  WEAPONS.



   (A)   A firearm is any weapon from which may be fired or ejected one
or more solid projectiles by means of a cartridge or shell by the action of
an explosive or the ignition of flammable or explosive substances.  Firearms
also include any weapons for which the said propelling force is a spring,
elastic band, carbon dioxide, air, or any gas or vapor.  Firearms shall
include all shotguns, rifles and other longguns, pistols and revolvers, BB
guns, air guns, slingshots, and pellet guns, but shall not include a stud or
nail gun commonly used in the construction industry or children’s popguns
or toys.



   (B)   No person, except a regular peace officer in the performance
of his duties, shall use, fire or discharge a firearm, as defined herein,
within the city.



   (C)   (1)   “Facsimile firearm” means any object which is a
replica of an actual firearm, which substantially duplicates an actual
firearm, or which could reasonably be perceived to be an actual firearm,
unless:



         (a)   The entire exterior surface of such object is
colored white, bright red, bright orange, bright yellow, bright green, bright
blue, bright pink or bright purple, either singly or as the predominant color
in combination with other colors in any pattern; or such object is
constructed entirely of transparent or translucent materials which permits
unmistakable observation of the firearm’s complete contents; and



         (b)    Such object shall have as an integral part,
permanently affixed, a blaze orange extension that extends at least six
millimeters from the muzzle end of the barrel of such object; and



         (c)   Such object does not have attached thereto a laser
pointer.



      (2)   “Facsimile firearm” does not include any actual
firearm as otherwise regulated by the terms of this code or the Minnesota
Statutes.



   (D)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city
to carry on or about his person in a public place or transport in any vehicle
in any public place any weapon or facsimile firearm, except the
transportation of any weapon or facsimile firearm in or upon any motor
vehicle in a secured container or in the locked truck of such vehicle.



      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable
to the transport of weapons or facsimile firearms by persons who are
regularly engaged in the lawful manufacture, distribution or sale at retail
or wholesale of weapons or facsimile firearms, or the agents of any of them
while engaged in such business; to the carrying or transport of weapons or
facsimile firearms by licensed, full-time peace officers, law enforcement
officers or military personnel while in the course of their duties; to
persons holding a permit to carry a firearm acting within the scope of such
permits; to any officer of a state adult correctional facility when on guard
duty or otherwise engaged in an assigned duty.



   (E)   The Columbia Heights Police Department may impound any weapon
which is used in violation of divisions (A) or (B), or M.S. § 609.99, as it
may be amended from time to time, which comes into its possession as lost and
found property, or which otherwise comes legally into its possession.



   (F)   The weapon may be surrendered to the rightful owner upon such
owner furnishing proof of ownership and providing that no charges are pending
against the rightful owner arising from the possession or use of that weapon
and providing that the rightful owner is otherwise entitled to the return of
the said weapon.



   (G)   Any weapon impounded by the city and which remains unclaimed
by the owner of a period of 60 days may be sold or otherwise disposed of as
approved by the City Council following ten days published notice in the legal
newspaper of the city prior to such sale or other disposal.



   (H)   All proceeds realized from the sale or disposal of impounded
weapons shall either be deposited in the general fund of the city, or, if
approved by the City Council, traded for other equipment for the Police
Department. Upon furnishing proof of ownership of a weapon which has been
sold or otherwise disposed of pursuant to this section, the true owner
thereof may recover an amount equal to the proceeds received from the sale of
that weapon at the sale.  If the weapon has been traded and a valid claim is
made pursuant to this section, the city shall reimburse the owner of the
weapon in an amount equal to the fair market value of the said weapon at the
time of the trade.  Any payments recovered hereunder shall be made from the
general fund.  Provided, that no such owner may recover or bring any action
to recover such payment unless such owner does so within a period of six
months following the date of the sale of the weapon.



(`77 Code, § 10.307)  (Am. Ord. 1006, passed 10-25-82; Am. Ord. 1569,
passed 8-24-09)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.308  MOTOR VEHICLES UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation may prohibit the operation of
motor vehicles upon its real property.  The owner of the real property or
his designated agent shall post signs on the said property in a fashion
reasonably calculated to give notice to those sought to be so prohibited. 
Such signs shall state “NO MOTOR VEHICLES ALLOWED UPON PROPERTY, EXCEPT
WITH PERMISSION OF OWNER” and shall conform to the following criteria:



      (1)   The lettering on the sign shall be no less than two
inches in height for each letter;



      (2)   The lettering shall be red placed on a white sign;



      (3)   The lower edge of the sign shall be no less than six
feet in height nor higher than eight feet from the level of the ground
immediately below the said sign; and



      (4)   The sign shall conform in all other respects to the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for streets and highways of the
State of Minnesota.



   (B)   Whenever a Columbia Heights police officer finds a motor
vehicle upon such private property posted in accordance with this section,
such officer may move such vehicle or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to remove the same to a position off the private
property, all at the owner's expense.  The placement of signs in accordance
with division (A) by any person, firm, or corporation shall be construed as
granting to any Columbia Heights police officer the right of entry upon said
real estate for the purpose of the enforcement of this chapter.



   (C)   No person, firm or corporation which is the owner of any motor
vehicle and no person who is in actual physical control of any motor vehicle
shall allow or permit the same to be driven, operated, parked, abandoned or
actually physically controlled when the same is upon such posted property
without the permission of the owner.



(`77 Code, § 10.308)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.309  BOMB THREATS AND EVACUATION.



   (A)   No person shall threaten to discharge any explosive device in
or to bomb any building or place or, as a hoax, to communicate or cause to be
communicated the fact that a bomb or other explosive device has been placed
in any building or in any location whether specifically identified or not.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly use or permit to be used any
telephone or other means of communication under his control to be used for
any purpose prohibited by this section.



   (C)   No person shall, as a hoax or otherwise, place or cause to be
placed in any building, place or location any article with the intent to give
the impression that such article possesses explosive capability.



   (D)   The City Manager, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, any
firefighter, or any peace officer shall have the authority to order the
evacuation of any building or area within the city when such person
reasonably believes that a bomb or other explosive device could be located in
such building or area.  Upon being notified of such order, no person within
such building or area shall fail to comply with such order, nor shall any
person obstruct the evacuation of such building or area.



(`77 Code, § 10.309)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.310  DISPLAY TO MINORS OF INDECENT PUBLICATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly display to view at newsstands or any
other business establishment frequented by minors under the age of 18 years
or where said minors are or may be invited as a part of the general public,
any motion picture, or any still picture, or any photograph, or any book,
pocket book, pamphlet, or magazine the cover of which exploits, is devoted
to, or is principally made up of descriptions or depictions of illicit sex or
sexual immorality or which is lewd, lascivious, or indecent, or which
consists of pictures of nude or partially denuded figures posed or presented
in a manner to provoke or arouse lust or passion or exploit sex, lust or
perversion for commercial gain or any article or instrument of indecent or
immoral use.



   (B)   As used in this section, the terms defined herein shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them:



      DESCRIPTION OR DEPICTION OF ILLICIT SEX OR IMMORALITY.



         (a)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal.



         (b)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or
sodomy.



         (c)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.



      KNOWINGLY.  Having knowledge of the character of the publication
or failure on notice to exercise reasonable inspection which would disclose
the character of the same.



      NUDE OR PARTIALLY DENUDED FIGURES.



         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; and



         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.



(`77 Code, § 10.310)  (Am. Ord. 872, passed 9-12-77)  Penalty, see §
10.401



§ 10.311  DISSEMINATION TO MINORS OF UNLAWFUL MATERIALS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly disseminate, sell or loan for
monetary consideration to a minor:



      (1)   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion
picture, film, or similar visual reproduction or image of a person or portion
of the body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sado- masochistic abuse
and which is harmful to minors; or



      (2)   Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however
reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in the
preceding subdivision (1) hereof, or which contains explicit or detailed
verbal accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic
abuse and which, when taken as a whole, are harmful to minors.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly exhibit for a monetary consideration
to a minor or knowingly sell to a minor an admission ticket or pass or
knowingly admit a minor for a monetary consideration to premises whereon
there is exhibited a motion picture, show, or other presentation which, in
whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct, or sado-masochistic abuse
and which is harmful to minors.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning



      HARMFUL TO MINORS.  That quality of any description or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement, or sado-masochistic abuse, when it:



         (a)   Taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest
in sex of minors; and



         (b)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in
the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for
minors; and



         (c)   Taken as a whole lacks serious literary or
artistic or political or scientific value.



      MINOR.  Any person under the age of 18 years.



      NUDITY.  The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or showing the
female breast with less than a full opaque covering, or showing the female
breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below a
point immediately above the areola, or the depiction of covered male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state.



      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE.  Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person clad in undergarments, in a revealing costume, a mask or bizarre
costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of the one so clothed.



      SEXUAL CONDUCT.  Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual
intercourse, or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed
genitals, pubic area, buttocks or female breast.



      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT.  The condition of the human male or female
genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or excitement.



   (D)   A person who engages in the conduct prescribed by this section
is presumed to do so with knowledge of the character and content of the
material sold or loaned, or the motion picture, show or presentation
exhibited or to be exhibited.



   (E)   In any prosecution for disseminating indecent materials to
minors, it is an affirmative defense that the defendant has reasonable cause
to believe that the minor has reached his eighteenth birthday, and that such
minor exhibited to the defendant a draft card, driver's license, birth
certificate or other official or apparently official document purporting to
establish that such minor had reached his eighteenth birthday.



   (F)   The following are exempt from criminal or other action
hereunder:



      (1)   Recognized and established schools, churches, museums,
medical clinics, and physicians, hospitals, public libraries, governmental
agencies, governmental sponsored organizations, and persons acting in that
capacity as employees or agents of such organization.  For the purpose of
this section RECOGNIZED AND ESTABLISHED shall mean an organization or agency
having a full-time faculty and diversified curriculum in the case of a
school; a church affiliated with a national or regional denomination; a
licensed physician or psychiatrist or clinic of licensed physicians or
psychiatrists; and in all other exempt organizations shall refer only to
income tax exempted organizations which are supported in whole or in part by
tax funds or which receive at least one-third of their support from publicly
donated funds.



      (2)   Individuals in a parental relationship with the minor.



(`77 Code, § 10.311)  (Am. Ord. 873, passed 9-12-77)  Penalty, see §
10.401



§ 10.312  PARTICIPATION IN LOUD PARTIES OR GATHERINGS.



   (A)   No person shall congregate because of or participate in any
party or gathering of people from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume
or of such nature to disturb the peace, quiet, or repose of other persons.



   (B)   A police officer may order all persons present other than the
owners or tenants of the building or place where the party or gathering is
located to immediately disperse.  Any person who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of
this section.



   (C)   Any owner, renter, or person in charge of the building or
place from which a disturbance emanates and those present fail to immediately
abate said disturbance upon order of a police officer shall be guilty of a
violation of this section.



(`77 Code, § 10.312)  (Am. Ord. 994, passed 3-22-82; Am. Ord. 1381, passed
12-28-98)  Penalty, see § 10.401



§ 10.313  FALSE ALARM RESPONSE.



   (A)   Definitions.



      ALARM.  Means a mechanical, electrical or an electronic device
designed to detect and/or signal: intrusion, holdup, trouble, or fire,
excluding such device affixed to a motor vehicle.



      FALSE ALARM.  Means an alarm signal when response by the Police
and/or Fire Departments is not in fact required, but excluding an alarm
caused by storm or other conditions beyond the reasonable control of the
alarm or alarm user.



         (a)   False alarms signaled within a 24-hour period of
the original false alarm will not be counted as additional alarms, to allow
for the repair and/or correction of the malfunction.



         (b)   The Columbia Heights Police will document all
police false alarms for the purpose of enforcing this section and the
Columbia Heights Fire Department will document all fire false alarms for the
purpose of enforcing this section.



   (B)   Exception.  Federal and/or state agencies and political
subdivisions of the federal or state government shall be exempt from the
payment of any permit, fees, and/or false alarm charges otherwise provided
for by this section.



   (C)   A fee shall be payable to the city for the third response and
each subsequent response within one calendar year by the Police and/or Fire
Department to an automatic alarm device triggered other than by reason of
criminal activity and/or fire (false alarm).  The fee shall be set by
resolution.



   (D)   The city shall have the power to collect such fee by whatever
means necessary, including the issuance of ordinance violation summons for
failure to comply with the requirements of this section within seven working
days of receiving notice of payment due.  The person responsible for the
payment of such fee is the person to be cited a petty misdemeanor.



   (E)   Liability of city.  The regulation of alarm response shall
not constitute acceptance by the city of liability to maintain equipment, to
answer alarms, or to respond to alarms in any particular manner.



(Ord. 1387, passed 5-10-99)



ARTICLE IV:  VIOLATIONS



Section



   10.401   Penalties



§ 10.401  PENALTIES.



   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of
this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
1.999.



(`77 Code, § 10.401)  (Am. Ord. 1186, passed 6-12-89)



CHAPTER 11:  CABLE COMMUNICATIONS



   Article



      I.   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS



ARTICLE I:  CABLE COMMUNICATIONS



Section



   11.101   Title



   11.102   Definitions



   11.103   Authorization



   11.104   Duration



   11.105   Non-exclusive grant



   11.106   Police powers



   11.107   Written notice



   11.108   Ownership, control; transfer of ownership and control



   11.109   Cancellation, termination and expiration



   11.110   Cancellation, termination procedure



   11.111   Condemnation



   11.112   Right to purchase



   11.113   Removal of system



   11.114   Continuity of operation



   11.115   Receivership



   11.116   Foreclosure



   11.117   Renewal or extension



   11.118   Abandonment



   11.119   Service area and extension of service



   11.120   Design and construction



   11.121   System services



   11.122   Video production facilities, staff and budgets for access
programming



   11.123   Interactive services



   11.124   Subscriber contracts; rates



   11.125   Disconnection



   11.126   Refunds to subscribers and users



   11.127   Franchise fee, taxes and assessments



   11.128   Indemnification, insurance, bonds, letters of credit



   11.129   Interruption of service and complaint procedure



   11.130   Books and records of grantee



   11.131   Testing



   11.132   Action by state or federal authorities



   11.133   Severability



   11.134   Grantee will not contest validity of franchise



   11.135   Interpretation by city of franchise



   11.136   Subscriber privacy



   11.137   Criminal penalty



   11.138   Compliance with City Charter



   11.139   Continuing supervision and regulatory jurisdiction



   11.140   Annual subscriber survey



   11.141   Completion of construction



   11.142   Joint system, acceptance, incorporation of grantee's
proposal, exhibits



   11.143   Commission organization and board



   11.144   Variance procedure



§ 11.101  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Cable Communications
Code.”



('77 Code, § 11.101)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.102  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  The
words SHALL and WILL are mandatory and MAY is permissive.



   ACTIVATED CHANNEL.  A video channel which is equipped to carry
programming.



   ADDITIONAL SERVICE.  Any communications service other than basic
service, provided over its system by the grantee directly or as a carrier for
its subsidiaries, affiliates, or any other person engaged in communications
services, including, by way of example, but not limited to, burglar alarm,
data or other electronic intelligence transmission, facsimile reproduction,
meter reading, pay cable, home shopping, and FM service.



   AUTOMATED SERVICES.  Programming or information displayed in an alpha
numeric mode.



   BASIC SERVICE.  The delivery by grantee to all subscribers, of service
provided by grantee covered by the regular monthly charge paid by all
subscribers, excluding additional services for which a separate charge is
made.



   BOARD.  The Minnesota Cable Communications Board and any legally
appointed, designated or elected agent or successor.



   CHANNEL.  A band of frequencies, which for television is six megahertz
wide and which for data, FM or other signals, is of various band widths
commensurate with the requirements of the specific service.



   CITY.  The City of Columbia Heights, a Charter city, in the State of
Minnesota.



   CLASS IV CABLE COMMUNICATIONS CHANNEL.  A signaling path provided by a
cable communications system to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber
terminal to another point in the cable communications system.



   CONVERTER.  An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a
subscriber, and which, by an appropriate channel selector, also permits a
subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated dial locations.



   EDUCATION ACCESS CHANNEL.  A television channel on the system which is
reserved pursuant to the terms of this agreement for use exclusively by local
educational institutions.



   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission, and any legally
appointed, designated or elected agent or successor.



   GRANTEE.  Teleprompter of Columbia Heights/Hilltop Inc., a Minnesota
corporation.



   GROSS RECEIPTS.  All revenue derived from or attributable to the
system directly or indirectly by grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, or
any persons or entities in which grantee has a contractual relationship.



   INTERACTIVE CAPACITY.  The ability of the subscriber to send a class
IV signal from a home terminal to the headend or other central point in the
system.



   LEASED CHANNEL.  A television channel on the system which is reserved
by this agreement for carriage of program material provided by persons
leasing channel time from the grantee.



   LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL.  A television channel on the system
which is reserved pursuant to the terms of this agreement for use exclusively
by local government.



   LOCAL ORIGINATION.  Video programming produced and/or cablecast by
grantee, who shall be solely responsible for its content.



   LOCKOUT DEVICE.  A mechanism which will enable the subscriber to
prevent the reception on his individual receiver of specific programs of the
channels cable casting pay cable services.



   ORIGINATION PROGRAMMING.  Programming imported by satellite, video or
film format that is cable cast by the grantee who is solely responsible for
its content.



   PAY CABLE.  The delivery over the system of audio-visual signals in
intelligible form to subscribers for a fee or charge, in addition to the
charge for basic service.



   PERSON.  Persons, firms, corporations, or associations and any other
legally recognized entity.



   PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL.  A television channel on the system which is
reserved by this agreement for use exclusively by any member of the general
public or any non-commercial organization, without charge, on a first-come,
first-served, nondiscriminatory basis.



   REGIONAL CHANNEL.  A segment of the electromagnetic spectrum provided
by cable communications systems or an interconnection entity operating within
the Twin Cities metropolitan area for programming on the standard VHF channel
6.



   STREETS.  The surface of, and the space above and below, any public
street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way, alley, court,
sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or any easement or right of way now or
hereafter held by the city which shall, within its proper use and meaning in
the sole opinion of the city, entitle grantee to the use thereof for the
purpose of installing or transmitting over poles, wires, cables, conductors,
ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and
other property as may be necessary to the system.



   SUBSCRIBER.  Any person or entity receiving any service offered by the
grantee herein.



   SYSTEM.  A system of cables, wires, lines, conduits, towers,
waveguides, microwave and laser beams, and any associated converters,
equipment or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of
producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing by audio, video and other
forms of electronic or electric signals to and from subscribers and locations
in the city.



   TAPPING.  Observing or monitoring a communications service by any
means for any purpose whatsoever.



   TWO WAY CAPABILITY.  The system's ability to carry and return video,
audio, and data communications.



   USER.  Any person utilizing a system channel for purposes of
production and/or transmission of material as contrasted with receipt thereof
in a subscriber capacity.



('77 Code, § 11.102)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1202, passed
6-25-90)



§ 11.103  AUTHORIZATION.



   The city hereby grants to the grantee a nonexclusive franchise to
construct, operate and maintain a system on and under its streets in
accordance with, and pursuant to, the terms, conditions, provisions and
limitations of this chapter.



('77 Code, § 11.103(1))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.104  DURATION.



   The franchise shall commence on the effective date of this chapter and
shall continue for a period through and including November 9, 2006, unless
sooner terminated as provided in this code.



('77 Code, § 11.103(2))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1202,
passed 6-25-90)



§ 11.105  NON-EXCLUSIVE GRANT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall affect the right of the city to grant to
any other person a franchise or right to occupy and use the streets or any
part thereof for the construction, operation and maintenance of a system
within the city, subject to state and federal law.  The grantee shall not
take a legal position contesting, or otherwise contest in any manner, the
city's right or decision to grant such other franchise or to authorize such
use of the streets or any part thereof.  Nothing contained in the
subdivision shall prohibit the grantee from appearing and being heard on any
application for the grant of such franchise or right.



('77 Code, § 11.103(3))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1202,
passed 6-25-90)



§ 11.106  POLICE POWERS.



   (A)   All rights granted pursuant to this franchise are subject to
the police power of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances.  Any conflict
between the provisions of this franchise and any other present or future
lawful exercise of the police powers of the city shall be resolved in favor
of the city.



   (B)   This franchise shall not affect the obligation of all users of
the system to comply with all licensure and permit requirements of the city.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be in preference or hindrance to
the right of the city to perform or carry on any public works or public
improvements of any kind.  In the event the system interferes in any manner
with the construction, maintenance or repair of any public works or
improvement, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, protect or
relocate its system or any part thereof, as directed by the city.  The
grantee shall repair or replace any city property damaged by it.



   (D)   The city shall have the right to install and maintain, free of
charge, upon the poles and within underground pipes of grantee any wires and
fixtures desired by the city.



('77 Code, § 11.103(4))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.107  WRITTEN NOTICE.



   All notices, reports and demands required to be in writing pursuant to
this franchise shall be deemed to be given when delivered personally to any
office of grantee or the City Manager of Columbia Heights or 48 hours after
it is deposited in the U.S. Mail as registered or certified mail, addressed
to the party to which notice is being given, as follows:



   (A)   If to city:  City Manager, City of Columbia Heights, 590 -
40th Avenue Northeast, Columbia Heights, Minnesota  55421.



   (B)   If to grantee:  Comcast Company, 10 River Park Plaza, St.
Paul, Minnesota 55107, Attn: Area Vice-President.



('77 Code, § 11.103(5))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1202,
passed 6-25-90)



§ 11.108  OWNERSHIP, CONTROL; TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL.



   (A)   (1)   None of the following shall directly or indirectly
own, operate, control or have a legal or equitable interest in the franchise:



         (a)   A television broadcasting station whose predicted
Grade B contour, computed in accordance with § 73.684 of the Federal
Communications Commission's Rules and Regulations, overlaps in whole or in
part the service areas of the system (e.g., the area within which the system
is serving subscribers); or



         (b)   A national television network; or



         (c)   A television translator station licensed to the
municipality of such system; or



         (d)   A telephone company within its local exchange
area, unless a proper and timely waiver is obtained from the Federal
Communications Commission; or



         (e)   A publisher and/or owner of a newspaper company
and the newspaper company within the primary market area, as defined by the
Audit Bureau of Circulation, served by the newspaper; or



         (f)   A radio or television broadcast station,
broadcasting from within the Twin Cities metropolitan area as designated in
M.S. § 473.121, subd. 4.



      (2)   The word “control” as used herein is not limited to
majority stock ownership, but includes actual working control in whatever
manner exercised.



      (3)   The word “interest” as used herein includes, in the
case of corporation, common officers, or directors and partial, as well as
total, ownership interests represented by ownership of voting stock.



      (4)   In applying the provisions of this rule to the
stockholders of a corporation which has more than 50 stockholders:



         (a)   Only those stockholders need be considered who are
officers or directors or who directly or indirectly own 1% or more of the
outstanding voting stock.



         (b)   Stock ownership by an investment company as
defined in U.S.C. § 80a-3, commonly called a mutual fund, need be considered
only if it directly or indirectly owns 3% or more of the outstanding voting
stock or if officers or directors of the corporation are representatives of
the investment company.  Holdings by investment companies under common
management shall be aggregated.  If an investment company directly or
indirectly owns voting stock in an intermediate company which in turn
directly or indirectly owns 50% or more of the voting stock of the
corporation, the investment company shall be considered to own the same
percentage of outstanding shares of such corporation as it owns of the
intermediate company; provided, however, that the holding of the investment
company need not be considered where the intermediate company owns less than
50% of the voting stock, but officers or directors of the corporation who are
representatives of the intermediate company shall be deemed to be
representatives of the investment company.



         (c)   In cases where record and beneficial ownership of
voting stock is not identical — for example, bank nominees holding stock as
record owners for the benefit of mutual funds, brokerage houses holding stock
in street name for the benefit of customers, trusts holding stock as record
owners for the benefit of designated parties — the party having the right
to determine how the stock will be voted will be considered to own it for the
purposes of this section.



   (B)   Any sale or transfer of the franchise, including a sale or
transfer by means of a fundamental corporate change, requires the written
approval of the city.  Any sale or transfer of the franchise shall be
subject to the provisions of 4 MCAR § 4.100.  The parties to the sale or
transfer of the franchise shall make a written request to the city for its
approval of a sale or transfer of the franchise.  The city shall reply in
writing within 30 days of the request and shall indicate its approval of the
request or its determination that a public hearing is necessary if it
determines that a sale or transfer of the franchise may adversely affect the
company's subscribers.  The city shall conduct a public hearing on the
request within 30 days of such determination.



   (C)   Notice of any such hearing shall be given 14 days prior to the
hearing by publishing notice thereof once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the area being served by the franchise.  The notice shall
contain the date, time and place of the hearing and shall briefly state the
substance of the action to be considered by the city.  Within 30 days after
the public hearing, the city shall approve or deny in writing the sale or
transfer request.



   (D)   Any sale or transfer of the franchise, including a sale or
transfer by means of a fundamental corporate change, requires notification to
the Board by the city.  The notification shall be accompanied by the written
certification of the transferee that it meets all of the requirements with
respect to technical ability and financial stability demanded of the original
franchisee.  The city shall cause to be sent to the Board a copy of all
public documents related to sale or transfer of the franchise.



   (E)   The parties to the sale or transfer of a franchise, only
within the inclusion of a cable communications system in which at least
substantial construction has commenced, shall be required to establish that
the sale or transfer of a franchise only will be in the public interest.



   (F)   For purposes of this provision, fundamental corporate change
means the sale or transfer of all of a majority of a corporation's assets,
merger (including any parent and its subsidiary corporation), consolidation,
or creation of a subsidiary corporation.



   (G)   Sale or transfer of stock in a corporation so as to create a
new controlling interest in a cable communication system shall be subject to
the requirements of 4 MCAR § 4.100 and 4 MCAR § 4.150.  The term
“controlling interest” as used herein is not limited to majority stock
ownership, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised.



('77 Code, § 11.103(6))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.109  CANCELLATION, TERMINATION AND EXPIRATION.



   The city shall have the right to cancel this franchise for the
following reasons:



   (A)   Failure by the grantee to comply with any provision of this
agreement, or any order, direction or permit issued by the city pursuant to
any provision; or the failure to comply with the notice requirements of this
code;



   (B)   Failure by the grantee to comply with any rule or regulation
promulgated by, or ordinance adopted by the city, which is consistent with
any provision of this code;



   (C)   Failure by the grantee to comply with, or attempt to evade,
any provision of this code, or any order, direction, or permit issued by the
city concerning any provision of this code;



   (D)   Failure by the grantee to file and maintain any bond, security
fund, or insurance policy in an amount required by this code;



   (E)   The grantee's sale, lease, assignment, encumbrance or mortgage
of the franchise or transfer of control of the system without the consent of
the city;



   (F)   Failure by the grantee to adhere to the construction schedule
provided under this code or delay in offering basic subscriber service;



   (G)   Any attempt to commit, or the commission, by the grantee, any
fraudulent or deceitful practice;



   (H)   Failure by the grantee to pay to the city any sum due under
this code;



   (I)   Failure by the grantee to receive a certificate of
confirmation from the Minnesota Cable Communications Board;



   (J)   Failure by grantee to obtain all necessary pole right
agreements within one year following the adoption of a Cable Communications
franchise by the city;



   (K)   If, the system or any part thereof, is inoperative for 30 days
out of any consecutive 12-month period;



   (L)   Failure to renegotiate franchise fees pursuant to § 11.127.



('77 Code, § 11.103(7))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.110  CANCELLATION, TERMINATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   If the city determines that the grantee has violated any of
the provisions of § 11.109 the city shall give written notice of such cause
for termination to grantee, and of it's intention to terminate the franchise.



   (B)   The grantee shall have 30 days from the date of receipt of
such notice to cure the cause for termination.



   (C)   If the grantee fails to cure the cause for termination within
said 30 day period, the city may elect to terminate the franchise.  Grantee
shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing before
the City Council of Columbia Heights prior to any decision to terminate the
franchise.



   (D)   In the event that the city determines to terminate the
franchise, the grantee shall have a period of 30 days, beginning the day
following the date of the conclusion of the public hearing at which the
termination of the franchise is considered, within which to file an appeal
with the Board.  During such 30 day period, and until the Board determines
the appeal, if an appeal is taken, the franchise shall remain in full force
and effect, unless the term thereof sooner expires.  If the Board approves
of the action of the city, the franchise shall terminate immediately; if the
Board disapproves of the action of the city, the franchise shall remain in
full force and effect during the terms thereof, unless sooner terminated in
accordance with law or rules of the Board or the terms of the franchise
agreement.  Any such appeal to the Board is a contested case to which the
Board is not a party.



('77 Code, § 11.103(8))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.111  CONDEMNATION.



   In the event the system is taken or condemned pursuant to law, the
franchise shall, at the option of the city, cease and terminate on the date
of the vesting of title pursuant to such condemnation or taking.



('77 Code, § 11.103(9))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.112  RIGHT TO PURCHASE.



   (A)   Upon cancellation, revocation, forfeiture, termination or
normal expiration of the franchise term, the city shall have the right to
purchase the system.  Such right shall be exercised by giving written notice
to grantee within six months after the occurrence of any such event.



   (B)   If the city elects to exercise its right to purchase the
system, the following shall then apply:



      (1)   The purchase price of the system to be paid by the city
shall be as follows:



         (a)   If the termination is due to the normal expiration
of the franchise term, the purchase price shall be the fair market value of
the system as a going business concern, with appropriate consideration for
depreciation using generally accepted accounting principles.  Goodwill shall
not be included in the purchase price of the system.



         (b)   If the franchise is cancelled, revoked, forfeited,
or terminated by the city for failure of franchisee to comply with the terms
of this code the purchase price shall be the original cost of the system less
depreciation.  Depreciation shall be calculated using grantee's method of
depreciation for income tax purposes.



      (2)   The city shall receive the entire system as defined in
this franchise ordinance together with all records necessary for the
operation of the system wherever located.



      (3)   The grantee shall promptly execute all documents
necessary to transfer title to the city, and shall assign all contracts,
leases, licenses, permits and other rights necessary to maintain continuity
of service to the public.



      (4)   The grantee shall cooperate with the city to operate the
system for a temporary period not to exceed two years, in maintaining
continuity of service.



      (5)   All liabilities and accounts payable as of the date the
city acquires title to the system shall remain the exclusive responsibility
of the grantee.



      (6)   All accounts receivable accrued as of the date the city
acquires title to the system shall remain the property of the grantee.



   (C)   If grantee offers the system for sale, all offers received
shall promptly be provided to the city.  Prior to grantee accepting any
offer, the city shall have the right to purchase the system according to the
terms of the offer.



('77 Code, § 11.103(10))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.113  REMOVAL OF SYSTEM.



   (A)   Upon cancellation, revocation, termination, forfeiture, or
normal expiration of the franchise term the city shall have the right to
require the grantee to remove, at grantee's expense, all or any portion of
the system within the city.  Grantee shall, at its own expense, refill any
excavation made by it, and shall leave all streets and other property within
the city in as good a condition as prior to grantee's removal of the
system.  Grantee shall not affect, alter or disturb in any way electric,
telephone, or other utility, cables, wires or attachments belonging to city
or another franchisee.  City shall have the right to inspect and approve the
condition of streets and other property within the city after removal.  All
letters of credit, bonds, insurance, indemnity and liquidated damages
provisions of the franchise shall remain in full force and effect during the
entire period of removal.



   (B)   If such removal is not commenced within 30 days following
written notice of city's demand for removal, or if such removal is not
completed within six months of such notice, the city, at its sole option, may
perform such removal and collect the cost thereof from the grantee.  The
cost of such removal by the city shall be recoverable from the letters of
credit, bonds, insurance, indemnity and liquidated damages provisions of the
franchise.



('77 Code, § 11.103(11))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.114  CONTINUITY OF OPERATION.



   Upon cancellation, revocation, or termination of this franchise or upon
the expiration of this franchise, the city, at it's option, may direct the
grantee to operate the system for the account of the city for a period up to
one year.  The grantee shall comply with such direction.  The city shall
pay the grantee the actual expenses incurred in operating the system.



('77 Code, § 11.103(12))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.115  RECEIVERSHIP.



   The city shall have the right to cancel this franchise 120 days after
the appointment of a receiver, or trustee to take over and conduct the
business of the grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy,
or in any other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship
shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of the 120-day period, or
unless:



   (A)   Within 120 days after his election or appointment, the
receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all provisions of this
code and remedied all defaults thereunder; and



   (B)   The receiver or trustee, within 120 days, shall have executed
an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction, whereby the
receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every
provision of this franchise.



('77 Code, § 11.103(13))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.116  FORECLOSURE.



   The grantee shall notify the city upon the foreclosure or other
judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the system.  Notification
shall be treated as a notification that a change in control of the grantee
has taken place, and the provisions governing the consent of the city to any
change in control of the grantee shall apply.



('77 Code, § 11.103(14))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.117  RENEWAL OR EXTENSION.



   (A)   The initial franchise period shall be for a period of ten
years.



   (B)   After the franchise has been in existence five years, the city
shall conduct an investigation and evaluation of the grantee and the
system.  Upon receipt of the results of the investigation and evaluation,
the City Council, may, at its sole discretion grant an extension of the
franchise terms for a period of five years following the expiration of the
initial ten year period.  If the City Council elects to grant such an
extension, it shall notify grantee in writing and grantee shall have 30 days
to accept or reject in writing the offer of extension.  If grantee accepts
the offer of extension, negotiations shall then commence between city and
grantee concerning the terms of the franchise during the five year extension
period.



   (C)   Grantee may apply for renewal of this franchise by making
application to do so not later than 12 months prior to the expiration of the
franchise.  Said application shall be on forms provided by the city.  If
application for renewal is not made as herein set forth the franchise shall
terminate at the end of the franchise period.  Any renewal of the franchise
shall not be for more than 15 years.



   (D)   Upon receipt of an application for renewal, the city shall,
within six months, determine whether the grantee has satisfactorily performed
its obligations under the franchise.  In doing so, the city shall consider
technical developments and performance of the system, programming, services
offered, cost of services, compliance with provisions of the franchise
ordinance, and annual reports made by grantee to the city and FCC.



   (E)   If the city determines a renewal of the franchise to be in the
public interest, it shall so notify the grantee within six months of receipt
of the application for renewal.  Negotiations shall then commence between
the city and the grantee regarding the terms of the franchise during the
renewal period.



   (F)   Any decision by the city concerning extension or renewal of
the franchise shall be in accordance with the then existing rules of the FCC,
the Board, the city and all other applicable laws.  Nothing in this code
shall be construed to require extension or renewal of the franchise.



   (G)   The acceptance of any extension or renewal of the franchise by
grantee shall be in writing and be within 30 days after Council action
granting such extension or renewal.  No extension or renewal shall be
binding upon the city until its acceptance by the grantee.  Such acceptance
shall be construed to be an acceptance of, and consent to, all the terms,
conditions, and limitations contained in the ordinance granting the franchise
as well as of the provisions of the City Charter.



('77 Code, § 11.103(15))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1202,
passed 6-25-90)



§ 11.118  ABANDONMENT.



   At least three months prior written notice to the city and the
Minnesota Cable Communications Board shall be given by grantee prior to the
abandonment of any cable communications service or any portion thereof.  In
the event of abandonment of any cable communications service or portion
thereof the grantee shall compensate the city for damages resulting from such
abandonment.  The amount of damages resulting from abandonment due the city
shall be determined solely by the city, and shall be recoverable from the
letters of credit, bonds, insurance, indemnity and liquidated damage
provisions of the franchise.  An abandonment of any portion of the system as
determined in the sole discretion of the city shall be a termination of the
franchise.



('77 Code, § 11.103(16))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.119  SERVICE AREA AND EXTENSION OF SERVICE.



   (A)   Service area.  The grantee shall construct, operate and
maintain the system so as to provide service to all areas of the city.



   (B)   Extension of service.  The grantee shall extend cable to
developing areas simultaneously with electric power and telephone utilities.



('77 Code, § 11.104)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.120  DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   System design.



      (1)   The grantee shall provide a system serviced by a headend
in the City of Roseville feeding a single-cable subscriber network and a
separate mid-split institutional network.  Both networks shall utilize 400
MHz equipment, fully activated for two-way transmission.



      (2)   The extension from the headend in Roseville shall
utilize fiber optic technology, construction of which shall be commenced on
or before June 1, 1991, and completed no later than November 1, 1992.



      (3)   The headend used to service city shall be constructed,
operated and maintained with the following equipment:



         (a)   Scientific-Atlantic Model 6650 Video Receivers;



         (b)   Scientific-Atlantic Model 6350 Modulators;



         (c)   Scientific-Atlantic Model 6150 and 6150PL Signal
Processors;



         (d)   ONAN Standby/Emergency Generator.



      (4)   On or before November 1, 2001, the grantee shall have
completed the refurbishing of the cable trunk distribution system to the best
available technology which is economically and technically feasible at the
time of the commencement of construction.  On or after January 1, 1996, the
city may require grantee to provide a preliminary report on the best
available technology which is economically and technically feasible which
grantee may use to refurbish the cable distribution system in the future. 
On or after January 1, 1998, the city may require the grantee to provide a
report of the best available technology which is economically and technically
feasible which grantee intends to use to refurbish the cable trunk
distribution system within the city.



   (B)   Institutional network.



      (1)   The grantee shall design and construct the system so
that at least the following locations may originate and transmit video, audio
and data signals on any subscriber or institutional network:  the fire and
police station, the Columbia Heights Public Library, the Fire Department
training classroom, all public and private elementary and secondary school
buildings, the Department of Public Works, the Columbia Heights City Hall,
Parkview Villa, Murzyn Hall, Huset Park Bandshell, high school stadium,
Columbia Heights Municipal Service Center, municipal liquor stores within the
city, Columbia Heights' city park activity centers, community centers and
other locations as may be designated by the city.  Grantee further agrees to
include North Park Elementary School in the institutional network at such
time as allowed by law.



      (2)   All locations mentioned shall each receive a modulator
at no cost, except that the municipal liquor bar and park activity centers
shall share the use of two modulators.



      (3)   Grantee shall provide a separate 16-mile institutional
network, with 38 activated downstream channels and 16 activated upstream
channels for use by city government, schools, and other local Columbia
Heights institutions and businesses.  Locations of the institutional network
facilities are shown on “Institutional Network Facilities Locations”
listing which is attached to Ordinance 982 as Exhibit A and incorporated by
reference.



      (4)   The grantee shall, at its own expense, be responsible
for maintaining, repairing, replacing, and adjusting the institutional
network and all necessary equipment including, but not limited to modulators
and processors.



      (5)   The grantee shall extend the institutional network to
institutions or users not described above upon request of that institution or
user and the payment of the necessary construction cost.  Necessary
construction cost is defined as including plant make ready and all labor and
material costs necessary to construct and activate that part of the
institutional network commencing at the nearest useable point of existing
plant and running to the user.  Construction shall be completed and service
made available to the requesting institution or user within 60 days of the
institution's or user's payment of the necessary construction cost, unless
the parties otherwise agree on a different schedule.



   (C)   Signals via satellite.  The grantee shall provide satellite
earth terminals for the purpose of receiving signals from at least three
communications satellites.



   (D)   Interconnection.  The grantee shall extend its facilities to
the city's boundaries to interconnect its system by microwave or cable with
any other cable systems operating in an area adjacent to the city without
charge to the city or any subscriber or user.  The interconnection shall be
accomplished according to the methods and technical standards approved by the
Board.



   (E)   System construction schedule.



      (1)   (a)   The grantee shall apply for all necessary
governmental permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations within 90
days of granting of the franchise.  The grantee shall complete construction
and installation of the system so as to offer basic and additional subscriber
services to all residents, institutions, and commercial establishments within
12 months following the grantee's receipt of the certificate of confirmation
from the Board.



         (b)   The grantee's obligation to construct and install
the system according to this schedule shall not be affected should litigation
be brought against grantee or city by a third party.



      (2)   The grantee shall design, construct and maintain the
system meeting the standards and practices promulgated by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC Rules Part 76, Subpart K) which are
incorporated by reference or those standards as set forth in Form I, pages
27a - 27h of grantee's proposal dated May 6, 1981.



      (3)   The grantee shall furnish the city with progress reports
detailing construction progress, indicating its compliance with the
construction schedule, and specifying the reasons for any delay therein.



      (4)   Approval of proposed construction.  No construction,
reconstructions or relocation of the system, or any part thereof, within the
streets shall be commenced until written permits have been obtained from the
proper city officials.  In any permit so issued, such officials may impose
any condition, restriction or regulation as is necessary for the purpose of
protecting any structures in the streets and for the proper restoration of
such streets and structures, and for the protection of the public and the
continuity of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.  The grantee shall give the
city written notice of proposed construction at least ten days prior to
construction.  Should grantee fail to comply with this section, grantee
shall be assessed the sum of $200 as liquidated damages for each day of
construction undertaken by grantee in violation of this section.



      (5)   Proof of performance.  The system shall conform to the
specifications for initial proof of performance tests and ongoing performance
tests, test equipment, methods and frequency of test equipment calibration,
forms and method of recording field data and permanent record keeping as set
forth in Form I, pages 29a - 29d, and Annual Proof of Performance Tests
Manual appended to Form I of grantee's proposal, dated May 6, 1981.



      (6)   The grantee shall furnish the city with progress reports
indicating in detail the progress in, and the areas of, construction of the
system.  The reports shall be furnished at monthly intervals, or as may be
determined by the city.  The first report shall be delivered to the city
within one month from the date of execution of this chapter.



   (F)   Erection of poles.  The grantee shall not erect any pole in
the city without prior consent of the city and only as necessary to fill
small gaps in the existing aerial utility system.  The grantee shall lease
pole space and facilities for all aerial construction.



   (G)   Installation of wires and cables.  All cables and wires shall
be installed parallel with existing telephone and electric wires.  Multiple
cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled, with due
respect for safety and engineering considerations.  All installations shall
be underground in those areas of the city where public utilities providing
either telephone or electric service are underground at the time of
installations.  In areas where both telephone and electric utility
facilities are installed above ground, the grantee may place its services
underground without additional charge.



   (H)   Trimming of trees.  The grantee may, with prior consent of
the city, trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and all
other public places so as to prevent the branches of trees from coming in
contact with the wires and cables of the grantee.  All trimming shall be
done under the supervision and direction of the city and at the expense of
grantee.



   (I)   Construction codes.



      (1)   The grantee shall construct, install, operate, and
maintain the system in strict compliance with all laws, ordinances, codes,
rules and regulations affecting the system.  The city reserves the right to
enact any ordinance or issue any rule or regulation with respect to the
operation, installation, maintenance, or construction of the system.



      (2)   The grantee shall construct, install, operate, and
maintain the system and any facilities employed in connection therewith in
strict compliance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code
as prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code
of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, the Bell Telephone System's Code
of Pole Line Construction, any standards issued by the Federal Communications
Commission or other federal or state regulatory agencies in relation thereto,
the Occupational Health and Safety Act, State Building Code, and any other
applicable codes.



      (3)   The grantee shall construct any tower in strict
compliance with the standards contained in Structural Standards for Still
Antenna Towers and Supporting Structures, EIA Standards RS-222-A, and any
other applicable code.  Further, any tower constructed by grantee shall
conform to height requirements contained in the city ordinance.



   (J)   Unreasonable or hazardous interference.



      (1)   The grantee shall not install or construct any part of
its system upon, over or under public and private property in such a manner
as to cause either a hazardous or unsafe condition or an unreasonable
interference with the use thereof by any person.  In the event the grantee's
system creates a hazardous or unsafe condition or an unreasonable
interference with property, the grantee, at its own expense and upon request
of the city, shall remove its system or any part thereof from the property in
question.  If the grantee fails to remove that part of the system creating a
hazardous or unsafe condition or an unreasonable interference with property
within ten days following written notice to remove by city, the city may
remove same at grantee's expense.  The cost of such removal by the city
shall be recoverable from the letters of credit, bond, insurance, indemnity
and liquidated damages provisions of this franchise.



      (2)   All wires, conduits, cables, and other property and
facilities of the grantee shall be so located, constructed, installed and
maintained as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with the usual and
customary trade, traffic and travel upon the streets and public places of the
city.  The grantee shall keep and maintain all of its property in good
condition, order and repair, so that the same shall not menace or endanger
the life or property of any person.  The city shall have the right to
inspect and examine at any reasonable time the property owned or used, in
whole or in part, by the grantee.  The grantee shall keep accurate maps and
records of all of its facilities and furnish copies of such maps and records
as requested by the city.  Said maps shall indicate the location of all
facilities of grantee within the city.



   (K)   Requests for removal or change.  The grantee shall, on the
request of any person holding a building permit, temporarily raise or lower
its wires to permit the moving of the building.  The grantee shall be given
not less than ten working days notice of any move contemplated to arrange for
temporary wire changes.



   (L)   Restoration of property and reimbursement.



      (1)   The grantee shall, upon completion of any work requiring
the opening of any street or public place, restore the same, including the
paving and its foundations, to as good a condition as formerly, and in a
manner and quality approved by the city and shall exercise reasonable care to
maintain the same thereafter in good condition.  If the grantee shall fail
to perform the work promptly, to remove all dirt and rubbish and to put the
street or public place back in good condition, the city shall have the option
of providing grantee written notice that grantee has ten days to place the
street or public place in good condition.  If grantee fails to do so within
ten days the city shall have the right to put the street or public place back
into good condition at the expense of the grantee, and the grantee shall,
upon demand, pay to the city the cost of such work done or performed by the
city, together with an additional sum as liquidated damages to be determined
by the city.



      (2)   In the event of disturbance of any private property by
the grantee, it shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the
owner, replace and restore such private property in as good condition as
before the work causing the disturbance was done.  In the event the grantee
fails to perform the replacement or restoration, the owner shall have the
right to do so at the sole expense of the grantee.  Payment by the grantee
to the owner for replacement or restoration shall be immediate upon demand by
the owner.  All requests for replacement or restoring of private property as
may have been disturbed must be in writing to the grantee.  The grantee
shall have ten days following receipt of such written notice to replace or
restore the private property.  Failure to do so within the ten day period
shall be grounds for the owner of the property to restore or replace the
property at grantee's expense.  All subscriber cons tracts shall set forth
the right of the subscriber to restore or replace private property disturbed
by grantee following the ten day notice period.



   (M)   Emergency removal of plant.



      (1)   If, at any time, in case of fire or disaster in the
city, it shall become necessary in the judgment of the city to cut or move
any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or appurtenances thereto of
the grantee, such cutting or moving shall be done, and any repairs rendered
necessary thereby shall be made by the grantee.



      (2)   Whenever the city shall undertake any public improvement
which affects cable communications equipment, it shall, with due regard to
reasonable working conditions, direct the grantee to remove or relocate its
wires, conduits, cables and other property located in said street, right-
of-way, or public place.  The grantee shall relocate or protect its facility
at its own expense.  The city shall give the grantee reasonable notice of
the undertaking of public improvements which affect the grantee's cable
communications equipment.



   (N)   Protection of facilities.  Nothing contained in this section
shall relieve any person, company or corporation from liability arising out
of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring the grantee's
facilities while performing any work connected with grading, regrading, or
changing the line of any street or public place or with the construction or
reconstruction of any sewer or water system.



   (O)   Emergency override.



      (1)   The grantee shall provide an audio and video emergency
alert override system including the provision of equipment to the official or
officials designated by city to activate the system.  Grantee shall provide
at no additional cost to subscriber an audio or visual alarm unit which will
alert subscribers to an emergency situation whether or not the television set
is turned on.



      (2)   Grantee shall work and cooperate on a continuing basis
with city and its designees to ensure that the audio and video emergency
alert override system is operating to the reasonable satisfaction of city.



   (P)   Standby power.  The grantee shall provide equipment capable
of providing standby power to the headend, earth station and studio for 48
hours following an outage of power.  The grantee shall provide standby power
for home terminals used in providing security service.



   (Q)   Two-way and interactive capability.



      (1)   The grantee shall design, construct and maintain the
system with activated capacity to provide interactive communications.



      (2)   The grantee shall design, construct and maintain the
system serving residential and institutional subscribers to accommodate
interactive data communications.  The total system transmission time shall
be less than one-tenth of a second.



      (3)   The grantee shall initially activate the 5-30 MHz
frequency spectrum of the subscriber network, and shall provide equipment at
the headend and to subscribers to support the interactive services as
described in § 11.123.



   (R)   Channel capacity.  The grantee shall construct the subscriber
network so that 58 downstream channels and the equivalent of four upstream
channels are activated upon the effective date of this code.



('77 Code, § 11.105)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1125, passed
5-27-86; Am. Ord. 1202, passed 6-25-90)



§ 11.121  SYSTEM SERVICES.



   (A)   Vacant and under-utilized channels.  Any vacant channels or
under-utilized channels shall be programmed with available non-duplicated
audio-video satellite programming selected at the sole discretion of
grantee.  For the purpose of this division, under-utilized channels means
those channels without programming for 18 or more hours a day, seven days a
week, other than public, educational or governmental access channels. 
One-half of these channels shall be programmed with available non- duplicated
audio-video satellite programming on or before the effective date of this
chapter.  The remaining channels shall be filled with non-duplicated
audio-video programming at the time of acceptance of this chapter.



   (B)   Local origination.  The grantee shall cablecast a minimum of
40 hours per week of programming, of which at least 20 hours per week shall
be produced locally.  The grantee shall provide two full-time staff members
for its local origination effort, and will provide a two-camera color studio
with editing facility, and a master control facility.  All facilities will
be available for access at times determined in the operating rules to be
developed by grantee and the city or its designate.



   (C)   Stereo on channels.  On or before July 1, 1991, grantee will
commence the introduction of MTS stereo service on those video services
capable of stereo transmission to the subscribers' T.V. sets for those
subscribers' T.V. sets capable of receiving such service.  On or before July
1, 1993, grantee shall provide MTS stereo service on all such services
capable of transmitting in stereo.



   (D)   Automatic audio volume control.  Grantee will commence the
provision of automatic audio control of all video program channels on or
before December 1, 1991.



('77 Code, § 11.106)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1125, passed
5-27-86; Am. Ord. 1202, passed 6-25-90)



§ 11.122  VIDEO PRODUCTION FACILITIES, STAFF AND BUDGETS FOR ACCESS
PROGRAMMING.



   (A)   The grantee shall make readily available for public use at the
least the minimal equipment necessary for the production of programming and
playback of prerecorded programs for the specially designated noncommercial
public access channel.  The grantee shall also make readily available, upon
need being shown, the minimum equipment necessary to make it possible to
record programs at remote locations with battery operated portable
equipment.  Grantee shall provide local programming equipment and
facilities.  Need shall be determined by subscriber petition.  The petition
must contain the signature of at least 10% of the subscribers of the system,
but in no case more than 500 nor fewer than 100 signatures.



   (B)   The grantee shall make available to access users the
two-camera color studio with editing facility and the master control as
described in § 11.121(B) at times determined in the operating rules to be
developed by the grantee and the city or its designate.



   (C)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, grantee shall be
responsible, at its own expense, for maintaining, repairing, adjusting, and
replacing all equipment, or any replacements thereto added by grantee, to
ensure that it is kept in good working order.  Capital expenditures of no
less than $70,000 for replacement local programming equipment shall be made
by grantee during the term of this franchise.  Grantee is hereby relieved of
the requirement to have a mobile production van exclusively for access users
in the city.  A mobile production van shall be available, however, for
public access users upon 30 days advance written request.



   (D)   The grantee shall provide a minimum of at least two full-time
staff persons for facilitating access programming.  Staff assistance for
training for access producers will be provided at no charge.



('77 Code, § 11.107)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1125, passed
5-27-86; Am. Ord. 1202, passed 6-25-90)



§ 11.123  INTERACTIVE SERVICES.



   (A)   The grantee shall offer subscribers a home security system
including fire detection and medical alert options.  The security system
must be designed to operate so that the first signal is sent to an
intermediary who will verify that the alert is a true emergency prior to
notifying the appropriate emergency service.



   (B)   The grantee will provide at system activation a full-channel
videotext information retrieval service, equipment for subscribers to send
data messages to the system and for interactive education.



   (C)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the requirement to
immediately provide the above- described interactive services is temporarily
deferred subject to the following:



      (1)   Grantee shall, as part of the annual report, report in
writing the current technical feasibility and financial reasonableness of the
interactive services set forth in the Cable Communications Code, but not
currently made available to subscribers; and



      (2)   Grantee shall, in the event grantee or any parent,
subsidiary, related corporation, affiliated corporation, partner or joint
venture of grantee, its parent or any of its subsidiaries makes available any
interactive service to subscribers of a system in Minnesota, report in
writing within 60 days of the provision of such service the current technical
feasibility and financial reasonableness of the interactive services set
forth in the Cable Communications Code but not currently made available to
subscribers; and



      (3)   Grantee shall, within 60 days of achieving a 45% basic
service, as defined herein, penetration, report in writing, the current
technical feasibility and financial reasonableness of the interactive
services set forth in the Cable Communications Code but not currently made
available to subscribers.



   (D)   At any review session described in subdivisions (C)(1), (2) or
(3) above, grantee shall bear the burden of establishing, to the satisfaction
of city, that the provision of interactive services is not technically
feasible or financially reasonable.  Should grantee fail to establish, to
the sole satisfaction of the city at any such review session, that the
provision of interactive services is not technically feasible or financially
reasonable, the city may request grantee to provide such services within 60
days and grantee shall comply with any such request.  The 60 days may be
extended by the city upon a reasonable showing of need by grantee.



   (E)   If this section or any of its subsections are deemed
unenforceable under federal or state law or the implementation of its
requirements are deemed illegal or unenforceable under federal or state law,
then, to that extent, this section will be of no effect and the pertinent
provisions of the Cable Communications Code as it existed immediately prior
to the enactment of this chapter is automatically reconstituted and shall be
of full force and effect.



('77 Code, § 11.108)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1125, passed
5-27-86)



§ 11.124  SUBSCRIBER CONTRACTS; RATES.



   (A)   Term of subscriber contracts.  Residential subscriber
contracts shall not exceed 12 months in duration, unless after 12 months, the
contract may be terminated by the subscriber at any time at his option with
no penalty to the subscriber.



   (B)   Subscriber rates.



      (1)   No rates shall be increased for a minimum of 30 months
from the effective date of this franchise.



      (2)   (a)   Should grantee desire an increase in its rates,
grantee shall file an application with the City Manager of the City of
Columbia Heights which application shall be supported by proof that the
existing rate schedule is inadequate and unreasonable and that the proposed
increase is required to enable grantee to fulfill its obligation under the
franchise and to enable grantee to derive a reasonable profit therefrom.



         (b)   Such proof shall include, but not be limited to,
the following financial reports, which shall reflect the operations of the
system only:



            1.   Balance sheet;



            2.   Income statement;



            3.   Cash flow statement;



            4.   Statement of sources and applications of
funds;



            5.   Detailed supporting schedules of expenses,
income assets, and other items as may be required;



            6.   Statement of current and projected
subscribers and penetration;



            7.   Such other data as the city may require.



         (c)   The grantee's accounting records applicable to the
system shall be available for inspection by the city and its representatives
at all reasonable times.  The city shall have access to records of financial
transactions for the purpose of verifying burden rates or other indirect
costs prorated to the system operation.  The documents listed above shall
include sufficient detail and/or footnotes as may be necessary to provide the
city with the information needed to make accurate determinations as to the
financial condition of the system.  All financial statements shall be
certified as accurate by an officer of the grantee.



      (3)   Within 60 days following the filing by grantee of an
application for a rate increase with the City Manager of Columbia Heights,
the city shall conduct a public hearing to consider the proposed rate
increase.  The city will publish one notice of said hearing at least ten
days prior to the hearing date in the official newspaper of the city. 
Grantee shall notify the public through providing notice for one week, each
day between 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on two channels of the purpose, of the
date, place and time of the hearing.  Any interested person may file written
comments on the proposed rate increase with the City Council of Columbia
Heights.



      (4)   After the conclusion of the public hearing, the city
will have 90 days within which to make its determination with respect to the
proposed rate increase.  The city in it's discretion may do one of the
following:



         (a)   Approve the proposed rate increase;



         (b)   Approve a rate increase but at levels different
than proposed in grantee's application;



         (c)   Determine that no rate change shall be allowed;



         (d)   Determine that the rate schedule of grantee shall
be decreased.



      (5)   In reviewing a proposed rate change the city may
consider at least the following factors:



         (a)   The ability of the grantee to render system
services and to derive a reasonable profit therefrom under the existing rate
schedule and under the proposed rate schedule;



         (b)   The revenues and profits derived from system
services;



         (c)   The efficiency of the grantee;



         (d)   The quality of service offered by the grantee;



         (e)   The original cost of the system less depreciation
under a reasonable and acceptable depreciation policy;



         (f)   A fair rate of return with respect to the cost of
borrowing and the rates of return on investments having similar risks to that
of providing cable communication services;



         (g)   The cumulative average rate of return forecasted
by the grantee when seeking the franchise.  This cumulative average rate of
return may be adjusted by actual economic conditions such as the percentage
variance of the experienced prime rate with the level of the prime rate
assumed by the grantee when seeking the franchise;



         (h)   The extent to which the grantee has adhered to the
terms of the ordinance;



         (i)   Rates currently fixed in cable television
franchises for comparable service areas;



         (j)   Capital expenditures by grantee in providing
updated technology and service to subscribers.



      (6)   The City Council shall not consider any valuation based
upon this franchise or the grantee's good will and these items of value shall
neither be amortized nor shall a return be paid on them.  All costs for the
review of an application for a rate change shall be paid for by grantee upon
demand of the city.



   (C)   Prohibition of discriminatory or preferential practices. 
Grantee shall make the services or facilities available to all persons within
the city on an equal basis.



   (D)   Non-regulated rates.  Prior to implementing any rate increase
for any service not subject to local rate regulation, other than
pay-per-channel or pay-per-view channels, grantee shall give the following
notice:



      (1)   At least 45 days' advance written notice to city
together with such supporting documentation as grantee in its sole discretion
determines appropriate;



      (2)   At least 30 days' advance written notice to subscribers
of that service; and



      (3)   Carriage of an announcement of the rate increase on one
channel 24 hours a day for seven consecutive days.  This announcement may be
in the form of a crawl across a portion of the television picture.



('77 Code, § 11.109)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1125, passed
5-27-86; Am. Ord. 1202, passed 6-25-90)



§ 11.125  DISCONNECTION.



   In the event any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly
subscriber fee, or any other properly due fee or charge, the grantee may
disconnect the delinquent subscriber's outlet.  The grantee shall not
disconnect a delinquent subscriber's service outlet until 45 days following
the due date of the delinquent fee or charge and shall include ten days
written notice to a subscriber of its intent to disconnect service.  After
disconnection and upon payment of the delinquent fee and of a reconnection
fee, the grantee shall promptly reinstate a subscriber's cable service.  The
grantee shall not charge any fee for disconnecting service.  The grantee may
require the maintenance of a security deposit in cases where a subscriber has
been disconnected for just cause within the preceding three years.  The
amount of the security deposit shall be equal to two months basic service
charge, and will be payable in advance of services being restored.  Any
advance payment shall be considered a security deposit, and may be retained
by grantee for a maximum of three years.  The security deposit shall be
refunded to the subscriber, without interest, after three years or when the
subscriber's service is terminated.



('77 Code, § 11.110)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.126  REFUNDS TO SUBSCRIBERS AND USERS.



   (A)   If the grantee fails to provide upon request of a subscriber
any service then being offered, the grantee shall promptly refund all
security deposits or other advance payments paid for the service in question
by said subscriber.



   (B)   In the event a subscriber terminates any monthly service by
reason of the grantee's failure to render the service in accordance with the
franchise, the grantee shall refund an amount equal to the product of the
installation charge paid, the reconnection charge paid, and the fraction of
the prepaid period in which service will not be received.



   (C)   In the event a subscriber terminates any monthly service prior
to the end of a prepaid period, the grantee shall refund the pro rata portion
of any security deposit or other advance payment as of the date of said
termination using the number of months as a basis.



('77 Code, § 11.111)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.127  FRANCHISE FEE, TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   Franchise fee.



      (1)   Throughout the term of the franchise, commencing on the
effective date of the ordinance, grantee shall pay the city an aggregate
amount equal to five percent of the grantee's gross receipts from operations
within Columbia Heights from whatever source whether direct or indirect
through subsidiaries, affiliates, persons or entities in which the grantee
has a financial interest or with which the grantee has a contractual
relationship for the sharing of receipts.



      (2)   The city and the grantee by acceptance of the franchise,
agree that the franchise fee will not interfere with the effectuation of
federal regulatory goals in the field of cable television and that the fee is
appropriate in light of the city's planned regulatory program and the system
contemplated by the ordinance.  The grantee shall support and assist the
city in demonstrating to the FCC that the franchise is consistent with such
federal standards and is otherwise appropriate, as indicated.



      (3)   The grantee, upon acceptance of the franchise agrees
that the franchise fee shall continue to be paid regardless of whether the
franchise fee standards of the FCC are lowered.  If the FCC increases the
range of franchise fees that may be permitted under its standards or
exercises no jurisdiction with respect to such fees, the city may elect to
renegotiate the franchise fee without regard to the time limitation contained
therein, but in no event shall the renegotiated fee be less than the 5%
referred to in subdivision (A)(1) of this section.  Failure of grantee to
renegotiate in good faith pursuant to this provision shall be grounds for
termination of the franchise at the option of the city.



   (B)   Payment of franchise fee.



      (1)   Within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter,
the grantee shall report for the preceding calendar quarter in such detail as
the city may require its gross receipts from all system services from
whatever sources and shall remit therewith all amounts due under division (A)
of this section.



      (2)   In the event any payment is not made on or before the
applicable date fixed in subdivision (B)(1), interest thereon shall apply
from its due date at the rate of one and one half percent per month.



      (3)   All payments due the city shall be made to the Treasurer.



   (C)   Operation following termination or cancellation.  In the
event the grantee continues the operation of any part or all of the system
beyond the cancellation or expiration of this franchise, it shall pay to the
city the compensation set forth in this franchise at the rate in effect at
the time of such cancellation or expiration, and in the manner set forth in
this franchise, together with all taxes it would have been required to pay
had its operation been duly authorized.



   (D)   Taxes and assessments.  Payments of compensation made by the
grantee to the city pursuant to the provisions of the franchise shall not be
considered in the nature of a tax or assessment but shall be in addition to
any and all taxes and assessments which are now or hereafter required to be
paid.



('77 Code, § 11.112)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1535, passed
9-8-08)



§ 11.128  INDEMNIFICATION, INSURANCE, BONDS, LETTERS OF CREDIT.



   (A)   General.  Rights of city pursuant to indemnification,
insurance, bonds, and letters of credit pursuant to the franchise, are in
addition to all other rights the city may have pursuant to the franchise or
any other ordinance, rule, regulation or law.



   (B)   Indemnification.



      (1)   The grantee shall, throughout the term of this
franchise, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless
the city, its officers, boards, agents and employees against all liability,
damages, costs, claims including but not limited to expenses for legal
charges and disbursements by the city in connection therewith, incurred by
the city in connection with:



         (a)   Damage to persons or property, in any way arising
out of or through the acts or omissions of grantee, its servants, agents or
employees or to which grantee's negligence shall in any way contribute;



         (b)   Any claim for invasion of privacy, defamation of
any person, firm or corporation, violation or infringement of any copyright,
trademark, trade name, service mark or patent or of any other right of any
person, firm, or corporation;



         (c)   Grantee's failure to comply with the provisions of
any federal, state or local law, ordinance, statute or regulation applicable
to grantee or the system.



      (2)   If suit is brought or threatened against the city,
either independently or jointly with grantee, or with any other person or
municipality, grantee, upon notice given by city, shall defend city at the
sole cost of grantee, and if judgment is obtained against city, grantee shall
indemnify city and pay such judgment with all costs and satisfy and discharge
said judgment.



      (3)   City reserves the right to cooperate with grantee and
participate in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel.  Grantee
shall pay upon receipt of written demand from city, all expenses incurred by
city in defending itself with regard to any matters in this section.  These
expenses shall include, but not be limited to, attorney's fees, and the
reasonable value, as determined by city, of services rendered by city or it's
employees, agents or representatives.



   (C)   Insurance.



      (1)   By acceptance of the franchise, grantee specifically
agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, liability
insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in this state
covering its obligations of indemnification provided for in this franchise in
the minimum amount of:



         (a)   $500,000 for property damage to any one person;



         (b)   $2,000,000 for property damage in any one act or
occurrence;



         (c)   $1,000,000 for personal injury to any one person;



         (d)   $2,000,000 for personal injury in any one act or
occurrence;



         (e)   $1,000,000 for damages resulting in claims for
invasion of privacy, defamation, violation or infringement of any copyright,
trademark, trade name, service mark or patent.



      (2)   Such insurance shall be with a company acceptable to
city and shall otherwise be in form and substance acceptable to city.  Such
insurance policy with written evidence of payment of required premiums shall
be filed and maintained with the City Manager during the term of the
franchise.  The above minimum amounts shall be changed from time to time by
grantee as requested by city.  Grantee shall immediately give notice to city
of any threatened or pending litigation.



      (3)   Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages
recovered by city shall be construed to, or shall, limit the liability of
grantee.



      (4)   No recovery by city of any sum by reason of the letter
of credit or bond required in the franchise shall be any limitation upon the
liability of grantee to city under the terms of this section, except that the
sum so received by city from such letter of credit or bond shall be deducted
from a recovery under this section, if for the same act or occurrence.



      (5)   All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this
franchise shall contain the following endorsement:



“It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be
cancel led nor the intention not to renew be stated until 120 days after
receipt by city, by registered mail, or written notice of such intention to
cancel or not to renew.”



   (D)   Bonds.



      (1)   Grantee shall provide a faithful performance bond
running to the city in the penal sum of $25,000 conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the grantee of all the terms and conditions of the ordinance
and upon the further condition that in the event the grantee shall fail to
comply with any law, ordinance, rule or regulation governing the franchise,
there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and
surety of the bond any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result,
including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of
removal or abandonment of property of the grantee plus costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees up to the full amount of the bond.



      (2)   In addition to the bond requirement in subdivision (1)
above, at such time as the grantee commences the rebuild and upgrade pursuant
to § 11.120(A)(2) of the code, the grantee shall file with the city a labor
and material bond in the sum of $250,000, guaranteeing payment by the grantee
of claims, liens, and taxes due to the city which arise by reason of the
rebuild and upgrade construction.  At such time as grantee has accomplished
the refurbishing pursuant to § 11.120(A)(2), grantee shall notify the city.
Upon receipt of such notice, the city shall have 90 days to obtain and
receive a written report from an independent engineer; provided, however, if
the city fails to receive such a written report within 90 days, the
construction shall be deemed complete.  The grantee may extinguish the labor
and material bond upon a determination by the city or under this section of
the code that construction is complete.



      (3)   The rights reserved by the city with respect to the
bonds are in addition to all other rights the city may have under this code
or any other law.



      (4)   The bonds shall be subject to the approval of the city
and shall be in full force and effect at all times until the grantee has
liquidated all of its obligation with the city.



      (5)   The bonds shall contain the following endorsement:



“It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be cancel led
until 120 days after receipt by the City Manager, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, of a written notice of intent to cancel or not to renew.”



   (E)   Letter of credit.



      (1)   At the time of acceptance of this franchise, grantee
shall deliver to the city an irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit,
in form and substance acceptable to and subject to approval of the city, from
a national or state bank approved by city, in the amount of $50,000.



      (2)   The letter of credit shall provide that funds will be
paid to city, upon written demand of city, and in an amount solely determined
by city in payment for penalties charged pursuant to subdivision (3) of this
division, in payment for any monies owed by grantee pursuant to its
obligations under the franchise, or in payment for any damage incurred as a
result of any acts or omissions by grantee pursuant to the franchise.



      (3)   In addition to recovery of any monies owed by grantee to
city or damages to city as a result of any acts or omission by grantee
pursuant to the franchise, city in its sole discretion may charge to and
collect from the letter of credit the following penalties:



         (a)   For failure to complete system construction in
accordance with grantee's initial service area plan, unless city approves the
delay, the penalty shall be $200 per day for each day, or part thereof, such
failure occurs or continues.



         (b)   For failure to provide data, documents, reports,
information or to cooperate with the city during an application process or
system review, the penalty shall be $50 per day for each day, or part
thereof, such failure occurs or continues.



         (c)   For failure to comply with any of the provisions
of this franchise for which a penalty is not otherwise specifically provided
pursuant to subdivision (E)(3), the penalty shall be $50 per day for each
day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.



         (d)   For failure to test, analyze and report on the
performance of the system following a request by the city, the penalty shall
be $50 per day for each day, or part thereof, that such failure occurs or
continues.



         (e)   For failure by grantee to modify the system or to
provide additional services within 45 days after required by city following a
periodic review or renegotiation session the penalty shall be $200 per day
for each day or part thereof that such failure occurs or continues.



         (f)   Forty-five days following notice from city of a
failure of grantee to comply with construction, operation or maintenance
standards, the penalty shall be $200 per day for each day, or part thereof,
that such failure occurs or continues.



         (g)   For failure to provide the services grantee has
proposed, including but not limited to the implementation and the utilization
of the access channels and the making available for use of the equipment and
other facilities to city, the penalty shall be $100 per day for each day or
part thereof that such failure occurs or continues.



         (h)   For failure to replace or restore private property
as required by § 11.120(L), the penalty shall be the actual cost of
restoring or replacing the private property disturbed by grantee.



         (i)   Each violation of any provision of this franchise
shall be considered a separate violation for which a separate penalty can be
imposed.



      (4)   Whenever city finds that grantee has violated one or
more terms, conditions, or provisions of this franchise, a written notice
shall be given to grantee informing it of such violation.  At any time after
three days following notice, city may draw from the letter of credit all
penalties and other monies due city.



      (5)   Whenever a penalty has been assessed, grantee may,
within ten days of notice, notify city that there is a dispute as to whether
a violation or failure has, in fact, occurred.  Such notice by grantee to
city shall specify with particularity the matters disputed by grantee.



         (a)   City shall hear grantee's dispute at the next
regularly scheduled Council meeting.  City shall supplement the Council
decision with written findings of fact.



         (b)   Upon a determination by city that no violation has
taken place, city shall refund to grantee without interest all monies drawn
from the letter of credit by reason of the alleged violation, less all costs
of grantee's appeal.



      (6)   If said letter of credit or any subsequent letter of
credit delivered pursuant hereto, expires prior to 15 months after the
expiration of the term of this franchise, it shall be renewed or replaced,
during the term of this franchise to provide that it will not expire earlier
than 15 months after the expiration of this franchise.  The renewed or
replaced letter of credit shall be on the same form and with a bank
authorized herein and for the full amount stated in subdivision (1) of this
division.



      (7)   If city draws upon the letter of credit, or any
subsequent letter of credit delivered pursuant hereto, in whole or in part,
grantee shall replace the same within ten business days and shall deliver to
city a like replacement letter of credit for the full amount stated in
subdivision (1) of this division as a substitution of the previous letter of
credit.



      (8)   If any letter of credit is not so replaced, city may
draw on said letter of credit for the whole amount thereof and hold the
proceeds, without interest, and use the proceeds to pay costs incurred by
city in performing and paying for any or all of the obligations, duties and
responsibilities of grantee under the franchise that are not performed or
paid for by grantee pursuant hereto, including attorneys' fees incurred by
the city in so performing and paying.  The failure to so replace any letter
of credit may also, at the option of city, be deemed a default by grantee
under the franchise.  The drawing on the letter of credit by city, and use
of the money so obtained for payment or performance of the obligations,
duties and responsibilities of grantee which are in default, shall not be a
waiver or release of such default.



      (9)   The collection by city of any damages, monies or
penalties from the letter of credit shall not affect any other right or
remedy available to city, nor shall any act, or failure to act, by city
pursuant to the letter of credit, be deemed a waiver of any right of city
pursuant to this franchise or otherwise.



      (10)   The letter of credit shall contain the following
endorsement:



“It is hereby understood and agreed that this letter of credit shall not be
cancelled by the financial institution, nor the intention not to renew be
stated until 30 days after receipt by the City, by registered mail return
receipt requested, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to
renew.”



('77 Code, § 11.113)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1125, passed
5-27-86; Am. Ord. 1202, passed 6-25-90)



§ 11.129  INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE AND COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The grantee shall put, keep and maintain all parts of the
system in good condition throughout the term of the franchise.  Service to
subscribers shall not be shut off or interrupted by grantee except when
necessary, and then only during periods of minimum use of the system. 
Unless such interruption is unforeseen or immediately necessary, grantee
shall give 48 hours' notice thereof to affected subscribers.  All costs
incurred in repairing system shall be borne by grantee.  If service is
interrupted for more than 24 hours, subscriber shall be credited on a pro
rata basis for such interruption.  In all cases, the cause of interruption
of service shall be removed and remedied by grantee as promptly as possible.



   (B)   Grantee shall maintain an office in the city, or other
location as approved by the City Council, which shall be open during normal
business hours and in no event less than from 9:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. Monday -
Friday exclusive of legal holidays.  Further, said office shall have a
publicly listed local telephone and shall be so operated to receive
complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments on a 24-hour-a-day basis,
seven days per week.  This office shall have sufficient telephone service to
permit subscribers to communicate with grantee without excessive delay. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, grantee shall maintain customer
service hours from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. for telephone inquiries.  The use
of an answering machine, answering service or similar instrument shall not
meet the requirements of the preceding sentence.  Notice of this information
shall be provided to all new subscribers at the time of subscription and to
existing subscribers annually.



   (C)   All complaints by city, subscribers, or other persons
regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunction, billing disputes,
and any other matters relative to the system shall be investigated and
responded to by a service representative of grantee within 24 hours.  If the
complainant is not satisfied by the action taken by the grantee, the
complainant shall file a complaint with the City Council or its designate. 
Grantee must provide the City Council or its designate with a statement of
the action taken to resolve the complaint and/or to preclude any recurrence
of the complaint.  The City Council or its designate shall cooperate with
the company in rectifying the complaint.



   (D)   Grantee shall employ repair technicians capable of responding
to and resolving requests for repair service within 24 hours following
receipt of the subscriber complaint or request for repair service.  Request
for repairs or adjustments received prior to 2:00 p.m. shall be responded to
the same day.  In no event shall the response time for calls received after
2:00 p.m. exceed 24 hours.  Service shall be restored as promptly as
possible, and in all cases within three calendar days from receipt of the
request for repair service.  The cost of repair service maintenance of the
system shall be borne by grantee.  If service is not restored within 24
hours, the subscriber shall be credited on a pro rata basis for such loss of
service.



   (E)   Grantee shall prepare and maintain a record of all complaints
made to grantee.  This record shall indicate the nature of each complaint,
the date and time of receipt, the disposition of said complaint and the time
and date thereof.  This record shall be made available for inspection upon
request by the city.



   (F)   Grantee shall maintain the system in conformance with this
code and all applicable codes and shall handle service complaints consistent
with this code and industry practice.



('77 Code, § 11.114)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1125, passed
5-27-86; Am. Ord. 1202, passed 6-25-90)



§ 11.130  BOOKS AND RECORDS OF GRANTEE.



   (A)   Payment records.  On or before each of the dates on which
payments pursuant to the franchise are to be made, and within 60 days after
the expiration or cancellation of the franchise, and at such other times as
the city shall designate, the grantee shall furnish and deliver to the city
verified or certified reports of its business and operations hereunder and
gross receipts derived therefrom in such form and in such detail as the city
may prescribe.



   (B)   Reports filed with government entities.  Within five days
after the grantee, its affiliates and/or subsidiaries have filed a report,
petition or communication with any city, state or federal agency, department
or board, pertaining to any aspect of operations under the franchise or the
financial arrangements therefore, it shall file a copy of such report,
petition, or communication with the city and with the Minnesota Cable
Communications Board.



   (C)   Access channel reports.  The grantee shall file quarterly
with the city a report or log describing the use being made and the users of
access channels.  The grantee shall file annually with the city a report of
its expenditures for local origination and access programming and facilities
including their operation and maintenance.



   (D)   Annual reports.  Grantee shall file with the City Manager a
certified annual report, on or before March 31 in each calendar year for the
preceding calendar year ending December 31.  The annual report shall include
the following:



      (1)   A statement summarizing the previous year's activities
in development of the system, including services commenced and terminated,
and subscribers gained and lost;



      (2)   A financial statement including a statement of income,
revenues, operating expenses, value of plant, annual capital expenditures,
depreciation schedule, interest paid, taxes paid, balance sheet and a
statement of sources and uses of funds certified by an officer of grantee and
in a format approved by city.  Such format shall be in the same format as
any pro formas submitted by grantee.



      (3)   A current statement of cost of construction by component
category;



      (4)   A statement of construction planned for the next year;



      (5)   A statement regarding complaints, identifying the
number, nature and disposition;



      (6)   A current list of the names and addresses of each
officer and director of grantee;



      (7)   A statement of current billing practices;



      (8)   A current copy of rules of grantee;



      (9)   A current copy of the subscribers service contract of
grantee;



      (10)   Results of system performance tests, including a
descriptive narrative, conducted within the previous 120 days for the purpose
of verifying technical standards at such sites as were used to determine
completion of construction.  In the event the technical standards of this
chapter are not met, grantee shall further report in writing what steps are
being taken to meet said standards.  A representative of city may, upon
request of city, accompany grantee at the time such tests or repeat tests are
conducted.



      (11)   Results of the annual subscriber survey.



      (12)   A marketing plan, including specific goals and
projections, together with a reconciliation of projections and actual results
from the previous year.



   (E)   Location and availability of books and records of grantee.



      (1)   The grantee shall maintain an office in the city of
other location as approved by the city, for so long as it continues to
operate the system or any portion thereof and hereby designates that office
as the place where all notices, directions, orders, and requests may be
served or delivered under the franchise.



      (2)   The requirement in subdivision (1) above shall be
temporarily deferred in order to allow grantee to consolidate the following
operations with the cable television system serving the North Suburban Cable
Service Territory:  Plant Manager; Technicians; Marketing; Administration;
Programming.  All access employees shall remain at the Columbia Heights
public access studio.



      (3)   The consolidation described in subdivision (2) above
shall be reviewed by city upon system-wide outages exceeding 24 hours per any
12-month period, as determined by city.



         (a)   Grantee achieving a 45% basic service penetration;
or



         (b)   The third anniversary of this chapter amendment; or



         (c)   System-wide outages exceeding 24 hours per any
12-month period, as determined by city.



      (4)   At any review session described in subdivision (3)
above, grantee shall bear the burden of establishing to the satisfaction of
city that the consolidation described in subdivision (2) above is still
necessary and appropriate.



      (5)   As a result of any review session described above, city
may, at its sole discretion, request a termination of the consolidation or a
modification to the consolidation and grantee shall comply with any such
request including any reasonable time requirements established by city.



      (6)   The common costs due to the above-described
consolidation shall be allocated to city in an amount which bears the same
ratio to all the common costs of consolidation as the number of subscribers,
plant mileage or homes passed in the city bears to the total number of
subscribers, plant miles or homes passed in all of the systems participating
in the consolidation.  All costs that can be specifically identified will be
allocated specifically to city.



      (7)   If this section or any of its subsections are deemed
unenforceable under federal or state law or the implementation of its
requirements are deemed illegal or unenforceable under federal or state law,
then, to that extent, this section will be of no effect and the pertinent
provisions of the Cable Communications Code as it existed immediately prior
to the enactment of this chapter is automatically reconstituted and shall be
of full force and effect.



         (a)   The grantee shall keep complete and accurate books
of account and records of its business and operations under and in connection
with the franchise in accordance with normal and accepted bookkeeping and
accounting practices for the cable communications industry, and allow for
inspection times at designated offices.  The books and records to be
maintained by grantee shall include:



            1.   A record of all requests for service;



            2.   A record of all subscriber or other
complaints, action taken by grantee, and the disposition thereof;



            3.   A file of all subscriber contracts;



            4.   Grantee policies, procedures, and company
rules; and



            5.   Financial records.



         (b)   The city or any other person designated by the
City Council, shall have access to all books of account and records of the
grantee for the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of any and all
reports, and shall have authority to audit the grantee's accounting and
financial records upon 24-hour notice.  The Council may examine the
grantee's officers and employees, under oath, in respect thereto.



         (c)   Any false entry in the books of account or records
of the grantee or false statement in the reports required to be filed by the
grantee shall constitute a breach of material provision of the franchise.



('77 Code, § 11.115)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1125, passed
5-27-86; Am. Ord. 1202, passed 6-25-90)



§ 11.131  TESTING.



   The grantee shall provide a minimum operational standard as indicated
below:



   (A)   The system shall deliver to the subscribers' terminal, a
signal that is capable of producing a picture, without visual material
degradation in quality.



   (B)   The system shall transmit or distribute signals without
causing objectionable cross modulation within the cables or interfacing with
other electrical or electronic networks or with the reception of other
television or radio receivers in the area not connected to the network.



   (C)   Grantee shall construct, operate and maintain the system so as
to meet the following standards at the furthest subscriber.  The standards
set forth shall apply and be measured at the converter output.:



      (1)   Carrier to Noise:  43.81 db.



      (2)   Composite Treble Beat:  -55.0 db.



      (3)   Cross Modulation:  -55.3 db.



   (D)   Grantee shall provide all technical employees with a minimum
of 40 hours of technical staff training per year.



   (E)   The grantee shall be responsible to abate all interference
arising from interfering signals of less than five volts per meter.



   (F)   The grantee shall be responsible for providing special testing
of the system as required by the city.  Cost for such special testing shall
be the responsibility of the grantee.



   (G)   Results of any tests required by the FCC shall be filed within
ten days of the conduction of such tests with the city and the Board.



   (H)   Grantee agrees that the technical standards set forth at
division (C) above have been freely offered by grantee and grantee or any
parent, subsidiary, related corporation, partner or joint venture of grantee,
its parents or any of its subsidiaries will not assert and will oppose any
assertion that the technical standards set forth in division (C) above are
not enforceable under federal, state or local law.



('77 Code, § 11.116)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1125, passed
5-27-86)



§ 11.132  ACTION BY STATE OR FEDERAL AUTHORITIES.



   (A)   The grantee shall conform to all state laws and rules
regarding cable communications, not later than one year after they become
effective, unless otherwise stated, and to conform to all federal laws and
regulations regarding cable communications as they become effective.



   (B)   The terms of this franchise shall cease to be of any force and
effect if the grantee fails to obtain either a regular certificate of
confirmation or renewal of a certificate of confirmation from the board:
provided, however, that the grantee may operate a cable communications system
while the Minnesota Cable Communications Board is considering the application
for the renewal of its certificate of confirmation.



   (C)   In the event any material provision of the franchise is held
to be invalid or preempted by federal or state laws, rules or regulations,
prior to or as a result of the issuance of a certificate of compliance or
certificate of confirmation by the FCC or the Minnesota Cable Communications
Board, the city shall have the option to terminate or modify the franchise.



   (D)   (1)   If any law, ordinance or regulation shall require or
permit grantee to perform any service or prohibit grantee from performing any
service which may be in conflict with the terms of this franchise, then as
soon as possible following knowledge thereof, grantee shall so notify the
city.  If the city determines that a material provision of the franchise is
affected by such law, ordinance or regulation, the city shall have the right
to modify, alter, or repeal any of the provisions of the franchise as may be
necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of the franchise.  In the
event the city modifies, alters, or repeals any provision of the franchise,
grantee agrees to conform to the franchise as modified, altered or partially
repealed.



      (2)   Failure of grantee to notify the city as provided in
this section shall constitute a breach of a material provision of the
franchise.



('77 Code, § 11.117(1))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.133  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of the
franchise is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.



('77 Code, § 11.117(2))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.134  GRANTEE WILL NOT CONTEST VALIDITY OF FRANCHISE.



   Grantee agrees that it will not set up against city in any claim or
proceeding, except as provided by state or federal law, any condition or term
of the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary, void or that city had no power
or authority to make such term or condition, but shall be required to accept
the validity of the terms and conditions of the franchise in their entirety.



('77 Code, § 11.117(3))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1202,
passed 6-25-90)



§ 11.135  INTERPRETATION BY CITY OF FRANCHISE.



   In case of any dispute or question as to the meaning, interpretation or
application of any term, provision or condition of this franchise, the City
Council of Columbia Heights, in its sole discretion shall resolve such
dispute or question.



('77 Code, § 11.117(4))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.136  SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.



   (A)   The grantee shall not transmit signals of a Class IV cable
communications channel from a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring
individual viewing patterns or practices without the express written
permission of the subscriber.  The request for such permission shall be
contained in a separate document with a prominent statement that the
subscriber is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of its
provisions.  Such written permission shall be for a limited period of time
not to exceed one year which shall be renewed at the option of the
subscriber.  No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber's failure to
provide or renew such authorization.  The authorization shall be revokable
at any time by the subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever.  Such
permission shall be required for each type of classification of Class IV
cable communications activity planned for the purpose.



   (B)   No information or data obtained by monitoring transmission of
a signal from a subscriber terminal, including but not limited to lists of
the names and addresses of such subscribers or any lists that identify the
viewing habits of subscribers shall be sold or otherwise made available to
any party other than to the grantee for internal business use, and also to
the subscriber subject of that information, unless the grantee has received
specific written authorization from the subscriber to make such data
available.



   (C)   Written permission from the subscriber shall not be required
for the systems conducting system- wide or individually addressed electronic
sweeps for the purpose of verifying system integrity or monitoring for the
purpose of billing.  Confidentiality of such information shall be subject to
the provision set forth in Minnesota Cable Communications Board rule 4 MCAR
§ 4.202W.1.



('77 Code, § 11.117(5))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.137  CRIMINAL PENALTY.



   Exclusive of the contractual penalties set out in the ordinance, a
violation of any provision of the ordinance by any person, firm or private
corporation is a misdemeanor.



('77 Code, § 11.117(6))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.138  COMPLIANCE WITH CITY CHARTER.



   By acceptance of the franchise, grantee specifically agrees that:



   (A)   Grantee shall be subject to and will perform on it's part all
the terms of §§ 94–102 inclusive of the Charter of the City of Columbia
Heights.



   (B)   Grantee shall not issue any capital stock on account of the
franchise or the value thereof, and that the grantee shall have no right to
receive, upon condemnation proceedings brought by the city to acquire the
public utility exercising such franchise, any return on account of the
franchise or its value.



   (C)   That no sale or lease of said franchise shall be active until
the assignee or lessee shall have filed in the office of the City Manager an
instrument, duly executed, reciting the fact of such sale or lease, accepting
the terms of the franchise, and agreeing to perform all the conditions
required of the grantee thereunder.



   (D)   That every grant of permission contained in the franchise for
the erection of poles, masts, or other fixtures in the streets and for the
attachment of wires thereto, or for the laying of tracks in, or of pipes or
conduits, under places of any permanent fixtures whatsoever, shall be subject
to the condition that the Council shall have the power to require such
alterations therein, or relocation or rerouting thereof, as the council may
at any time deem necessary for safety, health, or convenience of the public,
and particularly that it shall have the power to require the removal of
poles, masts, and other fixtures bearing wires and the placing underground of
poles, masts, and of other fixtures bearing wires and the placing underground
of all wires for whatsoever purpose used.



   (E)   Acceptance of the franchise, and every extension or renewal or
extension thereof shall be in writing by the grantee within thirty days after
its passage by the Council and before its submission to a vote of the people
in case of a referendum.  No such franchise shall be binding upon the city
until its acceptance by the grantee.  Such acceptance shall be construed to
be an acceptance of and consent to all the terms, conditions, and limitations
contained in the ordinance granting the franchise as well as of the
provisions of the Charter of the City of Columbia Heights.



('77 Code, § 11.117(7))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.139  CONTINUING SUPERVISION AND REGULATORY JURISDICTION.



   (A)   The city shall have continuing regulatory jurisdiction and
supervision over the system and the grantee's operation under the
franchise.  The city may issue such reasonable rules and regulations
concerning the construction, operation and maintenance of the system as are
consistent with the provisions of this agreement.



   (B)   The grantee shall construct, operate and maintain the system
subject to the supervision of all the authorities of the city who have
jurisdiction in such matters, and in strict compliance with all laws,
ordinances, departmental rules and regulations affecting the system.  The
system and all parts thereof, shall be subject to the right of periodic
inspection by the city.



   (C)   The officer responsible for the continuing administration of
the franchise on behalf of the city shall be:



                                   
Name



Title:  City Manager



('77 Code, § 11.117(8))  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81)



§ 11.140  ANNUAL SUBSCRIBER SURVEY.



   (A)   Commencing in 1987 and annually thereafter, grantee shall, no
earlier than 90 days and no later than 30 days prior to submitting its
written annual report conduct a survey of the programming preferences and
service satisfaction of all subscribers.



   (B)   Each questionnaire shall be prepared and conducted so as to
provide reliable measurements of subscriber preferences for:



      (1)   Programming offered by grantee at the time the poll is
conducted;



      (2)   Programming generally available to cable subscribers
nationally but not offered by grantee at the time the poll is conducted; and



      (3)   General subscriber satisfaction or dissatisfaction with
the maintenance and complaint practices of grantee.



   (C)   The survey documents shall be prepared and conducted in
conformity with such requirements, including supervision and review of
returned surveys, as the city may prescribe.



   (D)   Grantee shall report the results of the survey in writing as
part of its annual report and report what steps grantee is taking to
implement the findings of the survey.



(Ord. 1125, passed 5-27-86)



§ 11.141  COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   At such time as grantee has accomplished all construction,
upgrading and adjustments contemplated by this chapter, grantee shall so
notify the city.  Upon receipt of such notice the city shall have 90 days to
receive a written report from an independent engineer, provided, however, if
the city fails to receive such a written report within the 90 days the system
construction shall be deemed completed.  In the event an independent
engineer is retained by city, system construction shall be deemed completed
on the date on which the independent engineer reports positive confirmation
of the following:



      (1)   Verification of headend equipment and system extension
equipment as required herein.



      (2)   Satisfactory test results using the technical standards
set forth herein at up to 12 widely separated subscriber locations selected
by the independent engineer and using the following tests:



         (a)   Signal level.



         (b)   Hum.



         (c)   Bandpass response of system.



         (d)   Carrier to noise of system.



         (e)   Picture disparities at subscriber location and
headend.



         (f)   TASO picture quality.



      (3)   Verification that the emergency alert system is working
to the reasonable satisfaction of the city; and



      (4)   Compliance with all applicable codes and standards.



   (B)   A grantee designated engineer may accompany the independent
engineer in the inspection and evaluation.  In the event that any of the
tests are not immediately satisfactory, the independent engineer shall orally
and at the same time so inform the grantee engineer and the grantee engineer
shall have 24 hours in which to correct the deficiency.  If the deficiency
is corrected within 24 hours, the subscriber location in question shall be
promptly retested.  Such new test results corrected within 24 hours, the
subscriber location in question shall be promptly retested.  Such new test
results with respect to such subscriber location shall be reflected in the
report of the independent engineer.



   (C)   The cost of the independent engineer and subsequent testing
shall be borne equally by grantee and city, provided, however, that if
subsequent testing is necessary beyond the retesting described above, grantee
shall be responsible for the cost of that subsequent testing.



(Ord. 1125, passed 5-27-86)



§ 11.142  JOINT SYSTEM, ACCEPTANCE, INCORPORATION OF GRANTEE'S PROPOSAL,
EXHIBITS.



   (A)   The system intended for the city may be part of a joint system
that serves the Cities of Columbia Heights and Hilltop.



   (B)   Grantee will, in good faith, apply for and accept, if offered
to it, a franchise from both cities on all the same terms and conditions
herein provided.  Failure to do so shall cause this chapter to be void.



   (C)   The franchise ordinance, or any amendments hereto, shall be in
full force and effect 31 days after its passage provided grantee accepts the
franchise, or any amendments hereto, within 30 days of passage.  Upon
acceptance, grantee shall be bound by all of the terms and conditions
contained herein.  Grantee shall continue to provide at a minimum all
facilities and equipment and all broad categories of services-provided on the
effective date of this amendment to the code except to the extent they are
not subject to regulation by the city under state or federal law or upon the
mutual consent of the city and grantee.  Grantee shall provide one cable
outlet and non-premium monthly service at no charge to city governmental
institutions and educational institutions.  Any additional outlets shall be
installed on a “time and materials” basis to be paid by the governmental
institutions or educational institutions.  The repeal of Exhibits B-G to the
initial franchise does not constitute a waiver of any rights of either the
city or grantee.



   (D)   (1)   In the event of conflicts or discrepancies between
any part of grantee's proposal and the provisions of the franchise, those
provisions which provide the greatest benefit to city, in the option of the
Council, shall prevail.



      (2)   Grantee shall have continuing responsibility for the
franchise, and if grantee be a subsidiary or wholly owned corporate entity of
a parent corporation, performance of the franchise shall be secured by
guarantees of the parent corporation in form and substance acceptable to
city, which shall be delivered at time of, and as part of, acceptance of this
franchise.



      (3)   With its acceptance, grantee shall also deliver to city
an opinion from its legal counsel, acceptable to city, stating that the
franchise has been duly accepted by grantee, that the guarantees have been
duly executed and delivered, that the franchise and the guarantees are
enforceable against grantee and the guarantors in accordance with their
respective terms, and which opinion shall otherwise be in form and substance
acceptable to city.



      (4)   With its acceptance, grantee also shall deliver to city
true and correct copies of documents creating grantee and evidencing the
power and authority referred to in the opinion of grantee's counsel,
certified as of a then current date by public office holders to the extent
possible and otherwise by an officer of grantee.



      (5)   Each exhibit contained in Ordinance 982 is a part of the
franchise and each is specifically incorporated herein by reference.  The
exhibits are as follows:  Exhibit A, Constitutional Network Facilities
Locations.



('77 Code, § 11.118)  (Am. Ord. 982, passed 11-9-81; Am. Ord. 1202, passed
6-25-90)



§ 11.143  COMMISSION ORGANIZATION AND BOARD.



   There is hereby established a Telecommunications Commission for the
city as set forth in § 3.312 of the Columbia Heights City Code.



§ 11.144  VARIANCE PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   It is the purpose of this section to establish a process
that will enable the city and grantee flexibility in the administration and
enforcement of this franchise without the need for costly ordinance
amendments and delays.  Because the term of this franchise is lengthy,
changes and modifications may be needed because of the rapid changes
occurring in the cable communications industry.



      (2)   The franchise and grantee's proposal are complex and
subject to extensive regulation and it is not possible to delineate the
numerous possible areas in which administrative action or an administrative
variance shall be required.  Therefore, except as otherwise provided for in
this franchise and grantee's proposal, where a specific provision permits a
change, alteration or substitution, any change, alteration or substitution
shall be made only after compliance with the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Subjects of this section that may be considered without
ordinance amendment.



      (1)   Construction techniques, equipment, materials; and/ or
the design and development of buildings, appurtenances, or other real or
personal property incident to the cable system;



      (2)   System design and configuration, technical standards,
performance tests and maintenance procedures;



      (3)   Services and programming tiers;



      (4)   Public access or local origination equipment, personnel,
facilities, and operating procedures;



      (5)   Subscriber practices, including complaint procedures,
subscriber contracts, repair service, and information to subscribers; and



      (6)   Amounts of insurance, performance bonds, security
deposits or letters of credit, and accrued interest.



   (C)   Procedure.



      (1)   Notice.  A notice pursuant to § 11.107 shall be given
by the city or grantee of any change, alteration or substitution as required
in division (B) of this section.  If notice is given by the city, the City
Manager shall furnish notice to grantee.



      (2)   Application.  Applications for variance shall be filed
with the City Manager.  The City Manager shall forward the application to
the chairperson of the Columbia Heights/Hilltop Cable Communications
Commission.  The Commission shall review the application as soon as the
Commission finds it timely and practicable.  The Commission may adjourn
consideration of the application from time to time and, upon concluding its
consideration of the said application, shall prepare written findings and
recommendations concerning the application.



      (3)   Criteria.  The Commission shall consider the following:



         (a)   The requested variance is a minor deviation from
the franchise and is consistent with the franchise in the sole judgment of
the city.



         (b)   Application of the literal provisions of the
franchise will result in a hardship to the applicant and to grant a variance
would not be detrimental to other affected parties.



         (c)   Due to expense or delay it would be unreasonable
to perfect such change by ordinance amendment.



         (d)   Undue delay, expense or other adverse results will
not occur by approval of the required variance.



         (e)   If a variance is because of technical or cost
reasons, the variance will result in equal or better technical standards or
cost efficiency.



      (4)   Findings requirement.  Before recommending that a
variance be approved, the Commission must find that at least three of the
above five criteria are met, and that the variance will not result in a
deviation from the requirements of the MCCB, FCC or any other rule of law.



   (D)   Council approval.  The findings and recommendations of the
Commission shall be forwarded to the City Council of the city affected by the
variance.  The Council shall approve the variance, deny the variance, or
refer the application back to the Commission for further study.  No variance
request shall be effective until approved by the City Council of the city
affected by the variance.  Where both cities are affected, a variance
request shall not be effective until approved by both City Councils.  The
grantee must consent to all variances.



(Ord. 1021, passed 11-8-82)



CHAPTER 12:  TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Article



      I.   BONDS



      II.   CONVEYANCES



      III.   EASEMENTS



      IV.   FRANCHISES



      V.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



      VI.   VACATIONS



      VII.   ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS



ARTICLE I:  BONDS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




856
 
11-3-76
 
Authorizing the issuance of $1,000,000 of bonds for establishing a capital-
improvements fund.


903
 
7-9-79
 
Authorizing the issuance of $4,500,000 industrial development revenue bonds.


915
 
7-7-80
 
Authorizing the public sale of $8,175,000 general obligation tax increment
bonds.


916
 
7-7-80
 
Authorizing the issuance of housing development revenue bonds.


917
 
7-7-80
 
Authorizing the issuance of housing development revenue bonds.


1012
 
9-13-82
 
Authorizing the public sale of $450,000 general obligation tax increment
bonds of 1982, $2,550,000 general obligation permanent improvement revolving
fund bonds of 1982.


1022
 
10-21-82
 
Authorizing the issuance of single-family mortgage revenue bonds.


1082
 
4-9-84
 
Authorizing the issuance of $2,600,000 general obligation improvement bonds,
series 1984.


1083
 
4-9-84
 
Authorizing the issuance of $475,000 general obligation tax increment bonds,
series 1984.


1084
 
4-9-84
 
Authorizing the issuance of $1,000,000 general obligation tax increment
bonds, series 1984.


1106
 
8-5-85
 
Authorizing the issuance of $2,100,000 general obligation tax increment bond
of 1985, series A.


1107
 
8-5-85
 
Authorizing the issuance of $2,460,000 general obligation refunding bonds of
1985, series B.


1144
 
4-27-87
 
Authorizing the issuance of $9,100,000 general obligation of tax increment
refunding bonds of 1987, series A.


1147
 
4-20-87
 
Authorizing the issuance of single-family mortgage revenue bonds under the
1987 single-family housing bond program.


1148
 
4-27-87
 
Authorizing the issuance of $2,230,000 general obligation refunding
improvement bonds of 1987, series A.


1151
 
6-15-87
 
Authorizing the issuance of $1,100,000 general obligation taxable tax
increment bonds of 1987, series A.


1152
 
7-13-87
 
Authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds on behalf of Crest View Lutheran
Home.


1169
 
9-12-88
 
Authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds on behalf of Crest View Lutheran
Home.


1200
 
6-11-90
 
Authorizing issuance of up to $2,400,000 original principal amount of general
obligation tax increment capital appreciation bonds of 1990, series A.


1210
 
11-13-90
 
Authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds on behalf of Crest View Lutheran
Home.


1235
 
11-12-91
 
Authorizing the issuance and sale of general obligation tax increment
refunding bonds, series 1991A.


1238
 
3-9-92
 
Authorizing the issuance of $4,785,000 refunding revenue bonds.


1266
 
5-10-93
 
Authorizing the issuance and sale of approximately $735,000 general
obligation taxable refunding bonds, series 1993A.


1384
 
3-8-99
 
Authorizing the issuance and sale of $860,000 general obligation improvement
bonds, series 1999A.


1385
 
3-8-99
 
Authorizing the issuance and sale of $1,935,000 general obligation utility
revenue bonds, series 1999B.


1455
 
3-24-03
 
Authorizing issuance and sale of approximately $3,900,000 general obligation
improvement bonds, series 2003.


1476
 
10-11-04
 
Authorizing issuance and sale of approximately $2,045,000 general obligation
tax increment refunding bonds, series 2004A.


1514
 
10-9-06
 
Authorizing the issuance and sale of approximately $4,430,000 general
obligation improvement and utility revenue bonds, series 2006A.


1527
 
7-23-07
 
Providing for the issuance and sale of approximately $1,000,000 general
obligation street rehabilitation bonds, series 2007A.


1540
 
4-28-08
 
Providing for the issuance and sale of approximately $2,785,000 taxable
general obligation housing improvement area bonds, series 2008A.


1541
 
4-14-08
 
Providing for the issuance and sale of up to $11,500,000 general obligation
public safety center bonds, series 2008B.


1563
 
4-27-09
 
Providing for the issuance and sale of approximately $3,935,000 general
obligation public facilities bonds, series 2009A.


1564
 
4-27-09
 
Providing for the issuance and sale of approximately $930,000 general
obligation taxable tax increment financing bonds, series 2009B.


 
 




 



ARTICLE II:  CONVEYANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




880
 
10-24-77
 
Conveyance of a portion of Lot 8, Block 2, rearrangement of Block C, Columbia
Heights Annex to Minneapolis.


883
 
12-12-77
 
Conveyance of a part of Lot 12, Block 2, Walton's First Subdivision to
Reservoir Hills.


912
 
3-10-80
 
Conveyance of certain real estate to Daniel W. Beaman.


920
 
7-28-80
 
Conveyance of certain real estate to Patrick Allen Grady and Doris Ann Grady.


952
 
5-26-81
 
Conveyance of certain real property to the Housing and Redevelopment
Authority.


958
 
9-14-81
 
Conveyance of certain real property to Gary T. Wolff and Marion P. Wolff.


961
 
8-10-81
 
Conveyance of certain real estate to the Housing and Redevelopment Authority.


962
 
7-27-81
 
Conveyance of certain real estate to the Housing and Redevelopment Authority.


968
 
8-24-81
 
Conveyance of certain real estate to the Housing and Redevelopment Authority.


969
 
8-24-81
 
Conveyance of certain real estate to the Housing and Redevelopment Authority.


970
 
8-24-81
 
Conveyance of certain real estate to the Housing and Redevelopment Authority.


981
 
10-13-81
 
Conveyance of a reverter interest in certain real estate.


1037
 
4-25-83
 
Conveyance of a part of Lot 6, Block 62, Columbia Heights Annex to
Minneapolis.


1094
 
11-19-84
 
Conveyance of certain real estate to Anoka County.


1121
 
4-28-86
 
Conveyance of Lot 7, Block 27, Columbia Heights Annex to Minneapolis.


1122
 
4-28-86
 
Conveyance of Lot 14, Block 1, rearrangement of Block B of Columbia Heights
Annex.


1123
 
4-28-86
 
Conveyance of the West 1/2 of Lot 3, Block 3, rearrangement of Block A of
Columbia Heights Annex to Minneapolis, except the north 80 feet thereof.


1124
 
4-28-86
 
Conveyance of certain real estate to David and Marlaine Szurek.


1156
 
10-12-87
 
Conveyance of certain real estate to the Housing and Redevelopment Authority.


1168
 
9-12-88
 
Conveyance of a part of Lot 12, Block 2, Walton's First Subdivision to
Reservoir Hills.


1191
 
10-23-89
 
Conveyance of certain real estate to Invest Cast, Inc.


1294
 
11-14-94
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located on4600 block between Pierce St. and
FillmoreSt.


1297
 
2-27-95
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 4531–33 Fillmore St. N.E.


1298
 
3-27-95
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 4535–4537 Taylor St. Northeast.


1302
 
7-10-95
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 500 38th Ave. N.E. and 3725 5th
St. N.E.


1303
 
7-24-95
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 4612 Taylor St. Northeast.


1304
 
7-10-95
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 4535 Taylor St. Northeast.


1310
 
10-23-95
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 4204 6th St. Northeast.


1312
 
12-18-95
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 721 51st Ave. Northeast.


1317
 
3-25-96
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 4501 Taylor St. N.E.


1318
 
3-25-96
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 4549 Taylor St. N.E.


1319
 
3-25-96
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 4555 Taylor St. N.E.


1320
 
3-25-96
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 4550 Fillmore St. N.E.


1321
 
3-25-96
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 1221 40th Ave. N.E.


1323
 
5-13-96
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located on the 4600 block between Pierce
St. and Fillmore St.


1336
 
11-12-96
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 721 51st Ave. N.E.


1354
 
9-8-97
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 4613–15 Pierce St. N.E.


1355
 
10-13-97
 
Amending Ord. 1355 which conveys certain real estate located at 4613–15
Pierce St. N.E.


1357
 
10-13-97
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 572 38th Ave. N.E.


1359
 
10-27-97
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 4619 Peirce St. N.E.


1360
 
10-27-97
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 4625 Peirce St. N.E.


1361
 
10-27-97
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 685 46 1/2 Ave. N.E.


1363
 
11-10-97
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 578 38th Ave. N.E.


1365
 
11-10-97
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 685 46 1/2 Ave. N.E.


1372
 
5-11-98
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 566 38th Ave. N.E.


1394
 
6-28-99
 
Amending conveyance of certain real estate at 545 38th Ave. N.E. and 549 38th
Ave. N.E.


1398
 
9-13-99
 
Amending conveyance of certain real estate at 4519/4521 Taylor St. N.E.


1399
 
9-13-99
 
Amending Ord. 853, conveyance of certain real estate at 4642/4644 Taylor St.
N.E.


1420
 
10-9-00
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 4101 and 4103 Central Ave. N.E.


1421
 
10-23-00
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 3855 Main St. N.E.


1430
 
7-23-01
 
Conveyance of certain real estate at 4401 Quincy St. N.E.


1433
 
11-5-01
 
Amending conveyance of certain real estate located at 4656 Monroe St. N.E.


1450
 
1-13-03
 
Amending conveyance of certain real estate located at 325 Summit St. N.E.


1452
 
1-13-03
 
Amending conveyance of certain real estate located at 3929 California St. N.E.


1498
 
10-10-05
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 3955 University Avenue and 3947
Lookout Place.


1543
 
4-28-08
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 3710, 3718, and 3722 Central
Avenue.


1560
 
12-8-08
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 950 40th Avenue.


1587
 
1-24-11
 
Conveyance of certain real estate located at 3853 3rd Street, 4039 5th
Street, 4421 5th Street, 4110 6th Street, 4147 7th Street, 1307 Circle
Terrace Blvd., 4631 Pierce Street, 4600 Polk Street, 4636 Polk Street, 4648
Polk Street, 4448 Quincy Street, 4303 Reservoir Blvd., 3842 Tyler Street,
3846 Tyler Street, 4235 Washington Street and 4502 Washington Street.


 
 




 



ARTICLE III:  EASEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


859
 
12-14-76
 
Release of an easement to Lot 5, Block 3, Walton's Rearrangement of Lots 33
and 34, Block 6, Reservoir Hills.


900
 
4-23-79
 
Releasing a temporary construction easement over and across part of Lot 9,
Block 1, Reservoir Hills.


1016
 
9-27-82
 
Deeding a certain easement to LaBelle Park Condominium Association II.


1087
 
6-25-84
 
Granting a driveway easement over and across the west 12 feet of the north 28
feet of Lot 6, Block 64, Columbia Heights Annex to Minneapolis.


1130
 
9-8-86
 
Granting a sanitary sewer easement.


 
 



 



ARTICLE IV:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


1053
 
9-26-83
 
Granting a SRA Uniform Gas Franchise to Minnegasco, Inc., a Minnesota
corporation, its successors and assigns, for a term of 25 years.


1146
 
4-27-87
 
Granting a SRA Uniform Electric Franchise to Northern States Power Company, a
Minnesota corporation, its successors and assigns, for a term of 20 years.


1459
 
9-8-03
 
Granting a nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate, repair and maintain
facilities and equipment for the transportation, distribution, manufacture
and sale of gas energy for public and private use and to use the public
ground of the city for such purpose to Centerpoint Energy Minnegasco, for a
term of 20 years.


1533
 
1-28-08
 
Granting an electric franchise to Northern States Power Company, d/b/a Xcel
Energy, a Minnesota corporation, its successors and assigns, permission to
construct, operate, repair and maintain in the city an electric distribution
system and transmission lines, including necessary poles, lines, fixtures and
appurtenances, for the furnishing of electric energy to the city, its
inhabitants, and others, and to use the public ways and public grounds of the
city for such purposes.


1583
 
8-9-10
 
Granting a franchise to Comcast of Minnesota, Inc. to construct, operate and
maintain a cable system in the city of Columbia Heights.


 
 



 



ARTICLE V:  REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




849
 
5-10-76
 
Authorizing the sale of real estate known as the South 1/2 of Lot 5 (Ex. Pt.
to Schluter) and Ex. the Westerly 30 feet thereof for public purposes, Block
2, Walton's Sunny Acres.


851
 
5-10-76
 
Authorizing the sale of real estate to the H.B. Fuller Company.


860
 
12-27-76
 
Authorizing the sale of real estate known as Lots 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8, Block 1,
of Apache Heights.


885
 
5-9-78
 
Authorizing the sale of part of Auditor's Subdivision No. 51 to Midland
Cooperatives, Inc.


887
 
2-12-79
 
Authorizing the sale of part of Auditor's Subdivision No. 51 to Cheery
Company.


899
 
3-26-79
 
Authorizing the sale of part of Lot 2, Block 1, Temple Terrace Plat Three.


934
 
9-22-80
 
Authorizing the sale of certain real estate on 51st Ave. Northeast to Willard
and Verna Bolling.


935
 
10-27-80
 
Authorizing the sale of certain real estate on 43rd Ave. Northeast to Marvin
B. O'Donnell and Joan M. O'Donnell.


936
 
10-27-80
 
Authorizing the sale of certain real estate on 42 1/2 Ave. Northeast to David
M. Szurek and Marlaine J. Szurek.


950
 
5-11-81
 
Authorizing the sale of certain property to the Housing and Redevelopment
Authority.


1003
 
6-28-82
 
Authorizing the sale of certain real estate adjacent to 5014 - 7th St. N.E.
to Leonard A. Barott and Betty J. Barott.


1044
 
6-27-83
 
Authorizing the sale of certain real estate at 1237 - 42 1/2 Ave. Northeast
to James E. Prokopowicz.


1085
 
5-14-84
 
Authorizing the sale of certain real estate at 4101 - 3rd St. N.E. to the
Housing and Redevelopment Authority.


1113
 
12-23-85
 
Authorizing the sale of certain real estate described as the East 4.15 feet
of Lot 14, Block 61, Columbia Heights Annex to Minneapolis.


1177
 
12-12-88
 
Authorizing the sale of 322 40th Ave. N.E.


1184
 
5-8-89
 
Amending Ordinance 1177.


1203
 
8-13-90
 
Authorizing the sale of real estate near 4441–4443 Washington St.


1208
 
11-13-90
 
Authorizing the sale of real estate described as the South 160 feet of Lot 2,
except the East 60 feet thereof, Block 17, Auditor's Subdivision of Walton's
Second Subdivision.


1209
 
11-13-90
 
Authorizing the sale of real estate described as Lot 37, Block 85 (except the
South 15 feet front and rear), Columbia Heights Annex to Minneapolis.


1218
 
5-28-91
 
Authorizing the sale of real estate described as the East 27 feet of the West
33 feet of Lot 1, Hart Lake Manor.


1219
 
5-28-91
 
Authorizing the sale of real estate described as Lot 22, Block 3, Hilltop.


1273
 
11-22-93
 
Authorizing the sale of real estate described as the South 140 feet of Lot 49
and the South 140 feet of the West 20 feet of Lot 50, Block 3, Reservoir
Hills.


1345
 
5-27-97
 
Authorizing the sale of real estate to Olubunmi Odumade and Olubukunola
Odumade.


1346
 
5-27-97
 
Authorizing the sale of real estate to James C. Morel and Esperanza C. Morel.


1491
 
7-11-05
 
Authorizing the sale of real estate to Huset Park Development Corporation.


 
 




 



ARTICLE VI:  VACATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




850
 
5-10-76
 
Vacating a public alley.


852
 
5-10-76
 
Vacating a portion of 39th Ave. Northeast.


889
 
6-26-78
 
Vacating a drainage and utility easements in Lots 35 and 36, Cheery Heights.


898
 
2-26-79
 
Vacating a certain easement.


902
 
6-25-79
 
Vacating a certain public alley easement.


906
 
10-22-79
 
Vacating an alley.


949
 
5-11-81
 
Vacating the existing 41st Ave. Northeast.


966
 
8-24-81
 
Vacating a storm drain easement.


967
 
8-24-81
 
Vacating an alley.


971
 
8-24-81
 
Vacating an alley.


1000
 
4-26-82
 
Vacating an alley.


1008
 
8-23-82
 
Vacating an alley.


1009
 
8-23-82
 
Vacating a portion of Jackson St. Northeast.


1040
 
6-13-83
 
Vacating an alley.


1061
 
10-11-83
 
Vacating an alley.


1066
 
11-28-83
 
Vacating an alley.


1068
 
11-28-83
 
Vacating an alley.


1080
 
3-26-84
 
Vacating an alley.


1089
 
9-24-84
 
Vacating a utility easement near the rear of 825 - 50 1/2 Ave. Northeast.


1090
 
9-24-84
 
Vacating an alley near 40th and Van Buren Sts. Northeast.


1092
 
10-9-84
 
Vacating part of an alley south of 40th Ave. Northeast, between Central and
Van Buren Sts. Northeast.


1096
 
12-3-84
 
Vacating certain easements in the city.


1098
 
1-14-85
 
Vacating the public walkway lying Southwesterly of the Southwesterly line of
Lot 10, Block 1, Circle Terrace 2nd Addition.


1105
 
6-24-85
 
Vacating certain easements in the city.


1112
 
12-12-85
 
Vacating an alley.


1132
 
9-8-86
 
Vacating a certain alley.


1143
 
8-24-87
 
Vacating a storm sewer easement in University Heights.


1158
 
12-15-87
 
Vacating a certain alley.


1159
 
2-8-88
 
Vacating a certain alley.


1171
 
9-12-88
 
Vacating an easement.


1174
 
11-14-88
 
Vacating a certain alley easement and street.


1262
 
2-22-93
 
Vacating a certain alley easement.


1295
 
11-14-94
 
Vacating a certain alley easement.


1299
 
5-30-95
 
Vacating a certain alley easement.


1305
 
8-14-95
 
Vacating a certain alley easement.


1315
 
2-26-96
 
Vacating a certain alley easement.


1316
 
2-26-96
 
Vacating a certain portion of street.


1329
 
7-8-96
 
Vacating a portion of an utility easement.


1366
 
11-24-97
 
Vacating a certain portion of street.


1373
 
5-26-98
 
Vacating a certain alley.


1386
 
3-22-99
 
Vacating certain water pipes, main or hydrants, utility, sewer and storm
drain easements.


1390
 
6-14-99
 
Vacating a certain alley.


1425
 
11-27-00
 
Vacating certain alleys and easements.


1453
 
3-24-03
 
Vacating a portion of California St. N.E.


1473
 
8-9-04
 
Vacating a certain alley.


1493
 
9-12-05
 
Vacating a portion of 5th St. N.E.


1494
 
9-12-05
 
Vacating a portion of 38th Ave. N.E.


1495
 
9-12-05
 
Vacating a portion of 39th Ave. N.E.


1496
 
9-12-05
 
Vacating a portion of Lookout Place and adjacent alley.


1499
 
10-24-05
 
Vacating a portion of 45th Ave. N.E.


1500
 
6-12-06
 
Vacating a portion of Lookout Place.


1504
 
1-23-06
 
Vacating a portion of the University Ave. frontage road.


1552
 
8-25-08
 
Vacating a portion of Jackson Street N.E.


1611
 
2-25-13
 
Vacating drainage and utility easements over Outlot B Grand Central Lofts
Second Addition.


 
 




 



ARTICLE VII:  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1462
 
10-13-03
 
Rezoning properties located at 4707, 4747, 4757, 4801, 4811 and 4849 Central
Avenue from GB, General Business to MXD, Mixed Use District.


1475
 
10-11-04
 
Rezoning properties located at 317 37th Avenue NE; 450, 515 and 517 38th
Avenue NE; 510, 550, 600 and 620 39th Avenue NE; and 3700, 3800, 3801 and
3901 5th Street NE from I-1, Industrial to MXD, Mixed Use District.


1484
 
4-25-05
 
Rezoning Lot 27, Block 61, Columbia Heights Annex from CBD, Central Business
to R-3, Multi-Family Residential.


1519
 
1-8-07
 
Rezoning property located at 2101 37th Ave. from GB, General Business to R-3,
Limited Multiple-Family Residential.


1521
 
2-12-07
 
Rezoning property located at Lot 124A, Block 1, Huset Park from  MXD, Mixed
Use Development to R-2A, One and Two Family Development.


1529
 
8-27-07
 
Rezoning of certain properties located at 4755, 4757, 4801, 4811, and 4849
Central Avenue NE from MXD, Mixed Use Development District to GB, General
Business District.


1534
 
1-14-08
 
Rezoning of certain properties located at 4438, 4442, and 4446 Central Avenue
NE from LB, Limited Business District to GB, General Business District.


1549
 
6-23-08
 
Rezoning of a certain property located at 825—41st Avenue NE from R-4,
Multiple Family Residential to PO, Public and Open Space District.


1565
 
5-26-09
 
Rezoning of a certain property located at 4337 University Avenue NE from LB,
Limited Business District to R-2A, One and Two Family Residential.


1573
 
11-23-09
 
Rezoning of a certain property located at 3701-05 Reservoir Boulevard NE from
GB, General Business District to R-2A, One and Two Family Residential.


1582
 
6-28-10
 
Rezoning of a certain property located at 4555 Washington Street NE from
R-2B, One and Two Family Residential to R-2A, One and Two Family Residential.


 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Minnesota Statutes





References to Minnesota Rules





References to 1977 Code of Ordinances





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES



 

M.S. Cite
 
Code Section




12.25
 
8.601, 8.604


12.31
 
8.606


15.99
 
9.104


16B.59–16B.75
 
6.201


16B.62, subd. 1
 
6.201


16B.65, subd. 1
 
6.201


16B.69
 
6.201


18.83
 
4.203


18G.07
 
4.201


Chapter 80A
 
5.203


84.82
 
7.501


84.82–84.872
 
7.504


84.87
 
7.502


89.001
 
4.201


89.01
 
4.201


89.51-64
 
4.201


103B.231
 
9.106


103B.255
 
9.106


Chapter 103F
 
9.114


103F.205, subd. 4
 
9.103


103G.005, subd. 14
 
9.103, 9.114


103G.005, subd. 15
 
9.103


103G.245
 
9.114


115A.916
 
3.203


115A.952
 
4.702


115A.1310, subd. 7
 
4.702


116.06
 
4.702


120.05
 
5.610


123.932
 
5.610


144.391
 
5.301


144.411–144.417
 
5.509, 8.402


144.50–144.703
 
5.609


152.01, subd. 9
 
10.304


160.02
 
6.303, 6.304


160.27, subd. 6
 
6.303, 6.304


161.465
 
8.403


Chapter 168
 
7.101


168.03
 
3.203


168.09
 
3.203


168.10
 
7.205


168B.08
 
7.205


Chapter168C
 
7.401


168C.03
 
7.401


168C.08
 
10.106


168C.09
 
10.106


168C.10
 
10.106


Chapter 169
 
7.101, 10.305


169.01
 
5A.103, 7.101


169.041
 
3.203


169.222
 
3.203


169.34
 
3.203


169.345
 
7.101


169.346
 
3.203


169.35
 
3.203


169.35(1)
 
3.203


Chapter 171
 
7.101, 10.301, 10.305


Chapter 197
 
3.102


216B.02, subd. 4
 
6.301


216B.02, subd. 6
 
6.301


216B.097
 
4.313


219.761
 
8.403


237.16
 
6.301


237.162
 
6.301


237.163
 
6.301


237.163, subd. 2(b)
 
6.301


237.79
 
6.301


237.81
 
6.301


Chapter 238
 
6.301


238.086
 
6.301


Chapter 299F.011
 
8.401


299F.50
 
5A.212


299F.51
 
5A.212


299F.362
 
5A.212


300.03
 
6.301


307.08
 
9.103


325F.733
 
5.203


325F.734–325F.742
 
5.203


Chapter 326
 
5.605


326B148
 
6.201


326B153
 
6.201


327.31–327.36
 
6.207


Chapter 329
 
5.202


340A.24
 
5.503


340A.26
 
5.503


340A.28
 
5.503


340A.101, subd. 14
 
10.117


340A.101, subd. 19
 
10.117


340A.285
 
5.503


340A.301, subd. 6(c)
 
5.503


340A.301, subd. 6(d)
 
5.503


340A.301, subd. 6(i)
 
5.503


340A.301, subd. 6(j)
 
5.503


340A.308
 
5.502, 5.503


340A.408, subd. 5
 
5.509


340A.503, subd. 6
 
10.303


Chapter 343
 
3.203


344.02, subd. 1(a)-(d)
 
9.114


346.20
 
10.112


346.21
 
10.112


346.215
 
10.112


346.216
 
10.112


346.22
 
10.112


346.23
 
10.112


346.24
 
10.112


346.25
 
10.112


346.26
 
10.112


346.28
 
10.112


346.29
 
10.112


346.34
 
10.112


346.57(1)
 
3.203


346.57(2)
 
3.203


Chapter 363
 
3.302


364.06
 
3.402


364.09
 
3.402


366.011
 
8.403


366.012
 
8.403


394.22, subd. 8
 
9.103, 9.106


415.11
 
2.102


Chapter 419
 
3.102


Chapter 429
 
4.101, 5A.504


429.051
 
4.103, 4.201


429.061
 
4.103


429.101
 
4.104, 4.105, 4.106, 4.201, 8.207


444.075
 
4.313, 4.601, 4.707


444.075, subd. 3
 
4.609


Chapter 462
 
3.307, 9.114


462.351–462.365
 
9.101


462.354
 
9.104


462.357
 
9.109


463.00
 
5A.503


463.15–463.26
 
4.101


469.124–469.134
 
3.310


469.152–469.165
 
3.310


469.174, subd. 11
 
3.310


469.174–469.179
 
3.305, 3.310


471.345
 
3.102


473.121, subd. 4
 
11.108


505.03
 
9.115


518B.01, subd. 2
 
5A.410


525.6155
 
10.303


525.619
 
10.303


582.032, subd. 2
 
56.202


Chapter 609
 
8.803


609.05
 
10.101


609.17
 
10.102


609.175
 
10.102


609.22
 
10.103


609.27
 
10.104


609.28
 
10.104


609.294
 
10.103


609.33
 
8.803


609.34
 
10.103


609.37
 
10.103


609.375
 
10.103


609.40
 
10.105


609.435
 
10.105


609.45
 
10.105


609.46
 
10.105


609.475
 
10.105


609.485
 
10.105


609.50
 
10.105


609.505
 
10.105


609.51
 
10.105


609.52
 
10.106


609.523
 
5.203


609.525
 
10.106


609.53
 
10.106


609.535
 
10.106


609.545
 
10.106


609.555
 
10.106


609.565
 
10.106


609.57
 
10.106


609.575
 
10.105, 10.106


609.595
 
10.106


609.605
 
10.106


609.615
 
10.106


609.65
 
10.106


609.655
 
10.106


609.66
 
10.107


609.675
 
3.203, 5A.205, 10.107


609.68
 
10.107


609.684
 
10.108


609.685
 
10.107


609.686
 
10.108


609.705
 
10.108


609.715
 
10.108


609.72
 
10.108


609.725
 
10.108


609.735
 
10.108


609.74
 
8.201, 10.108


609.74(2)
 
10.108


609.745
 
10.108


609.75
 
10.109


609.755
 
10.109


609.77
 
10.111


609.775
 
10.111


609.78
 
10.111


609.785
 
10.111


609.79
 
10.111


609.795
 
10.111


609.805
 
10.113


609.81
 
10.113


609.815
 
10.113


609.82
 
10.113


609.99
 
10.307


617.23
 
10.110


617.24
 
10.110


617.241
 
5.610, 9.103, 9.107


617.243
 
10.110


617.26
 
10.110


617.28
 
10.110


617.29
 
10.110


618.01
 
5.609


624.20–624.25
 
10.109


624.30–624.33
 
10.113


624.61
 
10.113


624.62
 
10.113


624.63
 
10.113


624.64
 
10.113


624.65
 
5.403, 10.113


624.66
 
10.113


624.67
 
10.113


624.701
 
10.113


624.714
 
10.113


1036.005, subd. 15
 
9.106


1776.182
 
5.606


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA RULES



 

Minn. Rules Cite
 
Code Section


1505.0730
 
4.203


1505.0740
 
4.203


Chapter 4725
 
6.901


Chapter 7080
 
6.601


7819.0050–7819.9950
 
6.301


 



 



REFERENCES TO 1977 CODE OF ORDINANCES



 

1977 Code Section
 
2003 Code Section




1.201
 
1.105


2.101
 
2.101


2.102
 
2.102


2.202
 
2.201


2.301
 
2.301


3.101
 
3.101


3.102
 
3.102


3.103
 
3.103


3.104
 
3.104


3.201
 
3.201


3.202
 
3.202


3.203
 
3.203


3.204
 
3.204


3.205
 
3.205


3.206
 
3.206


3.208
 
3.207


3.301
 
3.301


3.302
 
3.302


3.303
 
3.303


3.305
 
3.305


3.306
 
3.306


3.307
 
3.307


3.308
 
3.308


3.309
 
3.309


3.315
 
3.312


4.101
 
4.101


4.102
 
4.102


4.103
 
4.103


4.104
 
4.104


4.105
 
4.105


4.106
 
4.106


4.201
 
4.201


4.202
 
4.202


4.203
 
4.203


4.401
 
4.501


4.402
 
4.502


5.101
 
5.101


5.102
 
5.102


5.103
 
5.103


5.104
 
5.104


5.202
 
5.201


5.203
 
5.202


5.204
 
5.203


5.205
 
5.203


5.206
 
5.204


5.207
 
5.205


5.209
 
5.206


5.402
 
5.401


5.404
 
5.402


5.408
 
5.403


5.411
 
5.404


5.501
 
5.502


5.502
 
5.504


5.503
 
5.505


5.504
 
5.506


5.505
 
5.507


5.506
 
5.508


5.508
 
5.509


5.510
 
5.510


5.603
 
5.601


5.604
 
5.602


5.605
 
5.603


5.606
 
5.604


5.607
 
5.605


5.608
 
5.606


5.609
 
5.607


5.610
 
5.608


5.611
 
5.203


5.612
 
5.609


5.613
 
5.610


5.701
 
5.701


6.1001
 
6.1001


6.101
 
6.101


6.201
 
6.201


6.202
 
6.202


6.203
 
6.203


6.204
 
6.204


6.205
 
6.205


6.206
 
6.206


6.207
 
6.207


6.301
 
6.301


6.302
 
6.302


6.303
 
6.303


6.501
 
6.501


6.502
 
6.502


6.503
 
6.503


6.601
 
6.601


6.701
 
6.701


6.801
 
6.801, 6.802


6.901
 
6.901


7.101
 
7.101


7.102
 
7.102


7.103
 
7.103


7.201
 
7.201


7.202
 
7.202


7.203
 
7.203


7.204
 
7.204


7.205
 
7.205


7.206
 
7.206


7.301
 
7.301


7.302
 
7.302


7.401
 
7.401


7.402
 
7.402


7.501
 
7.501


7.502
 
7.502


7.503
 
7.503


7.504
 
7.504


7.601
 
7.601


8.101
 
8.101


8.102
 
8.102


8.103
 
8.103


8.104
 
8.104


8.105
 
8.105


8.106
 
8.106


8.301
 
8.301


8.401
 
8.401


8.501
 
8.501


8.502
 
8.502


10.101
 
10.101


10.102
 
10.102


10.103
 
10.103


10.104
 
10.104


10.105
 
10.105


10.106
 
10.106


10.107
 
10.107


10.108
 
10.108


10.109
 
10.109


10.110
 
10.110


10.111
 
10.111


10.112
 
10.112


10.113
 
10.113


10.201
 
10.201


10.202
 
10.202


10.203
 
10.203


10.204
 
10.204


10.205
 
10.205


10.206
 
10.206


10.301
 
10.301


10.302
 
10.302


10.304
 
10.304


10.305
 
10.305


10.306
 
10.306


10.307
 
10.307


10.308
 
10.308


10.309
 
10.309


10.310
 
10.310


10.311
 
10.311


10.312
 
10.312


10.401
 
10.401


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


96-01
 
1-8-96
 
3.310


 
 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




849
 
5-10-76
 
Ch. 12, Article V


850
 
5-10-76
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


851
 
5-10-76
 
Ch. 12, Article V


852
 
5-10-76
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


856
 
11-3-76
 
Ch. 12, Article I


859
 
12-14-76
 
Ch. 12, Article III


860
 
12-27-76
 
Ch. 12, Article V


871
 
4-9-79
 
7.301


872
 
9-12-77
 
10.310


873
 
9-12-77
 
10.311


878
 
9-26-77
 
7.204


880
 
10-24-77
 
Ch. 12, Article II


883
 
12-12-77
 
Ch. 12, Article II


884
 
2-27-78
 
3.302


885
 
5-9-78
 
Ch. 12, Article V


887
 
2-12-79
 
Ch. 12, Article V


889
 
6-26-78
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


890
 
8-15-78
 
7.101, 10.305


893
 
8-15-78
 
10.106, 10.109


898
 
2-26-79
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


899
 
3-26-79
 
Ch. 12, Article V


900
 
4-23-79
 
Ch. 12, Article III


902
 
6-25-79
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


903
 
7-9-79
 
Ch. 12, Article I


904
 
7-9-79
 
7.101


906
 
10-22-79
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


912
 
3-10-80
 
Ch. 12, Article II


914
 
5-12-80
 
7.102


915
 
7-7-80
 
Ch. 12, Article I


916
 
7-7-80
 
Ch. 12, Article I


917
 
7-7-80
 
Ch. 12, Article I


920
 
7-28-80
 
Ch. 12, Article II


921
 
10-14-80
 
6.101, 6.201, 6.203–6.206


929
 
10-27-80
 
7.202


934
 
9-22-80
 
Ch. 12, Article V


935
 
10-27-80
 
Ch. 12, Article V


936
 
10-27-80
 
Ch. 12, Article V


940
 
11-24-80
 
6.502


949
 
5-11-81
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


950
 
5-11-81
 
Ch. 12, Article V


952
 
5-26-81
 
Ch. 12, Article II


958
 
9-14-81
 
Ch. 12, Article II


960
 
7-27-81
 
7.101. 7.204


961
 
8-10-81
 
Ch. 12, Article II


962
 
7-27-81
 
Ch. 12, Article II


963
 
9-15-81
 
5.404


965
 
11-23-81
 
5.506


966
 
8-24-81
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


967
 
8-24-81
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


968
 
8-24-81
 
Ch. 12, Article II


969
 
8-24-81
 
Ch. 12, Article II


970
 
8-24-81
 
Ch. 12, Article II


971
 
8-24-81
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


976
 
9-29-81
 
5.402


977
 
9-29-81
 
10.301


980
 
9-29-81
 
2.102


981
 
10-13-81
 
Ch. 12, Article II


982
 
11-9-81
 
11.101–11.139, 11.142


986
 
12-28-81
 
3.308


987
 
1-25-82
 
3.104


991
 
4-26-82
 
7.401


992
 
3-22-82
 
10.301


994
 
3-22-82
 
10.312


1000
 
4-26-82
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1002
 
7-14-82
 
3.312


1003
 
6-28-82
 
Ch. 12, Article V


1005
 
7-12-82
 
8.102


1006
 
10-25-82
 
10.307


1007
 
8-23-82
 
4.501


1008
 
8-23-82
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1009
 
8-23-82
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1010
 
9-27-82
 
6.207


1011
 
9-27-82
 
7.204


1012
 
9-13-82
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1016
 
9-27-82
 
Ch. 12, Article III


1019
 
10-12-82
 
10.201


1021
 
11-8-82
 
11.144


1022
 
10-21-82
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1024
 
11-8-82
 
6.1001


1035
 
3-14-83
 
5.507


1037
 
4-25-83
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1040
 
6-13-83
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1044
 
6-27-83
 
Ch. 12, Article V


1053
 
9-26-83
 
Ch. 12, Article IV


1059
 
10-11-83
 
6.202, 8.401


1061
 
10-11-83
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1063
 
11-14-83
 
7.205


1066
 
11-28-83
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1068
 
11-28-83
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1069
 
1-12-84
 
5.508, 5.509


1074
 
2-13-84
 
5.204, 5.604–5.606


1077
 
3-26-84
 
10.201


1078
 
2-27-84
 
5.603


1080
 
3-26-84
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1082
 
4-9-84
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1083
 
4-9-84
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1084
 
4-9-84
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1085
 
5-14-84
 
Ch. 12, Article V


1087
 
6-25-84
 
Ch. 12, Article III


1089
 
9-24-84
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1090
 
9-24-84
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1092
 
10-9-84
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1094
 
11-19-84
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1096
 
12-3-84
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1098
 
1-14-85
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1105
 
6-24-85
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1106
 
8-5-85
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1107
 
8-5-85
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1109
 
1-13-86
 
5.206


1112
 
12-12-85
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1113
 
12-23-85
 
Ch. 12, Article V


1116
 
2-13-86
 
5.509


1118
 
2-10-86
 
10.306


1119
 
2-24-86
 
5.502, 5.505, 5.506


1121
 
4-28-86
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1122
 
4-28-86
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1123
 
4-28-86
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1124
 
4-28-86
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1125
 
5-27-86
 
11.120–11.124, 11.128–11.131, 11.140, 11.141


1127
 
8-25-86
 
5.606, 10.301


1129
 
8-25-86
 
10.302


1130
 
9-8-86
 
Ch. 12, Article III


1132
 
9-8-86
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1135
 
9-22-86
 
4.501, 5.502, 5.504–5.507, 10.302


1138
 
2-23-87
 
5.609


1143
 
8-24-87
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1144
 
4-27-87
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1146
 
4-27-87
 
Ch. 12, Article IV


1147
 
4-20-87
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1148
 
4-27-87
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1149
 
6-22-87
 
5.510


1151
 
6-15-87
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1152
 
7-13-87
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1154
 
8-24-87
 
5.502, 5.504, 5.505


1155
 
9-28-87
 
2.102


1156
 
10-12-87
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1158
 
12-15-87
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1159
 
2-8-88
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1160
 
3-28-88
 
3.201, 3.202, 3.203


1166
 
6-27-88
 
8.501


1167
 
7-11-88
 
8.501


1168
 
9-12-88
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1169
 
9-12-88
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1171
 
9-12-88
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1172
 
9-26-88
 
6.201, 6.202


1174
 
11-14-88
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1177
 
12-12-88
 
Ch. 12, Article V


1181
 
3-27-89
 
5.603, 5.701, 8.301


1184
 
5-8-89
 
Ch. 12, Article V


1186
 
6-12-89
 
10.204, 10.401


1188
 
6-26-89
 
4.501


1190
 
10-23-89
 
5.504


1191
 
10-23-89
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1193
 
11-27-89
 
3.102


1195
 
11-27-89
 
3.102


1196
 
11-27-89
 
3.102


1200
 
6-11-90
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1202
 
6-25-90
 
11.102, 11.104, 11.105, 11.107, 11.117, 11.120–11.122, 11.124,
11.128–11.130, 11.134, 11.142


1203
 
8-13-90
 
Ch. 12, Article V


1206
 
10-22-90
 
3.308


1208
 
11-13-90
 
Ch. 12, Article V


1209
 
11-13-90
 
Ch. 12, Article V


1210
 
11-13-90
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1214
 
12-26-90
 
2.101


1215
 
11-13-90
 
5.610


1216
 
4-13-92
 
6.201


1218
 
5-28-91
 
Ch. 12, Article V


1219
 
5-28-91
 
Ch. 12, Article V


1227
 
8-26-91
 
4.301–4.319, 4.401–4.408


1228
 
7-8-91
 
5.101, 5.103, 5.604


1230
 
8-26-91
 
3.301


1231
 
9-9-91
 
8.301


1235
 
11-12-91
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1236
 
11-23-92
 
10.207


1238
 
3-9-92
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1246
 
6-22-92
 
3.313


1248
 
7-13-92
 
4.201, 4.202


1260
 
3-8-93
 
2.101


1262
 
2-22-93
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1263
 
5-24-93
 
3.309


1264
 
4-26-93
 
10.114


1266
 
5-10-93
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1268
 
6-28-93
 
2.102


1273
 
11-22-93
 
Ch. 12, Article V


1282
 
2-28-94
 
3.203


1283
 
4-25-94
 
8.402


1286
 
5-9-94
 
5.401


1294
 
11-14-94
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1295
 
11-14-94
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1296
 
1-9-95
 
5.609


1297
 
2-27-95
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1298
 
3-27-95
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1299
 
5-30-95
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1301
 
7-10-95
 
10.303


1302
 
7-10-95
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1303
 
7-24-95
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1304
 
7-10-95
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1305
 
8-14-95
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1307
 
9-11-95
 
3.312


1309
 
11-13-95
 
6.201


1310
 
10-23-95
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1312
 
12-18-95
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1315
 
2-26-96
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1316
 
2-26-96
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1317
 
3-25-96
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1318
 
3-25-96
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1319
 
3-25-96
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1320
 
3-25-96
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1321
 
3-25-96
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1323
 
5-13-96
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1325
 
6-10-96
 
3.312


1326
 
6-10-96
 
10.115


1327
 
6-10-96
 
10.116


1329
 
7-8-96
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1333
 
10-28-96
 
5.607


1334
 
11-25-96
 
8.301


1336
 
11-12-96
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1338
 
12-2-96
 
3.402


1343
 
4-28-97
 
7.205


1344
 
5-12-97
 
6.201


1345
 
5-27-97
 
Ch. 12, Article V


1346
 
5-27-97
 
Ch. 12, Article V


1354
 
9-8-97
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1355
 
10-13-97
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1357
 
10-13-97
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1358
 
10-13-97
 
3.501–3.507


1359
 
10-27-97
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1360
 
10-27-97
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1361
 
10-27-97
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1363
 
11-10-97
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1364
 
11-24-97
 
7.205


1365
 
11-10-97
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1366
 
11-24-97
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1367
 
12-8-97
 
10.201


1370
 
5-11-98
 
5.401


1371
 
5-11-98
 
5.301–5.313


1372
 
5-11-98
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1373
 
5-26-98
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1376
 
9-14-98
 
10.305


1377
 
10-12-98
 
5.101–5.104, 5.201–5.206, 5.402–5.404, 5.601–5.610, 6.303


1378
 
11-23-98
 
6.201


1381
 
12-28-98
 
10.312


1384
 
3-8-99
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1385
 
3-8-99
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1386
 
3-22-99
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1387
 
5-10-99
 
10.313


1390
 
6-14-99
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1394
 
6-28-99
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1396
 
7-26-99
 
7.204


1397
 
8-9-99
 
4.601–4.609


1398
 
9-13-99
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1399
 
9-13-99
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1401
 
11-22-99
 
10.117


1402
 
11-22-99
 
10.118


1405
 
2-14-00
 
3.301


1406
 
2-14-00
 
3.302


1407
 
2-14-00
 
3.306


1408
 
2-14-00
 
3.308


1409
 
2-14-00
 
3.309


1410
 
2-14-00
 
3.312


1416
 
7-24-00
 
5.501, 5.502, 5.506


1419
 
9-25-00
 
5.504, 5.505, 5.508, 5.510


1420
 
10-9-00
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1421
 
10-23-00
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1424
 
12-11-00
 
9.106


1425
 
11-27-00
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1428
 
5-29-01
 
9.101– 9.112, 9.114, 9.115


1430
 
7-23-01
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1433
 
11-5-01
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1433
 
7-23-01
 
3.203


1441
 
10-8-01
 
5.601


1442
 
10-22-01
 
3.305, 3.310


1444
 
2-11-02
 
6.303, 6.304


1446
 
4-22-02
 
6.301


1450
 
1-13-03
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1452
 
1-13-03
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1453
 
3-24-03
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1454
 
3-24-03
 
3.203


1455
 
3-24-03
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1456
 
5-27-03
 
6.201


1458
 
6-30-03
 
7.102


1459
 
9-8-03
 
Ch. 12, Article IV


1460
 
10-13-03
 
9.106, 9.110, 9.112, 9.114


1461
 
10-13-03
 
1.999, 8.205–8.207


1462
 
10-13-03
 
Ch. 12, Article VII


1470
 
6-28-04
 
9.115


1472
 
7-12-04
 
8.701–8.705


1473
 
8-9-04
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1475
 
10-11-04
 
Ch. 12, Article VII


1476
 
10-11-04
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1477
 
10-25-04
 
10.108


1479
 
2-14-05
 
9.104


1482
 
3-28-05
 
5.504–5.506, 5.510


1484
 
4-25-05
 
Ch. 12, Article VII


1485
 
6-13-05
 
7.205


1487
 
6-27-05
 
8.401


1489
 
7-11-05
 
8.402


1491
 
7-11-05
 
Ch. 12, Article V


1493
 
9-12-05
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1494
 
9-12-05
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1495
 
9-12-05
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1496
 
9-12-05
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1498
 
10-10-05
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1499
 
10-24-05
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1500
 
6-12-06
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1501
 
12-12-05
 
6.801


1502
 
1-9-06
 
9.107, 9.109


1504
 
1-23-06
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1505
 
1-30-06
 
9.110


1507
 
3-27-06
 
9.103, 9.106


1511
 
6-12-06
 
4.203


1513
 
9-25-06
 
5.306–5.308


1514
 
10-9-06
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1515
 
11-13-06
 
9.103, 9.107, 9.110


1516
 
10-23-06
 
9.103, 9.107, 9.111


1517
 
10-23-06
 
9.103, 9.106


1519
 
1-8-07
 
Ch. 12, Article VII


1520
 
2-12-07
 
8.201–8.207


1521
 
2-12-07
 
Ch. 12, Article VII


1523
 
5-29-07
 
9.103, 9.106


1524
 
4-23-07
 
9.106


1525
 
5-29-07
 
9.107


1527
 
7-23-07
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1528
 
8-13-07
 
6.201


1529
 
8-27-07
 
Ch. 12, Article VII


1530
 
9-24-07
 
9.103, 9.104, 9.106, 9.107, 9.109, 9.110


1531
 
9-24-07
 
9.106


1532
 
11-26-07
 
5A.101–5A.103, 5A.201–5A.212, 5A.301–5A.307, 5A.401–5A.411,
5A.501–5A.506, 5A.601–5A.602


1533
 
1-28-08
 
Ch. 12, Article IV


1534
 
1-14-08
 
Ch. 12, Article VII


1535
 
9-8-08
 
1.105, 1.119, 2.201, 3.204, 3.208, 3.301, 3.303, 4.103–4.106, 5.201,
5A.506, 6.101, 6.901, 7.203, 7.302, 8.101, 8.103, 8.207, 8.605, 8.606, 
11.127


1536
 
3-24-08
 
9.103, 9.106


1537
 
3-10-08
 
9.104, 9.115, 9.116


1538
 
3-10-08
 
8.705


1540
 
4-28-08
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1541
 
4-14-08
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1542
 
4-28-08
 
8.206, 8.207


1543
 
4-28-08
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1544
 
5-12-08
 
4.203


1545
 
5-27-08
 
2.102


1547
 
6-23-08
 
9.106


1549
 
6-23-08
 
Ch. 12, Article VII


1550
 
6-23-08
 
9.114


1552
 
8-25-08
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1553
 
8-25-08
 
9.103, 9.106


1554
 
8-25-08
 
9.106


1555
 
8-25-08
 
9.106


1556
 
8-25-08
 
9.106


1559
 
11-24-08
 
5B.101–5B.103, 5B.201, 5B.202, 5B.301–5B.304, 5B.401, 5B.501, 5B.601


1560
 
12-8-08
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1561
 
3-23-09
 
9.114


1562
 
5-11-09
 
8.403


1563
 
4-27-09
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1564
 
4-27-09
 
Ch. 12, Article I


1565
 
5-26-09
 
Ch. 12, Article VII


1568
 
8-24-09
 
8.801–8.809


1569
 
8-24-09
 
10.307


1570
 
9-28-09
 
5.302, 5.303, 9.103, 9.107


1573
 
11-23-09
 
Ch. 12, Article VII


1574
 
6-14-10
 
6.201


1575
 
1-25-10
 
9.106


1576
 
3-22-10
 
9.109


1577
 
3-22-10
 
9.104


1578
 
4-12-10
 
5.603, 5A.205, 8.301


1579
 
4-12-10
 
4.201, 4.202


1580
 
4-26-10
 
2.101


1582
 
6-28-10
 
Ch. 12, Article VII


1583
 
8-9-10
 
Ch. 12, Article IV


1587
 
1-24-11
 
Ch. 12, Article II


1588
 
2-14-11
 
9.106, 9.109


1590
 
5-9-11
 
4.203


1591
 
5-9-11
 
8.206


1592
 
5-9-11
 
5A.205, 5A.402, 5A.410, 5A.411


1593
 
4-25-11
 
9.103, 9.106


1594
 
4-25-11
 
9.106, 9.107, 9.109–9.111


1595
 
4-25-11
 
9.107, 9.110


1602
 
10-24-11
 
3.402


1604
 
10-24-11
 
9.104


1605
 
1-9-12
 
5.506


1606
 
4-23-12
 
9.103, 9.107, 9.110


1609
 
9-24-12
 
9.106


1610
 
11-26-12
 
5.501, 5.502, 5.504–5.512


1611
 
2-25-13
 
Ch. 12, Article VI


1612
 
6-24-13
 
9.106


1613
 
10-28-13
 
3.314


1616
 
10-27-14
 
5.301–5.303


1618
 
2-9-15
 
8.702, 8.704, 8.705


1619
 
2-9-15
 
9.106


1620
 
3-23-15
 
5.501


1623
 
11-23-15
 
9.114


1626
 
5-9-16
 
9.103, 9.107, 9.110, 9.111


1628
 
7-11-16
 
8.401


1635
 
11-28-16
 
5.609


1638
 
2-27-17
 
5.501, 5.503 –5.512, 9.103, 9.107, 9.110, 9.111


1640
 
6-12-17
 
5.502-5.506, 5.508, 5.510


1641
 
6-12-17
 
9.107


1645
 
2-12-18
 
3.306


1646
 
2-26-18
 
4.701–4.707


1647
 
6-25-18
 
9.113–9.116


1649
 
6-25-18
 
9.110


1650
 
8-13-18
 
8.204


1651
 
9-24-18
 
9.104


1652
 
10-8-18
 
5.303


1653
 
2-25-19
 
9.103, 9.107, 9.110


1654
 
2-25-19
 
9.103, 9.107, 9.110


 
 
 
 
 




 


