
Cologne, MN Code of Ordinances


CITY OF COLOGNE, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



Contains 2017 S-5 Supplement, current through
Ordinance 161-L, passed 12-19-2016



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CITY OFFICIALS
OF
COLOGNE, MINNESOTA



 




CITY COUNCIL




MAYOR

 

Matt Lein




MEMBER

 

Don W. Meyer




MEMBER

 

Sarah Bruss




MEMBER

 

Kyle Evenski




MEMBER

 

Carol Szaroletta





 





CITY OFFICIALS



CITY ADMINISTRATOR
 

Jesse Dickson



DEPUTY CLERK
 

Susan Mueller



CITY ATTORNEY
 

R. Lawrence Harris










TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS




CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Rules of interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Official time



   10.11   Reasonable time



   10.12   Ordinances repealed



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Effective date of ordinances



   10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities



   10.18   Copies of code



   10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules by reference



   10.20   Enforcement



 



   10.98   Supplemental administrative penalties



   10.99   General penalty



   Appendix A:   Resolution to Adopt the Provisions of City Code §
10.98 and a Schedule of Offenses and Voluntary Administrative Penalties



   Appendix B:   Notice of Code Violation



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city,
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“city code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified
ordinances,” or “code” may be substituted.  Code title, chapter, and
section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the
code.



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
the components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code.” 
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by
the number, such as “§ 10.01.”  Headings and captions used in this code
other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Generally.  Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or
implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and
application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.



   (B)   Specifically.  The construction of all ordinances of this
city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is plainly
repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same
ordinance.



      (1)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other
as if written “and/or,” whenever the context requires.



      (2)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute, code provisions,
or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as
well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.



      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting
the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter
genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular; and the use of a verb in the present tense
shall include the future, if applicable.



      (4)   General term.  A general term following specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY.  The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of
Cologne, Minnesota, as presently established or as amended by ordinance,
annexation, or other legal actions at a future time.  The term CITY, when
used in this code, may also be used to refer to the City Council and its
authorized representatives.



      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This city code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



      COUNTY.  Carver County, Minnesota.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.  All
terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an
individual authorized by state law.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission, or department of this city unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons,
firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or
WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents
thereof.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
that reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.11  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter
or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section.  In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.17  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.  The liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments,
penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had
not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted,
the acceptance, establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the election
of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.18  COPIES OF CODE.



   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk/Treasurer for public inspection.  The Clerk/Treasurer shall provide a
copy for sale for a reasonable charge.



§ 10.19  ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.



   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code,
all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by
reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to
the contrary.



§ 10.20  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department,
or the County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to
enforce any provision of this code.



   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from
time to time, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall have the authority to administer
and enforce this code.  In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code or by the Clerk/Treasurer or City
Council shall have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions
specified.  All and any person or persons designated may issue a citation in
lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.



   (C)   The City Clerk/Treasurer, and any city official or employee
designated by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under
this code, may with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of
any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any
premises, inspect or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with
this code.



   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control
of a premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the
City Clerk/Treasurer, peace officer, or any employee or official charged with
the duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that
probable cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court
of competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before
conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property.  This warrant
shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made
as a result of the warrant.  No warrant shall be issued unless there be
probable cause to issue the warrant.  Probable cause occurs if the search is
reasonable.  Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the
condition of a particular property.



   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of
property within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or
entrance to the property by the City Clerk/Treasurer or any other authorized
city officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this
code enacted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people are
being complied with and to enforce these provisions.  Unreasonable refusal
to permit the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for
termination of any and all permits, licenses, or city service to the
property.  Mailed notice shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident, or
other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for the
termination, and the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of
the property shall be given an opportunity to appear before the City
Clerk/Treasurer to object to the termination before it occurs, subject to
appeal of the Clerk/Treasurer’s decision to the City Council at a regularly
scheduled or special meeting.



   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
authority of the city to enter private property in urgent emergency
situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.



§ 10.98  SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.



   (A)   In addition to those administrative penalties established in
this code and the enforcement powers granted in § 10.20, the City Council is
authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a majority of the members of
the Council, supplemental administrative penalties.  The resolution may be
in the form established in Appendix A of this chapter.



   (B)   These administrative penalty procedures in this section are
intended to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost-effective,
and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of this code.  The procedures are intended to be
voluntary on the part of those who have been charged with those offenses.



   (C)   Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions
of the code, other than those penalties established in the code or in
statutes that are adopted by reference, may be established from time to time
by resolution of a majority of the members of the City Council.  In order to
be effective, an administrative penalty for a particular violation must be
established before the violation occurred.



   (D)   In the discretion of the peace officer, City Clerk/Treasurer,
or other person giving notice of an alleged violation of a provision of this
code, in a written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first-class mail
to the person who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving
notice may request the payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the
violation directly to the City Clerk/Treasurer within 14 days of the notice
of the violation.  A sample notice is contained in Appendix B of this
chapter.  In the sole discretion of the person giving the notice of the
alleged violation, the time for payment may be extended an additional 14
days, whether or not requested by the person to whom the notice has been
given.  In addition to the administrative penalty, the person giving notice
may request in the notice to the alleged violator to adopt a compliance plan
to correct the situation resulting in the alleged violation and may provide
that if the alleged violator corrects the situation resulting in the alleged
violation within the time specified in the notice, that the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.



   (E)   At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty
is due, the person who has been given notice of an alleged violation may
request to appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment
of the penalty.  After a hearing before the Council, the Council may
determine to withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for
payment.  Because the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary,
there shall be no appeal from the decision of the Council.



   (F)   At any time after the date the payment of the administrative
penalty is due, if the administrative penalty remains unpaid or the situation
creating the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city, through its
City Attorney, may bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and
this code.  Likewise, the city, in its discretion, may bring criminal
charges in the first instance, rather than requesting the payment of an
administrative penalty, even if a penalty for the particular violation has
been established by Council resolution.  If the administrative penalty is
paid, or if any requested correction of the situation resulting in the
violation is completed, no criminal charges shall be initiated by the city
for the alleged violation.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of
this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference,
which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed for any
petty offense which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of
not more than $300.



   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor,
the costs of prosecution may be added.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.



   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or
in § 10.98, if any person, firm, or corporation fails to comply with any
provision of this code, the Council, or any city official designated by it,
may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain,
correct, or abate the violation.



APPENDIX A:  RESOLUTION TO ADOPT THE PROVISIONS OF CITY CODE § 10.98 AND A
SCHEDULE OF OFFENSES AND VOLUNTARY ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES



   WHEREAS, the City Council wishes to adopt the provisions of City Code
§ 10.98, establishing a procedure for requesting the voluntary payment of
administrative penalties for certain violations of the code; and



   WHEREAS, the provisions of City Code § 10.98 authorize the City
Council, by a resolution adopted by a majority of its members, to identify
administrative offenses and establish penalties for these offenses;



   NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by the City Council as follows:



   The City Council hereby adopts the provisions of City Code § 10.98 and
adopts the following administrative penalties:



 

Offense
 
Code Section
 
Amount of Administrative Penalty


All offenses for which an administrative penalty may be established under
this code, other than those specified below:
 
 
$75



 



   EFFECTIVE DATE:  The effective date of this resolution is the date of
its passage by a majority of the members of the City Council.  Passage of
this resolution implements the provisions of City Code § 10.98.



Mayor:                                               
         



Attest:                                             
             



      City Clerk/Treasurer



APPENDIX B:  NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION



To:  (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)



From:  (Name and title of city official giving the notice)



Re:  Alleged violation of §                 of the City Code,
relating to (give title of section)



Date:  (Date of notice)



   I  hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated §      
              of the City Code relating to                 
          .



   The City Council has by resolution established an administrative
penalty in the amount of $        for this violation.



   Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not
pay it the city may initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation.



   Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice.  Before the
due date, you may request an additional 14-day extension of the time to pay
the administrative penalty.



   As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the
situation that gave rise to this alleged violation is corrected by      
                (establish date), then the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.



   Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the city reserves the right
to institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain,
correct, or abate the violation.



   Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council
to contest the request for payment of the penalty.  After a hearing before
the Council, the Council may determine to withdraw the request for payment or
to renew the request for payment.  Because the payment of the administrative
penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the
Council.



   If you pay the administrative penalty, the city will not initiate
criminal proceedings for this alleged violation.  However, the Council, or
any city official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at
law or at equity to restrain, correct, or abate the violation.



   Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash, or
money order to the City Clerk/Treasurer.



Signed:                                             
               



      (Name and title of person giving notice)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   CITY COUNCIL, OFFICIALS, AND ORGANIZATIONS





         31.   FINANCES





         32.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT




CHAPTER 30:  CITY COUNCIL, OFFICIALS, AND ORGANIZATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   30.01   Elections and terms for Mayor and Council Members



   30.02   Salaries




Parks and Recreation Board




   30.15   Board established



   30.16   Composition



   30.17   Vacancies



   30.18   Meetings



   30.19   Attendance



   30.20   Board officers



   30.21   Duties of officers



   30.22   Performance criteria



   30.23   Conflict of interest



   30.24   Code of conduct



   30.25   Powers and duties



   30.26   Subcommittees




Planning Commission




   30.40   Establishment of Commission



   30.41   Composition



   30.42   Organization and meetings



   30.43   Adoption of program of work



   30.44   Review of comprehensive plan



   30.45   Procedure for revision of comprehensive plan



   30.46   Means of executing plan



   30.47   Zoning plan



   30.48   Official map of street extensions



   30.49   Plats



   30.50   Procedure for changes



   30.51   Effective date




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 30.01  ELECTIONS AND TERMS FOR MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   (A)   Date of election.  The regular election shall be held on the
first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in every even-numbered year,
beginning with the 1976 election.



   (B)   Terms.  Two Council Members shall be elected for four-year
terms at each biennial election commencing in 1978.  The Mayor shall be
elected for a term of two years at each such election, commencing in 1976.



(Ord. 86, passed 9-2-1975)



§ 30.02  SALARIES.



   (A)   The salary of the Mayor of the city shall be $2,400 per year.



   (B)   The salary of each Council Member of the city shall be $2,000
per year.



   (C)   The salary of each Planning Commission Member shall be $40 per
regular or special Planning Commission meeting attended.



   (D)   Should any elected official not fulfill their term, the salary
shall be prorated through the month of service.



   (E)   The salaries hereby established as to Mayor, Council Member,
and Planning Commission member of the city shall take effect on January 1,
2007 per M.S. § 415.11, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 163, passed 10-2-2006)




PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD




§ 30.15  BOARD ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established an advisory board to be known as the
Cologne Parks and Recreation Board.  This Board will work with the City
Administrator to provide recommendations to the City Council for policies,
procedures, and purchases that affect Cologne’s park facilities and
recreational programming.



(Ord. 157, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 30.16  COMPOSITION.



   The Parks and Recreation Board shall consist of five regular members,
and one alternate member.  They shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Council.  Three applicants for the Board must reside within
the city limits of Cologne, and two may be selected from outside the city
limits and one member from the City Council.  The terms of the members first
appointed shall be for one-, two-, and three-year terms; the term to be
designated in the appointment notices the appointees receive, unless
otherwise provided in the filling of vacancies.  An appointive member shall
not serve more than two consecutive three-year terms.  All terms will begin
January 1 and end December 31.  Partial terms do not count toward the term
limitation.  The purpose of the term limit policy is to encourage resident
participation on city advisory bodies and provide community members with the
opportunity to participate in their local government.



(Ord. 157, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 30.17  VACANCIES.



   (A)   Generally.  Any vacancy in the appointive membership shall be
filled in the following manner.



   (B)   Specifically.



      (1)   The Personnel Committee makes a recommendation to the
Mayor.



      (2)   The consent of the Council is obtained for the
recommendation.  The appointees shall serve for the unexpired term so filled.



(Ord. 157, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 30.18  MEETINGS.



   In conformance with the Minnesota Open Meeting Law, being M.S. Chapter
13D, as it may be amended from time to time, all meetings of the Board are
open to the public.  Regular meetings shall be held at the Community Room,
City Hall, in Cologne, Minnesota.  The Board will convene at 6:30 p.m. the
second Wednesday of each January.  At this meeting, the current members will
decide on regular dates and times for each month of the current year. 
Regular meetings may be scheduled, canceled, or changed depending upon unique
circumstances and subject to the approval and consent of the Chair and/or
Vice-Chair.



(Ord. 157, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 30.19  ATTENDANCE.



   In the absence of a regular member, the alternate member shall assume
the seat of the absent regular member.  The alternate member assuming the
regular member’s seat shall have all the powers, including, but not limited
to, voting powers, of the regular members.  Regular members are expected to
attend all regularly scheduled meetings.  If a member has not attended at
least 80% of the regularly scheduled meetings January through December,
(10/12), the City Administrator may recommend to the Personnel Committee that
the member be removed from the Board.  The Personnel Committee will forward
this recommendation to the City Council as is deemed appropriate.



(Ord. 157, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 30.20  BOARD OFFICERS.



   The Board shall elect from its membership a Chair, Vice-Chair, and
Secretary who shall serve for 1 year.



(Ord. 157, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 30.21  DUTIES OF OFFICERS.



   (A)   The duties of the Chair shall be to:



      (1)   Review and approve of meeting agenda;



      (2)   Preside at meetings;



      (3)   Participate with the Personnel Committee in the
selection of Committee members; and



      (4)   Represent the Committee as appropriate.



   (B)   The duties of the Vice-Chair shall be to:



      (1)   Perform the duties of the Chair in his or her absence;
and



      (2)   Assume other duties as assigned by the Chair.



   (C)   The duties of the Secretary shall be to:



      (1)   Be responsible for recording and compiling a written
summary of all official activities of the Committee;



      (2)   Take attendance at all meetings; and



      (3)   Other duties as assigned.



(Ord. 157, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 30.22  PERFORMANCE CRITERIA.



   (A)   Annually, the Board shall perform a written self-evaluation on
the following:



      (1)   Achievement of goals and objectives;



      (2)   Compliance with bylaws;



      (3)   Formulation of proposals and recommendations and overall
accomplishments;



      (4)   Visitation of subject sites as applicable; and



      (5)   Member’s personal attendance record.



   (B)   The Board shall forward this evaluation to the City
Administrator.  The City Administrator will forward the evaluation to the
City Council for review by the third week of December.



(Ord. 157, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 30.23  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   Members with a financial or vested interest with an applicant,
application, proposal, policy, or other Board issue shall disclose the
relationship before participating in discussion about the issue.  If the
conflict is deemed to be significant, the member shall refrain from
discussion and voting on the issue.  If the conflict involves the presiding
officer, he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from discussion and
pass the gavel to the Vice-Chair or a member who has no conflict.  He or she
may resume the chair once the issue has been dispatched.



(Ord. 157, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 30.24  CODE OF CONDUCT.



   (A)   Generally.  Outside of official meetings, Board members will
adhere to the following.



   (B)   Specifically.



      (1)   A Board member’s opinion pertaining to a function,
organization, or specific application or issue shall not be given to the
public or media unless there is a clear qualification that the opinion is not
the opinion is that of the Committee or the city.  If a Board member gives
or represents the opinions of the Board, he or she shall do so only after
receiving the official direction from the Board.



      (2)   The conduct of Board members shall reflect positively
upon the Board, individual member, and city.



      (3)   Board members shall avoid any actual or apparent
impropriety.



(Ord. 157, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 30.25  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the Cologne City Council
and shall advise the City Council on parks and recreation matters.  Any
recommendation of the Board submitted to the Council in writing, which
requires action of the Council to carry it out, shall be submitted to the
Mayor and the Council for its consideration.  A majority of the membership
of the Board may make Board recommendations with any minority views to be
presented in a minority report to the Council.



(Ord. 157, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 30.26  SUBCOMMITTEES.



   The Board may divide its membership into subcommittees, as it deems
necessary to implement its goals and objectives.



(Ord. 157, passed 1-3-2005)




PLANNING COMMISSION




§ 30.40  ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.



   A City Planning Commission for the City of Cologne is hereby continued.



(Ord. 80B, passed 12-18-1989)



§ 30.41  COMPOSITION.



   The Planning Commission shall consist of five members:  four members
shall be appointed by the Council and the appointment may be by a 4/5 vote of
the Council; and the Council shall select one member of the Planning
Commission from amongst its own members.  Of the members of the Commission
first appointed, one shall be appointed for the term of one year, one for the
term of two years, one for the term of three years, and one for the term of
four years.  Their successors shall be appointed for the terms of four
years.  Both original and successive appointees shall hold their offices
until their successors are appointed and qualified.  Vacancies during the
term shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired portion of the term. 
Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the discharge of his or
her duties, take an oath that he or she will faithfully discharge the duties
of his or her office.  All members shall serve with the compensation as may
be set from time to time by the City Council.  The one member selected by
the Council from its members shall serve for the period of time as shall be
determined by the Council by motion.  The member so selected from the
Council shall not be the Mayor.



(Ord. 80B, passed 12-18-1989)



§ 30.42  ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its
members for a term of one year.  The Commission may create and fill the
other offices as it may be determined.



   (B)   The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each
month.  It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep
a record of its resolutions, transactions, and findings, which record shall
be a public record.  On or before January 1 of each year, the Commission
shall submit to the City Council a report of its work during the preceding
year.  Expenditures of the Commission shall be within amounts appropriated
for that purpose by the City Council.



(Ord. 80B, passed 12-18-1989)



§ 30.43  ADOPTION OF PROGRAM OF WORK.



   (A)   Upon the appointment and organization of the Commission, it
shall proceed with the preparation and adoption by resolution of a program of
work, outlining activities proposed to be undertaken in the exercise of its
powers and the performance of its duties.



   (B)   The program will include the following:



      (1)   An outline of data and information to be assembled in
order to conform to the existing comprehensive plan of the City of Cologne;



      (2)   An outline of the types of procedure necessary in order
to implement and make effective the comprehensive city plan; and



      (3)   A regular review procedure of the Cologne zoning and
subdivision ordinances with suggested additions, deletions, or amendments to
the ordinances in order to effectively implement the objectives of the
comprehensive city plan for the City of Cologne.



(Ord. 80B, passed 12-18-1989)



§ 30.44  REVIEW OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   It shall be the function and duty of the Planning Commission to
continually review the existing comprehensive city plan for the physical
development of the city, including proposed public buildings, street
arrangements and improvements, use of property, density of population, and
other matters relating to the physical development of the city.  These
efforts shall be made in cooperation with and in coordination with the
Council.



(Ord. 80B, passed 12-18-1989)



§ 30.45  PROCEDURE FOR REVISION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   Before revising the comprehensive plan or any section of it or any
substantial amendment thereto, the Planning Commission shall hold at least
one public hearing thereon, giving notice of the time and place of the
hearing by publication in the official newspaper at least ten days before the
day of the hearing.  A revision of the comprehensive city plan or any
section or amendment thereto shall be by resolution of the Planning
Commission.  The Commission may from time to time amend or add to the
comprehensive plan or any section thereof as herein provided as it deems
necessary.  Any changes in the comprehensive plan adopted by the Planning
Commission shall be approved and certified by the City Council.



(Ord. 80B, passed 12-18-1989)



§ 30.46  MEANS OF EXECUTING PLAN.



   (A)   Upon the adoption of the comprehensive plan or any section
thereof, it shall be the duty of the Planning Commission to recommend to the
City Council reasonable and practicable means for implementing the plan or
section thereof in order that the same will serve as a pattern and guide for
the orderly physical development of the city and as a basis for the efficient
expenditure of the funds thereof relating to the subjects of the
comprehensive plan.



   (B)   The means shall consist of a zoning plan, the control of
subdivision plats, a plan for future streets, coordination of the normal
public improvements of the city, a long-term program of capital expenditures,
and any other matters as will accomplish the purposes of this section.



(Ord. 80B, passed 12-18-1989)



§ 30.47  ZONING PLAN.



   The Planning Commission upon its own motion may, and upon instructions
by the City Council shall, prepare or amend a proposed zoning plan for the
city.  Before recommending the plan to the City Council, the Planning
Commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon after notice as
required by § 30.45.  The same procedure shall apply for the preparation of
any plan of proposed rights-of-way for future streets or highways or for the
reservations of lands for other public purposes.



(Ord. 80B, passed 12-18-1989)



§ 30.48  OFFICIAL MAP OF STREET EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   The Planning Commission, with the assistance of the City
Engineer, may, and upon instruction by the City Council shall, prepare an
official map of the platted and unplatted portions of the city and adjoining
territory, or portions thereof, indicating upon the map the proposed future
extensions or widening of streets of the city within the existing platted and
developed territory or across the unplatted territory.



   (B)   After the map has been prepared and a hearing on it has been
held as provided in § 30.47, it shall be submitted to the Council which
shall thereupon consider the map and may adopt it, or any part of it, with
the amendments as it deems advisable.  Before the adoption by the Council, a
public hearing shall be held upon the proposal of at least ten days after a
notice thereof has been published in the official newspaper of the city. 
After the map has been adopted by the Council, whenever any existing street
or highway is widened or improved or whenever any new street is opened or
acquired by action of the city, the city shall not be required in the
proceedings to pay damages for the removal of any building or structure
whatsoever constructed upon the mapped street, or situated outside of any
building lane that may have been established upon the existing street or
within any area thus reserved by the map for public purposes, if the building
or structure has been placed there after the adoption and publication of the
map.



(Ord. 80B, passed 12-18-1989)



§ 30.49  PLATS.



   (A)   Every plat of land proposed within the city or within two
miles of the limits of the city shall be submitted to the City Council before
being filed and no plat of land shall be filed unless and until the same
shall first have been approved by the City Council.



   (B)   Any person who violates this provision or who sells land or
offers land for sale or contracts for the sale of land by reference to or by
other use of any plat before the plat has been approved by the Planning
Commission and the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  Before acting on the plat, the
City Council shall submit the same to the Planning Commission for its
recommendations.



   (C)   The Planning Commission, within 40 days after any such plat
has been referred to it by the City Council, shall act on the same and shall
make its recommendations with respect thereto.  The recommendations may
consist of:



      (1)   Recommendation that the City Council approve the plat;



      (2)   Recommendation that the City Council disapprove the
plat, in which case the recommendation shall include a statement of the
specific reasons for the recommendation; or



      (3)   Recommendation that the City Council approve the plat
after specified changes or revisions are made therein, which recommendations
may include the condition that a revised plat, containing the changes or
revisions, be submitted to the Planning Commission, in which case the revised
plat shall be so submitted to the Planning Commission for its further
consideration and recommendation before action thereon by the City Council.



(Ord. 80B, passed 12-18-1989)



§ 30.50  PROCEDURE FOR CHANGES.



   No change shall be made in the zoning plan, future street and public
lands plan, or regulations governing the platting of land after the plans or
regulations have been adopted by the City Council, until the proposed change
shall have been referred to the Planning Commission for report thereon, for
the holding of a public hearing pursuant to M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 3, as it
may be amended from time to time, and an attested copy of the report,
prepared after hearing, shall have been filed with the Council.  Further, no
ordinance or resolution establishing any of the plans or regulations shall be
adopted by the City Council until the ordinance or resolutions establishing
any of the plans or regulations shall have been adopted by the City Council
and until the ordinance or resolution shall have been referred to the
Planning Commission for a report thereon and an attested copy of the report
shall have been filed with the Council.  Failure of the Planning Commission
so to report within 40 days, or any longer period as may be designated by the
Council, after the reference shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed
change.



(Ord. 80B, passed 12-18-1989)



§ 30.51  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval, and publication as provided by law.



(Ord. 80B, passed 12-18-1989)



CHAPTER 31:  FINANCES



Section




Reimbursement of Fees Incurred for Third Party Consultants Relating to Land
Use Matters




   31.01   Findings



   31.02   Initial consultation



   31.03   Subsequent meetings and review prior to application



   31.04   Preapplication complex project review and environmental
review



   31.05   Application requirements



   31.06   Invoices for services



   31.07   Accounting procedures and controls



   31.08   Effective date




Reimbursement for Fire and Rescue Services




   31.20   Reimbursement from nonresident individuals and businesses



   31.21   Noncontracting parties



   31.22   Certain hazards



   31.23   Fee schedule



   31.24   Effective date




Fee Schedules




   31.35   Findings



   31.36   Adoption



   Appendix A:   Fee Schedule



REIMBURSEMENT OF FEES INCURRED FOR THIRD-PARTY CONSULTANTS RELATING TO LAND
USE MATTERS



§ 31.01  FINDINGS.



   (A)   The City of Cologne is located in a section of the Twin Cities
seven-county metropolitan area which is experiencing rapid growth.



   (B)   The city regularly receives inquiries from property owners,
real estate professionals, developers, and proposed purchasers in relation to
city requirements and procedures for annexation, land use planning,
amendments to the city’s comprehensive plan, land subdivision, zoning and
development, environmental review, and other land use issues arising out of
or related to zoning and subdivision ordinances.



   (C)   The city also regularly receives requests from property owners
for various land use matters, including, but not limited to, variances,
conditional use permits, and minor subdivisions.  (The issues referred to in
division (B) above and this division (C) are collectively land use matters.)



   (D)   The city desires to be appropriately responsive to requests
for information and applications concerning land use matters, both within the
city and its environs, but recognizes that a significant amount of city staff
and city consultant time is required by the requests, all of which places a
strain on the limited resources, both personnel and economic, of the city.



   (E)   The city is committed to creating a balance between the need
to provide general background information to property owners, real estate
professionals, developers, and proposed purchasers concerning land use
matters and the city’s policy that the cost of development in general, and
land use matters relating to specific parcels in particular, and the costs
incurred by the city in processing information requests and applications
thereto, should be self-sustaining and not a cost to the city and its
taxpayers.



(Ord. 160, passed 12-6-2004)



§ 31.02  INITIAL CONSULTATION.



   Any property owner, developer, real estate professional, or prospective
purchaser (the requesting party) may schedule one meeting with the city’s
planning consultant relating to general background as to land use matters for
a particular parcel of property within the corporate limits of the city or
its environs (the initial consultation).  The meeting will be scheduled at
the reasonable convenience of the city’s planning consultant.  Based on
preliminary information determined by the planning consultant at the time the
meeting is scheduled, the planning consultant may request that members of
city staff, the city consulting engineer, or the City Attorney attend the
meeting.  The city will only permit one initial consultation per requesting
party or for a particular parcel of real property within a calendar year
unless multiple unaffiliated parties request an initial consultation for a
particular parcel of property.  The length of the initial consultation shall
not exceed 1–1/2 hours.  The city will not seek reimbursement from the
requesting party for city staff and city consultant expenses incurred by the
city for the initial consultation.



(Ord. 160, passed 12-6-2004)



§ 31.03  SUBSEQUENT MEETINGS AND REVIEW PRIOR TO APPLICATION.



   Additional request to the city third party consultants for information,
analysis, review, and assistance relating to land use matters by requesting
parties arising out of or after the initial consultation shall be responded
to within a reasonable time, provided the requesting party agrees to
reimburse the city for amounts the city is invoiced by its third party
consultants to provide the information and services.  The city has limited
personnel and financial resources and, accordingly, the city’s planning,
land use administration, engineering, fiscal consulting, and legal services
are provided by third party consultants.  City staff and/or the planning
consultant shall determine a reasonable estimate of the city consultant fees
likely to be incurred by the city in responding to and analyzing the request
of the requesting party, and the requesting party shall deposit the amount of
the estimated fees with the City Clerk/Treasurer as payment for the services
provided or to be provided by the city third party consultants.  If, at any
time, it appears to city staff or the city’s planning consultant that the
amount of security held by the city is inadequate to defray city third party
consultants costs actually incurred or reasonably anticipated to be incurred
in responding to the request, a new estimate shall be determined and the
requesting party must deposit additional amounts to defray the difference
between the original estimate and the revised estimate.



(Ord. 160, passed 12-6-2004)



§ 31.04  PREAPPLICATION COMPLEX PROJECT REVIEW AND ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW.



   If, because of the size, scope, density, or topography related to a
particular development proposal, the city determines that the proposal is
complex, or in a situation where the requesting party proposes or the city
determines it is advisable that the preparation of an environmental
assessment worksheet, an environmental impact statement, or an alternative
urban areawide review be prepared, the requesting party shall enter into a
cost reimbursement agreement and shall provide the financial security in the
amount of the city’s estimate of the costs to be incurred, in the form
required in § 31.05(B)(2), as a condition precedent to the city undertaking
any work to review the proposal or commence the environmental review.



(Ord. 160, passed 12-6-2004)



§ 31.05  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The requesting party shall reimburse the city for all third
party consulting fees incurred by the city in relation to the review and
processing of the requesting party’s application(s) in relation to land use
matters.



   (B)   All applications related to land use matters shall be
accompanied by a cost reimbursement agreement and financial security in the
manner set forth herein.



      (1)   For applications relating to a request for a variance,
conditional use permit, rezoning or zoning ordinance amendment for single
platted lot or, if not platted, a parcel with a land area of less than two
acres, the cost reimbursement agreement shall be a separate provision
included within the application and the financial security (cash deposit or
letter of credit) for city consultant fees (which is in addition to any
application fees) shall be $500, subject to revision and increase if city
staff or the city’s planning consultant determines that additional security
is reasonably necessary.  If the actual costs for city consultant fees is
less than any cash deposit, the surplus shall be refunded to the requesting
party and any shortfall shall be invoiced to and paid by the requesting party.



      (2)   For all other applications, the requesting party shall,
prior to the submission of the application, request that city staff, in
consultation with the city’s planning consultant, prepare an estimate of
the consultant fees reasonably likely to be incurred by the city in the
reviewing and processing of the application.  The estimate may be revised
from time to time by city staff as the project of the requesting party
expands or diminishes in scope or complexity.  Concurrent with the
submission of the application, the requesting party must execute the city’s
cost reimbursement agreement and deliver the same to the City Clerk/Treasurer
together with the amount of the estimate in cash or provide to the city a
letter of credit in the amount issued by a bank capable of being drawn upon
at a location within the Twin Cities seven-county metropolitan area, in a
form acceptable to the City Attorney.



      (3)   The failure to provide both the cost reimbursement
agreement and financial security required in this section shall make the
application submitted incomplete pursuant to M.S. § 15.99, as it may be
amended from time to time, and the city shall not be required to review and
process the application until the requirements of this section are satisfied.



(Ord. 160, passed 12-6-2004)



§ 31.06  INVOICES FOR SERVICES.



   The City Clerk/Treasurer shall compile the invoices from the city third
party consultants and, no less frequently than once every 90 days, shall
submit a statement and the supporting invoices to the requesting party for
payment.  All third party consultant invoices to the city shall be
segregated for specific land use matters for a requesting party.  The
requesting party shall pay the statement within 15 days.  If the requesting
party disputes the fees of the city’s third party consultants, the
requesting party shall submit a written objection to the fees to the City
Administrator within 15 days of the receipt of the statement from the City
Clerk/Treasurer.  Concurrent with submission of the objection to the fees,
the requesting party must pay the disputed fees to the City Clerk/Treasurer
with instructions to the City Clerk/Treasurer to place the disputed fees into
a separate escrow account.  The requesting party shall first meet with the
City Administrator and the applicable city third party consultants in an
attempt to informally resolve the dispute as to the fees.  If the fee
dispute is not resolved in this manner, the requesting party may have the
matter heard by the City Council.  If the fees dispute is not resolved to
the satisfaction of the requesting party either informally or by the City
Council, the requesting party may assert any appeal rights pursuant to M.S.
§§ 462.361 and 462.353, Subd. 4(d), as they may be amended from time to
time.  The city shall not condition the approval of any requesting party’s
proposed subdivision or development on an agreement to waive the right to
challenge the validity of the fees set forth in this section.



(Ord. 160, passed 12-6-2004)



§ 31.07  ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES AND CONTROLS.



   The fees collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be used solely for
the purpose of reimbursing the city for expenses incurred by the city for its
third party consultants in relation to the reviewing and processing of
requests and applications as to land use matters by a particular requesting
party.  The city shall not use fees collected pursuant to this subchapter
from one requesting party in relation to a particular land use matter for any
purpose other than defraying cots incurred by the city for the use of the
services of its third party consultants in relation to the particular land
use matter.



(Ord. 160, passed 12-6-2004)



§ 31.08  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall be in force and effect on 1-1-2005, after
adoption and publication in the official newspaper of the City of Cologne in
accordance with applicable law.



(Ord. 160, passed 12-6-2004)




REIMBURSEMENT FOR FIRE AND RESCUE SERVICES




§ 31.20  REIMBURSEMENT FROM NONRESIDENT INDIVIDUALS AND BUSINESSES.



   The city may bill and collect in accordance with the city fee schedule
certain sums to recoup cost of providing fire and rescue services to
individuals and businesses which do not have an address within the City Fire
Department’s (the Department) area of service (benefitted area) in the
following instances:



   (A)   Motor vehicle fires and crashes on state and county highways;



   (B)   Snowmobile, ATV, and dirt bike fires and crashes occurring on
a public road or right-of-way, public trail, lake, or park land;



   (C)   Responses to fire calls to or for railroad rights-of-way,
including, but not limited to, grass fires;



   (D)   Fires occurring in the right-of-way of a state highway will be
billed to the Minnesota Department of Transportation;



   (E)   To other governmental entities within the benefitted area
which do not contract with the city for fire and rescue protection services;



   (F)   For all responses to Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
(DNR) or United States Fish and Wildlife Service properties, trails, and
wildlife management areas in the benefitted area that are not covered under
special contract with the DNR or United States Fish and Wildlife Service; and



   (G)   Medical and rescue calls.



(Ord. 151, passed 5-1-2000)



§ 31.21  NONCONTRACTING PARTIES.



   The city may bill and collect in accordance with the city fee schedule
certain sums to recoup costs of providing fire and rescue services to
governmental entities within the benefitted area in the following instances:



   (A)   Fires occurring in the right-of-way of a state highway will be
billed to the Minnesota Department of Transportation;



   (B)   To other governmental entities within the benefitted area
which do not contract with the city for fire and rescue protection services;
and



   (C)   For all responses to DNR property, trails, and wildlife
management areas in the benefitted area that are not covered under special
contract with the DNR or United States Fish and Wildlife Service.



(Ord. 151, passed 5-1-2000)



§ 31.22  CERTAIN HAZARDS.



   Regardless of whether or not the services of the Department are
provided to the individuals and business within the benefitted area, the city
may bill and collect for services provided in the following instances:



   (A)   Responses to any and all hazardous waste, discharges, and
spills will be billed to the responsible party regardless of whether the
responsible party is a resident individual or business within the benefitted
area; and



   (B)   Open burning violations and burning permit violations may be
billed to resident individuals and businesses at the direction of the City
Attorney, the County Attorney, or by the Carver County District Court.



(Ord. 151, passed 5-1-2000)



§ 31.23  FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Generally.  The city hereby adopts the following city fee
schedule for services provided by the Department.



   (B)   Specifically.



      (1)   For motor vehicle accidents and fires.



         (a)   For the initial response with a fire engine,
tanker truck, first response truck, or a fire rescue unit dispatched on a
motor vehicle accident or fire occurring on a public road or right-of-way in
the benefitted area, there will be a $400 charge for the first hour with a
minimum of $400;



         (b)   There will be a charge of $200 for each additional
1/2 hour;



         (c)   The time will run from the time the Department
calls dispatch that they are in service and en route to the scene until they
have notified dispatch that they are out of service and ready to respond to
their next call;



         (d)   There will be a man-hour charge equal to the total
man-hours incurred in the response times the per hour rate set for that
year.  The man-hour rate will be determined each year by the City Council;



         (e)   All extinguishing agents such as Class A or Class
B foam, dry chemical fire extinguisher, or Co2 fire extinguisher shall be
billed at the actual replacement cost of those materials;



         (f)   For expendable materials such as absorption
materials, emulsifiers, or other agents used in cleanup operations, the
actual replacement cost of those materials;



         (g)   For collection of debris, chemicals, fuel, or
contaminated materials resulting from a spill, the actual cost of removal and
disposal at an authorized location; and



         (h)   The total of all these charges will be equally
split in billing to all parties or vehicles involved in any such crash. 
However, if any party to an incident or the driver or owner of the vehicle is
a resident of the benefitted area, the portion of the charges which would be
allocated to the party or individual shall not be billed except as authorized
in division (B)(1)(c) above.



      (2)   Snowmobile, ATV, and dirt bike fires and crashes.



         (a)   For the initial response with a fire engine,
tanker truck, first response truck, or a fire rescue unit dispatched on a
snowmobile, ATV, or dirt bike fire or crash occurring on a public road or
right-of-way in the benefitted area, there will be a $400 charge for the
first hour with a minimum of $400;



         (b)   There will be a charge of $200 for each additional
1/2 hour;



         (c)   The time will run from the time the Department
calls dispatch that they are in service and en route to the scene until they
have notified dispatch that they are out of service and ready to respond to
their next call;



         (d)   There will be a man-hour charge equal to the total
man-hours incurred in the response times the per hour rate set for that
year.  The man-hour rate will be determined each year by the City Council;
and



         (e)   All extinguishing agents such as Class A or Class
B foam, dry chemical fire extinguisher, or Co2 fire extinguisher shall be
billed at the actual replacement cost of those materials.



      (3)   For railroad fires, railroad right-of-way fires,
derailments, and crashes involved in the railroad-owned property.



         (a)   For the initial response with a fire engine,
tanker truck, first response truck, or a fire rescue unit dispatched on a
railroad fire, railroad right-of-way fire, derailment, or crash on any
railroad-owned property in the benefitted area, there will be a $400 charge
for the first hour with a minimum of $400;



         (b)   There will be a charge of $200 for each additional
1/2 hour;



         (c)   The time will run from the time the Department
calls dispatch that they are in service and en route to the scene until they
have notified dispatch that they are out of service and ready to respond to
their next call;



         (d)   There will be a man-hour charge equal to the total
man-hours times the per hour rate set for that year.  This amount will be
determined each year by the City Council;



         (e)   All extinguishing agents such as Class A or Class
B foam, dry chemical fire extinguisher, or Co2 fire extinguisher shall be
billed at the actual replacement cost of those materials; and



         (f)   For expendable materials such as absorption
materials, emulsifiers, or other agents used in cleanup operations, the
actual replacement cost of those materials.



      (4)   Fires occurring in the right-of-way of a state highway.



         (a)   For the initial response with a fire engine,
tanker truck, first response truck, or a fire rescue unit dispatched on a
fire in the right-of-way of any state highway in the benefitted area, there
will be a $400 charge for the first hour with a minimum of $400;



         (b)   There will be a charge of $200 for each additional
1/2 hour;



         (c)   The time will run from the time the Department
calls dispatch that they are in service and en route to the scene until they
have notified dispatch that they are out of service and ready to respond to
their next call;



         (d)   There will be a man-hour charge equal to the total
man-hours times the per hour rate set for that year.  The man-hour rate will
be determined each year by the City Council; and



         (e)   All extinguishing agents such as Class A or Class
B foam, dry chemical fire extinguisher, or Co2 fire extinguisher shall be
billed at the actual replacement cost of those materials.



      (5)   Fires, motor vehicle accidents, and rescues on or
involving any other governmental entities within the benefitted area that are
not covered by contract.



         (a)   For the initial response with a fire engine,
tanker truck, first response truck, or a fire rescue unit dispatched on a
fire, motor vehicle accident, or rescue involving any governmental entity
owning property in the benefitted area without a service contract with the
city, there will be a $400 charge for the first hour with a minimum of $400;



         (b)   There will be a charge of $200 for each additional
1/2 hour;



         (c)   The time will run from the time the Department
calls dispatch that they are in service and en route to the scene until they
have notified dispatch that they are out of service and ready to respond to
their next call;



         (d)   There will be a man-hour charge equal to the total
man-hours times the per hour rate set for that year.  The man-hour rate will
be determined each year by the City Council;



         (e)   All extinguishing agents such as Class A or Class
B foam, dry chemical fire extinguisher, or Co2 fire extinguisher shall be
billed at the actual replacement cost of those materials;



         (f)   For expendable materials such as absorption
materials, emulsifiers, or other agents used in cleanup operations, the
actual replacement cost of those materials; and



         (g)   For collection of debris, chemicals, fuel, or
contaminated materials resulting from a spill, the actual cost of removal and
disposal at an authorized location.



      (6)   For all responses to DNR or United States Fish and
Wildlife Service properties, trails, and wildlife management properties in
the benefitted area.



         (a)   For the initial response with a fire engine,
tanker truck, first response truck, or a fire rescue unit dispatched on a
fire, rescue, or crash occurring on any DNR or United States Fish and
Wildlife Service properties, trails, and wildlife management areas in the
benefitted area without a service contract with the city, there will be a
$400 charge for the first hour with a minimum of $400;



         (b)   There will be a charge of $200 for each additional
1/2 hour;



         (c)   The time will run from the time the Department
calls dispatch that they are in service and en route to the scene until they
have notified dispatch that they are out of service and ready to respond to
their next call;



         (d)   There will be a man-hour charge equal to the total
man-hours times the per hour rate set for that year.  The man-hour rate will
be determined each year by the City Council;



         (e)   All extinguishing agents such as Class A or Class
B foam, dry chemical fire extinguisher, or Co2 fire extinguisher shall be
billed at the actual replacement cost of those materials;



         (f)   For expendable materials such as absorption
materials, emulsifiers, or other agents used in cleanup operations, the
actual replacement cost of those materials;



         (g)   No charges will be imposed if the DNR and the city
enter into a service agreement covering the property to which the Department
responds; and



         (h)   No charges will be imposed if the United States
Fish and Wildlife Service and the city enter into a service agreement
covering the property to which the Service responds.



      (7)   Hazardous material responses and spills.



         (a)   For the initial response with a fire engine,
tanker truck, first response truck, or a fire rescue unit dispatched on a
hazardous material response or spill in the benefitted area, there will be a
$400 charge for the first hour with a minimum of $400;



         (b)   There will be a charge of $200 for each additional
1/2 hour;



         (c)   The time will run from the time the Department
calls dispatch that they are in service and en route to the scene until they
have notified dispatch that they are out of service and ready to respond to
their next call;



         (d)   There will be a man-hour charge equal to the total
man-hours times the per hour rate set for that year.  The man-hour rate will
be determined each year by the City Council;



         (e)   All extinguishing agents such as Class A or Class
B foam, dry chemical fire extinguisher, or Co2 fire extinguisher shall be
billed at the actual replacement cost of those materials;



         (f)   For expendable materials such as absorption
materials, emulsifiers, or other agents used in cleanup operations, the
actual replacement cost of those materials;



         (g)   For collection of debris, chemicals, fuel, or
contaminated materials resulting from a spill, the actual cost of removal and
disposal at an authorized location;



         (h)   All additional cost associated with any evacuation
or news release prompted by the spill; and



         (i)   All additional cost associated with mutual aid or
standby help needed by the Department while they are on the response.



      (8)   Open burning violations and/or burning permit violations.



         (a)   For the initial response with a fire engine,
tanker truck, first response truck, or a fire rescue unit dispatched on a
open burning violations and/or burning permit violations in the benefitted
area, there will be a $400 charge for the first hour with a minimum of $400;



         (b)   There will be a charge of $200 for each additional
1/2 hour;



         (c)   The time will run from the time the Department
calls dispatch that they are in service and en route to the scene until they
have notified dispatch that they are out of service and ready to respond the
their next call;



         (d)   There will be a man-hour charge equal to the total
man-hours times the per hour rate set for that year.  The man-hour rate will
be determined each year by the City Council;



         (e)   All extinguishing agents such as Class A or Class
B foam, dry chemical fire extinguisher, or Co2 fire extinguisher shall be
billed at the actual replacement cost of those materials;



         (f)   For expendable materials such as absorption
materials, emulsifiers, or other agents used in cleanup operations, the
actual replacement cost of those materials;



         (g)   For collection of debris, chemicals, fuel, or
contaminated materials resulting from a spill, the actual cost of removal and
disposal at an authorized location;



         (h)   All additional cost associated with any evacuation
or news release prompted by the spill; and



         (i)   All additional cost associated with mutual aid or
standby help needed by the Department while they are on the response.



(Ord. 151, passed 5-1-2000)



§ 31.24  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall be effective upon adoption and publication
according to law.



(Ord. 151, passed 5-1-2000)




FEE SCHEDULES




§ 31.35  FINDINGS.



   (A)   The City of Cologne is located in a section of the Twin Cities
seven-county metropolitan area which is experiencing rapid growth.



   (B)   The city provides numerous services to residents, landowners,
developers, and issues certain permits and licenses and processes various
land use applications.



   (C)   It is the city’s intention that license, permit, and
application fees and rates for various services provided by the city are
reviewed periodically.



   (D)   In order to defray the costs associated with the provision of
various services by the city and to defray the costs associated with
developments and applications for any land use matters, the city must charge
appropriate fees.



   (E)   The fees listed in this section will supersede the respective
fees listed in Ordinance 161- I.



(Ord. 161B, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 161C, passed 12-17-2007; Ord. 161-I,
passed 12-16-2013; Ord. 161-J, passed 1-5-2015)



§ 31.36  ADOPTION.



   The Fee Schedule, attached hereto as Appendix A of this chapter, is
hereby adopted and shall be in full force and effect on January 1, 2017,
following adoption and publication in the official newspaper of the City of
Cologne in accordance with applicable law.



(Ord. 161B, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 161C, passed 12-17-2007; Ord. 161-I,
passed 12-16-2013; Ord. 161-J, passed 1-5-2015; Ord. 161-K, passed
12-21-2015; Ord. 161-L, passed 12-19-2016)



APPENDIX A:  FEE SCHEDULE



Effective January 1, 2017, per Ordinance 161-L:



UTILITIES



 

Storm Water Rates (Monthly)



Residential

 

$3.50




Commercial (1/4 acre or less)

 

$3.50




Commercial (>1/4 acre or up to 1/2 acre)

 

$4.00




Commercial (>1/2 acre up to 3/4 acre)

 

$4.50




Commercial (>3/4 acre)

 

$5.00




 



 

Water Rates




0-7,500 gallons
 
$11.53 base/$5.00 per 1,000 gallons


7,501-20,000 gallons
 
$5.50 per 1,000 gallons


20,001-50,000 gallons
 
$6.25 per 1,000 gallons


50,001-100,000 gallons
 
$7.00 per 1,000 gallons


Over 100,000 gallons
 
$7.75 per 1,000 gallons


MN Water Supply Service Connection Fee
 
$0.58 per month


Hydrant Sales
 
$6.30 per 1,000 gallons plus $60.00 hookup fee


Water Disconnect/Reconnect Fee
 
$75.00 each


Water Plant Fee
 
$7.00 per month




 



 

Sewer Rates


Based on average use May-October and actual use November-April
 
$6.00 per 1,000 gallons of water ERU (Equivalent Resident Unit) $13.30 per
month



 



 

Utility Connection Fees




Water Hookup
 
$140.00


Water Meter
 
$350.00


Water Permit
 
$65.00


Water Trunk Fee
 
$3,000.00


Sewer Hookup
 
$140.00


Sewer Permit
 
$65.00


Sewer Trunk Fee
 
$2,750.00


Curbstop Cover
 
$100.00




 



LIQUOR LICENSES



 

Annual




On-Sale Liquor
 
$1,750.00


Off-Sale Liquor
 
$100.00


CCC On-Sale Liquor
 
$525.00


Sunday Liquor
 
$210.00


On-Sale Wine
 
$310.00


3.2% License (Commercial)
 
$110.00


3.2% License (Non-Profit)
 
$55.00




 



 

Temporary



1–3 Day Intoxicating

 

$55.00




1–3 Day Intoxicating S.C.*

 

$160.00




3.2% License

 

$30.00



NOTE TO TABLE:

*S.C. = Special Council Meeting



 



 

New Licenses


Investigation Fee
 
$350.00



 



 

MISCELLANEOUS ANNUAL LICENSES AND OTHER FEES




Adult Use Permit Fee
 
$3,570.00


Adult Use Permit Investigation Fee
 
$310.00


Sanitation/Solid Waste Haulers
 
$175.00 per vehicle used in Cologne
(up to three licensees per year)


Peddler, Transient Merchant
 
$200.00 Annual License Fee


Solicitor
 
No charge


Utilities/Special Assessment Search (Written)
 
$35.00


Returned Checks
 
$35.00


Utility Installation Review 4 Blocks or Less
 
$80.00


Utility Installation Review 4 Blocks or Greater
 
$160.00


Rental Property Inspection (Including 1 Reinspection)
 
$55.00 base/$12.00 per unit bi-annually


Rental Property Reinspections Greater Than 2
 
$80.00/each additional


Late Fee - Utility Bills
 
5% of past due balance/month


Late Fee - Other Items
 
18% APR




 



 

BUILDING PERMITS


Total Valuation
 
Building Permit Fee




$1.00 to $500.00
 
$25.50


$501.00 to $2,000.00
 
$25.50 for the first $500.00, plus $3.32 for each additional $100.00, or
fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00


$2,001.00 to $25,000.00
 
$75.30 for the first $2,000.00, plus $15.05 for each additional $1,000.00, or
fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00


$25,001.00 to $50,000.00
 
$431.80 for the first $25,000.00, plus $10.97 for each additional $1,000.00,
or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00


$50,001.00 to $100,000.00
 
$706.05 for the first $50,000.00, plus $7.65 for each additional $1,000.00,
or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00


$100,000.00 to $500,000.00
 
$1,088.55 for the first $100,000.00, plus $6.12 for each additional
$1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00


$500,000.00 to $1,000,000.00
 
$3,536.55 for the first $500,000.00, plus $5.10 for each additional
$1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00


$1,000,000.00 and up
 
$6,086.55 for the first $1,000,000.00, plus $4.08 for each additional
$1,000.00, or fraction thereof


State Surcharge Fee
 
0.0005 of Building Valuation - Minimum of $0.50




 



 

Additional Building Permit Fees




Residential Zoning Fee
 
$110.00


Plumbing Fee
 
$6.00/fixture - minimum of $50.00


Mechanical Fee
 
$70.00


Reroofing/Residing/Rewindow (Same Size)
 
$80.00


Fence/Accessory Structure Fee (150 sq. ft. or less)
 
$50.00


Plan Check Fee
 
67% of Building Permit Fee


Redundant Plan Check Fee
 
27% of Building Permit Fee


Fixed Cost Building Permit Surcharge
 
Rate set by state


Erosion Control Fee
 
$30.00


Trail/Transportation (HHH) Fee
 
$735.00




 



LAND USE FEES



 


Preliminary Plat Applications




Residential Escrow*

 

$1,100.00




Residential Processing Fee

 

$510.00 plus $30.00/lot




Non-residential Escrow*

 

$1,200.00




Non-residential Processing Fee

 

$850.00 plus $30.00/lot



NOTE TO TABLE:

*Escrow must be replenished when the balance falls below $200.00



 



 

Final Plat Applications


Civil Defense Fee
 
$40.00 ERU


Map Updating Fee
 
$12.50/lot



 



 


Concept Plan Review/Site Plan Review Deposit**




Residential - Single Lot

 

$110.00




Residential - Multiple Lots

 

$510.00




Commercial Lot

 

$255.00



NOTE TO TABLE:

**Actual costs will be deducted, any unused portion will be refunded. Excess
costs will be billed to applicant.



 



 


Variances, Conditional Use Permits, and Other Requests Requiring a Public
Hearing




Application Fee

 

$255.00




Consulting Escrow**

 

$255.00



NOTE TO TABLE:

**Actual costs will be deducted, any unused portion will be refunded. Excess
costs will be billed to applicant.



 



 

Sign Permits


Permanent
 
$60.00


Temporary
 
No charge



 



COLOGNE FITNESS CENTER



 

Monthly Rates



Single - Resident

 

$20.00




Single - Business Owner/Employee

 

$21.00




Single - Regular

 

$24.00




Second Family Member

 

$9.00




Each Additional After Second Member

 

$5.00




Daily Rate

 

$3.00




 



 

Monthly City Employee/CFD Rates



Single

 

$10.00




Second Family Member

 

$9.00




Each Additional After Second Member

 

$5.00




 



 

Other Charges



Initial Sign-up Fee - First Member

 

$20.00




Sign-up Fee for Each Additional Member

 

$10.00




Lost Card Replacement

 

$15.00




Reactivate Account

 

$10.00




30-day Notice to Discontinue Membership

 

No charge




 



LOUIS HALL



 

   Daily Rental
 
   $75.00



 



COLOGNE COMMUNITY CENTER



 

Conference Room


   Per Hour
 
   $20.00/hour; Max $50.00/day



 



 

Community Room (Per Day)


Resident (Friday to Sunday and Holidays)
 

$60.00



Regular (Friday to Sunday and Holidays)
 

$80.00



Resident (Monday to Thursday, excluding holidays)
 

$40.00



Regular/Com. (Monday to Thursday, excluding holidays)
 

$50.00




 



 

Gymnasium



Sporting Events/Practices/Activities

 

$22.50/hour




Monday to Friday
5:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.

 

$15.00/hour;
Max $80.00/day after 8:00 a.m.




Fitness Classes (Minimum 6 Classes)

 

$10.00/class - Up to 1 hour




 



 

Social Gatherings (Gym and Serving Kitchen)



Per Hour (4 Hour Minimum)

 

$35.00/hour




 



 

Birthday Party Rental



3 Hours Gym and Serving Kitchen

 

$80.00




 



 

Gymnasium - Weddings/Large Event (Full Day Use)





Facility Charge

 

$500.00




Event Clean Up and Takedown

 

$400.00




Event Security

 

$200.00




Full Drapery

 

$500.00




Ceiling Drapery

 

$350.00




Accessory Drapery (All Pieces)

 

$150.00




Stage Drapery Only

 

$50.00





 



 

Wedding - Additional Services



Wedding Setup

 

$225.00




Place Setting (Dishes/Utensils/Water Glass)

 

$0.50/each




Wedding Early Access -



1:00 p.m. day before (If Available)

 

$50.00




Wedding Early Access -



11:00 a.m. day before (If Available)

 

$100.00




 



 

Serving Kitchen



Daily Rental

 

$30.00




 



 

Damage Deposits



Wedding/Large Event

 

$250.00




Social Gathering

 

$100.00




Community Room/Birthday Party/Louis Hall

 

$50.00




 



MISCELLANEOUS



 

Photocopy Fees



Black and White 8.5 x 11

 

$0.25 per page




Black and White 11 x 17

 

$0.50 per page




Color 8.5 x 11

 

$0.50 per page




Color 11 x 17

 

$1.00 per page




 



 

CCC Equipment


Projector Screen
 

$25.00



Projector
 

$25.00



Wireless Microphone
 

$25.00



Microphone Mixer
 

$25.00




 



 

Old Fire Station



Tables

 

$5.00




Chairs

 

$1.00




 



(Ord. 161B, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 161C, passed 12-17-2007; Ord. 161-D,
passed 12-15-2009; Ord. 161-E, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 161-F, passed
12-6-2010; Ord. 161-H, passed 1-7-2013; Ord. 161-I, passed 12-16-2013; Ord.
161-J, passed 1-5-2015; Ord. 161-K, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 161-L, passed
12-19-2016)



CHAPTER 32:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   32.01   Policy and purpose



   32.02   Definitions



   32.03   Establishment of emergency management organization



   32.04   Powers and duties of Director



   32.05   Local emergencies



   32.06   Emergency regulations



   32.07   Emergency management a government function



   32.08   Participation in labor disputes or politics



   32.09   Violations



§ 32.01  POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds, or other natural causes, or from sabotage,
hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure;
and in order to ensure that preparations of this city will be adequate to
deal with those disasters, and, generally, to provide for the common defense
and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the
lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and
declared to be necessary:



   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization
responsible for city planning and preparation for emergency government
operations in time of disasters;



   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during
emergencies and disasters;



   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city
and other political subdivisions of this state and of other states with
respect to the carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions; and



   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be
amended from time to time, which requires that each political subdivision of
the state shall establish a local organization for emergency management.



§ 32.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISASTER.  A situation which creates an immediate and serious
impairment to the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has
resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for
which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area
are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.



   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.  The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado, and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous
material mishaps.  These functions include, without limitation, firefighting
services, police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning
services, communications, radiological, and chemical, evacuation, congregate
care, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of
plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other
functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions.  EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT includes those activities sometimes referred to as civil defense
functions.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES.  The total personnel resources engaged in
city-level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter or any rule or order thereunder.  This includes personnel
from city departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and
agencies.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.  The staff responsible for
coordinating city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. 
This organization provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state,
and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and
assures implementation of federal and state program requirements.



§ 32.03  ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.



   There is hereby created within the city government an emergency
management organization which shall be under the supervision and control of
the City Emergency Management Director, called the Director.  The Director
shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term and may be
removed by the Council at any time.  The Director shall serve with a salary
as established by the City Council and shall be paid his or her necessary
expenses.  The Director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, and operation of the emergency preparedness
organization, subject to the direction and control of the Council.



§ 32.04  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state
conference for emergency management.  The Director shall develop proposed
mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for
reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great
to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the
Council for its action.  These arrangements shall be consistent with the
State Emergency Plan.



   (B)   The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human
resources, industries, resources, and facilities of the city as deemed
necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan
for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster.  The
Director shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures,
service staffs, boards, and sub-boards required, in accordance with state and
federal plans and directions subject to the approval of the Mayor.



   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for
the emergency preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the
Council for its approval.  When the Council has approved the plan, it shall
be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the
city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. 
The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time.  The Director
shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end
that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans
of the federal government and the state and correlated with emergency plans
of the county and other political subdivisions within the state.



   (D)   In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the
Director shall institute training programs and public information programs
and conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be
necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan
when a disaster occurs.



   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies, and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to
the maximum extent practicable.  The officers and personnel of all city
departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate
with and extend services and facilities to the city’s emergency management
organization and to the Governor upon request.  The head of each department
or agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the
planning and programming of those emergency activities as will involve the
utilization of the facilities of the department or agency.



   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments
and agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting, and training of
emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state.  To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.



   (G)   Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director
shall coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations
within the city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs
as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several
services as provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and
regulations issued by the Governor with reference to emergency management.



   (I)   The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency
preparedness activities when requested by the Mayor.



§ 32.05  LOCAL EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or
her legal successor.  It shall not be continued for a period in excess of
three days except by or with the consent of the Council.  Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be
given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the
City Clerk/Treasurer.



   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary
portions of the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or
inter-jurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance
thereunder.



   (C)   No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local
emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency
functions.  However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall provide
aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.



§ 32.06  EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare
for an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the
Governor or the Council, the Council may by resolution promulgate
regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation,
respecting:  the conduct of persons and the use of property during
emergencies; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public
services, emergency health, fire, and safety regulations, drills or practice
periods required for preliminary training, and all other matters which are
required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in declared
emergencies.



   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing;
shall be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains,
if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City
Clerk/Treasurer.  A copy shall be kept posted and available for public
inspection during business hours.  Notice of the existence of these
regulations and their availability for inspection at the City
Clerk/Treasurer’s office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the
City Hall or other headquarters of the city or at other places in the
affected area as the Council shall designate in the resolution.  By
resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.



   (C)   The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any
time.  If not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of
30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it
relates, whichever comes first.  Any resolution, rule, or regulation
inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be
suspended during the period of time and to the extent conflict exists.



   (D)   During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions
of M.S. § 12.31, as it may be amended from time to time, and notwithstanding
any statutory or Charter provision to the contrary, empowered, through its
Council, acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter
into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by
protecting the health and safety of persons and property and providing
emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster.  The city may exercise
these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without
compliance with the time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by
law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering rental equipment
agreements, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies,
and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds, including, but not
limited to, publication of resolutions, publication of calls for bids,
provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to low bids, and
requirement for bids.



§ 32.07  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.



   All functions and activities relating to emergency management are
hereby declared to be governmental functions.  The provisions of this
section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which
he or she would otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the
worker’s compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any
person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.



§ 32.08  PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.



   The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form
of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.



§ 32.09  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted thereunder relating to acts, omissions, or conduct other than
official acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE V:  PUBLIC UTILITIES



      Chapter




         50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         51.   WATER REGULATIONS





         52.   SEWER REGULATIONS





         53.   STORM WATER





         54.   BROADBAND SERVICE




CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   50.01   Purpose and general fee structure



   50.02   Effective date



 



   50.98   Violations



§ 50.01  PURPOSE AND GENERAL FEE STRUCTURE.



   (A)   The City of Cologne provides a variety of public services to
residents, businesses, and property owners in the community, including public
utilities.  Municipal water, wastewater treatment, storm water management,
and street lighting are basic public utilities and among the services
provided by the city. The City Council periodically reviews the costs for the
provision of these services and adjusts the fees for services accordingly.



   (B)   The fee structure for each utility is identified separately
and includes provisions for the reimbursement of core facility expenditures
and operating expenditures.  The fee structure includes existing
expenditures (including debt service) and planned expenditures (including
anticipated debt service) within the public utility systems.  Core facility
expenditures include, but are not limited to, such items as water wells and
related equipment, trunk water distribution lines, water treatment
facilities, water storage facilities, sanitary sewer lift stations, trunk
sanitary sewer lines, wastewater treatment facilities, and storm water
management facilities.  Operating expenditures include, but are not limited
to, labor and capital expenditures associated with the delivery, monitoring,
maintenance, repair, replacement, upgrade, and administration of the public
utility system.



   (C)   The fee structure for core facilities is based upon an
Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU), and the fees collected are referred to as
trunk charges.  Trunk charges are collected at the time of building permit
issuance; although, the City Council may require prepayment of trunk charges
for certain core facilities at the time of subdivision or development
approval.  The core facilities ERU is established for all land uses as
follows:



 

Single-family detached dwelling
 
1.0 ERU


Single-family attached dwelling (<8 units/building)
 
1.0 ERU


Multiple-family dwelling (>7 units/building)
 
0.8 ERU


Commercial/Industrial/Public/Institutional/Other
 
1.0 ERU for each Metropolitan Council Service Availability Charge (SAC) unit
assigned to the use



 



   (D)   The fee structure for operating expenditures is based upon
utility usage and is collected through monthly billings to utility users.



   (E)   The rates, fees, trunk charges and charges for public utility
services are established by City Council from time to time.



(Ord. 159, passed 10-6-2003)



§ 50.02  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall become effective on 11-1-2003.



(Ord. 159, passed 10-6-2003)



§ 50.98  VIOLATIONS.



   All violations of this subchapter shall be considered a misdemeanor and
shall be punishable to the maximum extent of the law.



(Ord. 159, passed 10-6-2003)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER REGULATIONS



Section



   51.01   General operation



   51.02   Use of water service



   51.03   Use to circumvent chapter prohibited



   51.04   Damage to water system



   51.05   Connections beyond city boundaries



   51.06   Connection to system required; use of private wells



   51.07   Use of water for air conditioning; permits



   51.08   Use of water from fire hydrants; temporary connections



   51.09   Water deficiency, shut off and use restrictions




Water Regulations




   51.25   Supply from one service



   51.26   Tapping of mains restricted



   51.27   Repairs



   51.28   Abandoned or unused services



   51.29   Disconnection permit



   51.30   Service pipes



   51.31   Excavation and construction requirements



   51.32   Connection to other water supplies restricted



   51.33   Water connections; applications and charges



   51.34   Location of curb stop box



   51.35   Water meters




Rates and Charges




   51.50   Water unit



   51.51   Rates, fees and charges generally



   51.52   Water service billing; change of address



   51.53   Water rates



   51.54   Payment of charges; late payment; collection




Administration and Enforcement




   51.70   Supervision by Utilities Superintendent; licensing



   51.71   Powers and authority of inspectors



   51.72   Discontinuance of service



   51.73   Authorized employees to turn water on and off



   51.74   Liability for expense, loss or damage



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.01  GENERAL OPERATION.



   The city does hereby make provision for the establishment of a
municipal water system (hereinafter called the water system) to be operated
as a public utility.



§ 51.02  USE OF WATER SERVICE.



   No person other than a city employee shall uncover or make or use any
water service installation connected to the city water system except in the
manner provided by this chapter.  No person shall make or use any
installation contrary to the regulatory provisions of this chapter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.03  USE TO CIRCUMVENT CHAPTER PROHIBITED.



   No person shall permit water from the water system to be used for any
purpose to circumvent this chapter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.04  DAMAGE TO WATER SYSTEM.



   (A)   No unauthorized person shall remove or damage any structure,
appurtenance, or part of the water system or fill or partially fill any
excavation or move any gate valve used in the water system.



   (B)   No person shall make any connection of an electrical welder to
the city water main, appurtenance or service or use an electric welder for
the purpose of thawing frozen water mains, appurtenances or services.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.05  CONNECTIONS BEYOND CITY BOUNDARIES.



   Where water mains of the city are in any street or alley adjacent to or
outside the corporate limits of the city, the City Council may issue permits
to the owners or occupants of properties adjacent or accessible to the water
main to make proper water service pipe connections with the water mains of
the city and to be supplied with water in conformity with the applicable
provisions of this chapter and subject to any contract for the supply of
water between the city and any other city.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.06  CONNECTION TO SYSTEM REQUIRED; USE OF PRIVATE WELLS.



   (A)   Except where municipal water is not available, it shall be
unlawful to construct, reconstruct, or repair any private water system which
is designed or intended to provide water for human consumption.  Private
wells, to provide water for other than human consumption, may be constructed,
maintained and continued in use after connection is made to the water system;
provided, there is no means of cross-connection between the private well and
municipal water supply at any time.  Hose bibbs that will enable the
cross-connection of the two systems are prohibited on internal piping of the
well system supply.  Where both private and city systems are in use, outside
hose bibbs shall not be installed on both systems.



   (B)   All new homes or buildings shall connect to the municipal
water system if water is available to the property.  At the time as
municipal water becomes available to existing homes or buildings, a direct
connection shall be made to the public system within a period of time as
determined by the City Council.  If the connection is not made pursuant to
this chapter, a charge shall be made in an amount established by § 51.51.



   (C)   Where new homes or buildings do not have water available to
the property, the city shall determine whether and under what conditions the
municipal water system will be extended to serve the property.



   (D)   If the well is not to be used after the time a municipal water
connection is made:



      (1)   The well pump and tank shall be disconnected from all
internal piping;



      (2)   The casing shall be filled with sandy soil from the
bottom to a point eight feet from the top;



      (3)   The remaining eight feet shall be filled with concrete
to the floor level and the well casing cut off as close to the floor level as
possible;



      (4)   Within 30 days after the municipal water connection is
made, the owner or occupant must advise the City Utilities Superintendent
that the well has been sealed.



      (5)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, all well abandonment
shall be done in accordance with M.S. §§ 103I.301 to 103I.345 and Minn.
Rules Ch. 4725, Wells and Borings, as it may be amended from time to time.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.07  USE OF WATER FOR AIR CONDITIONING; PERMITS.



   (A)   All air conditioning systems which are connected directly or
indirectly with the public water system must be equipped with water
conserving and water regulating devices as approved by the City Engineer or
City Utilities Superintendent.



   (B)   Permits shall be required for the installation of all air
conditioning systems to the public water system.  The fee shall be
established pursuant to § 51.51.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.08  USE OF WATER FROM FIRE HYDRANTS; TEMPORARY CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   Use of fire hydrants.  Except for extinguishment of fires, no
person, unless authorized by the Public Works Director or Public Utilities
Department, shall operate fire hydrants or interfere in any way with the
water system without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city as
follows:



      (1)   A permit to use a fire hydrant shall be issued for each
individual job or contract and for a minimum of 30 days and for the
additional 30 day period as the city shall determine.  The permit shall
state the location of the hydrant and shall be for the use of that hydrant
and none other.



      (2)   The user shall make an advance cash deposit to guarantee
payment for water used and to cover breakage and damage to the hydrant and
meter, which shall be refunded upon expiration of the permit, less applicable
charges for use.



      (3)   The user shall relinquish the use of the hydrant to
authorized city employees in emergency situations.



      (4)   The user shall pay a rental charge as established
pursuant to § 51.51 for each day including Sundays and legal holidays, and a
fee as established by the City Council from time to time for each 1,000
gallons of water used.



   (B)   Temporary connection to fire hydrants.  An owner of a private
water system may make a temporary above ground connection to a fire hydrant,
subject to the time periods, conditions, and payment specified in § 51.51. 
In addition, the method of connection to the private system shall conform to
all existing requirements of this chapter and city ordinance and the type of
meter used shall meet the approval of the Utilities Superintendent.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.09  WATER DEFICIENCY, SHUT OFF AND USE RESTRICTIONS.



   The city shall not be liable for any deficiency or failure in the
supply of water to consumers, whether occasioned by shutting the water off
for the purpose of making repairs or connections or from any other cause
whatsoever.  In case of fire, or alarm of fire, or in making repairs of
construction of new works, water may be shut off without notice at any time
and kept off as long as necessary.  In addition, the City Council shall have
the right to impose reasonable restrictions on the use of the city water
system in emergency situations.  For non-payment of charges, water service
may be discontinued according to the procedures established in § 51.72.



WATER REGULATIONS



§ 51.25  SUPPLY FROM ONE SERVICE.



   No more than one housing unit or building shall be supplied from one
service connection except by permission of City Council.  Each unit served
shall have a separate water meter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.26  TAPPING OF MAINS RESTRICTED.



   No person, except persons authorized by the City Council, shall tap any
distributing main or pipe of the water supply system or insert stopcocks or
ferrules therein.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.27  REPAIRS.



   (A)   Determination of need for repairs.  Based on the information
supplied by the property owner or available to the city, the city will make a
determination whether a problem exists in that portion of the service which
is the city's responsibility.  If the problem, appears to exist in the areas
for which the city has no responsibility, the private owners will be
responsible for correction of the problem.



   (B)   Thawing of water services.  The city will attempt to thaw
water services on request of the resident.  If the problem is found within
that portion of the service for which the private owner is responsible, the
private owner thereafter will be responsible for thawing the service and
correction of the problem.



   (C)   Excavation or repair of water service.



      (1)   The city will arrange for the investigative digging up
and repair of any water service where the problem apparently exists within
that area for which the city has responsibility.



      (2)   Unless it is clearly evident, however, that the problem
is the responsibility of the city, the excavation and repair will not be made
until the property owner requests the city in writing to excavate or repair
the service and agrees to pay the cost.



      (3)   The owner further agrees to waive public hearing and be
special assessed the cost of the excavation and repair if the problem is
found to be other than the city's responsibility.  The city will make the
determination for responsibility of the cost of investigation or repair.



      (4)   The matter of whether the dig up is done by city forces
or contracted would depend on the urgency or need of repair and the
availability of city forces to do the work.  Recovery by the city for faulty
construction will depend upon the circumstances and the decision of the City
Attorney on the likelihood of recovery.



   (D)   Failure to repair.  In case of failure upon the part of any
consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring in his or her service pipe
within 24 hours after verbal or written notice thereof, the water may be
turned off by the city and shall not be turned on until the leak has been
repaired and a fee pursuant to § 51.51 has been paid to the city.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.28  ABANDONED OR UNUSED SERVICES.



   (A)   If the premises served by water have been abandoned, or if the
service has not been used for one year, then the service shall be shut off at
the curb stop box by the city and the water meter will be removed.



   (B)   When new buildings are erected on the site of old ones, and it
is desired to increase or change the old water service, no connections with
the mains shall be made until all the old service has been removed and the
main taps plugged or yoked connections installed by the city at the owner's
expense.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.29  DISCONNECTION PERMIT.



   A permit must be obtained to disconnect from the existing water service
leads at the curb stop box.  The fee for the permit shall be set pursuant to
§ 51.51.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.30  SERVICE PIPES.



   Every service pipe shall be laid so as to allow at least one foot of
extra length in order to prevent rupture by settlement.  The service pipe
must be placed no less than seven feet below the ground and in  a manner as
to prevent rupture by freezing.  Service pipes must extend from the curb
stop box to the inside of the building, or if not taken into the building,
then to the hydrant or fixtures which it is intended to supply.  Type K
copper tubing shall be used.  All services over two inches shall be ductile
or cast iron.  All underground joints are to be mechanical, except joints
under floors shall be silver soldered, unless otherwise approved by the
Utilities Superintendent.  Joints of copper tubing shall be kept, to a
minimum, with not more than one joint used for service for each 70 feet in
length.  Splicing may be approved with three-piece unions only.  All joints
and connections shall be left uncovered until inspected by the Utilities
Superintendent and tested at normal water line pressure.  Unions must be
three-part type.  All services over two inches shall be cast iron. 
Connections with the mains for domestic supply shall be at least
three-quarter inch up to the curb stop box.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.31  EXCAVATION AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No excavation shall be made until a permit for the connection
has been issued by the city.



   (B)   No water service pipe or water connection shall be installed
in the same trench or closer than ten feet horizontally to a sewer trench or
drain laid, or to be laid, either in the street or in private property,
except that the water pipe on private property may be in a common trench with
a sewer drain which is of a material that is in conformance with the current
Minnesota Plumbing Code, Minn. Rules Ch. 4715, as it may be amended from time
to time.



   (C)   Where it is desired to lay the water service pipe and the
building sewer pipe in the same trench, or in separate trenches less than ten
feet apart, the water service pipe shall be above the sewer pipe unless
approved by the City Engineer.  It shall be placed at least one foot above
the sewer and on a solid shelf excavated at one side of the trench.  The
sewer pipe shall be of a material that is in conformance with the Minnesota
Plumbing Code with tested watertight joints.  The water service pipe shall
be watertight and corrosion resistant.  Copper pipe and ductile or cast iron
water pipe with specially protected joints is acceptable for this
construction.  Cast iron pipe shall conform to the American Water Works
Association specifications for this pipe.  Bell joint clamps with rubber
gaskets are provisionally acceptable as extra protection for the joints on
cast iron water pipe.  In all cases, precautions shall be taken to assure a
firm foundation for the pipes.  The intervening space between the pipes
shall be backfilled with compacted earth.



   (D)   In case the installation is on a surfaced street, the
following shall apply:  All backfill materials shall be mechanically
compacted in 12-inch layers to the density of the adjacent material in the
roadway area and to the existing street grades in accordance with the
Minnesota Department of Transportation Standards.  Complete surface
restoration shall be made.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.32  CONNECTION TO OTHER WATER SUPPLIES RESTRICTED.



   No water pipe of the water system shall be connected with any pump,
well, tank, or piping that is connected with any other source of water supply
except to service municipal systems.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.33  WATER CONNECTIONS; APPLICATIONS AND CHARGES.



   (A)   Water permit fee.



      (1)   All applications for service installations and for water
service shall be made to the City Clerk.  All applications for service
installations and water service shall be made by the owner or agent of the
property to be served and shall state the size and location of service
connection required.  The applicant shall, at the time of making
application, pay to the city the amount of fees as established by the City
Council, as may be amended from time to time or deposit required for the
installation of the service connection as hereinafter provided. 
Applications for services larger than one inch shall be accompanied by two
sets of plans or sketches indicating preferred location of service pipe and
size of service based on building demand.



      (2)   The size of the water service connections and meter
shall be subject to approval of the City Engineer.



      (3)   Water billing shall start at the time of installation of
the water meter, or in the event the meter is not installed, seven days after
completion of outside piping, and shall be calculated upon the minimum
quarterly rate, prorated on a semi-monthly basis.



   (B)   Water hookup fee.



      (1)   A permit must be obtained to connect to the existing
water service leads at the curb stop box.  The fee for the permit shall be
set pursuant to § 51.51.  The city shall install or have installed all
service connections from the water main to the curb stop box including the
stop box.  Payment for service connections must be made before the work is
started and should be based upon 1½ times the estimate of costs provided by
the City Engineer.  Any excess deposit shall be returned to the applicant.



      (2)   Additional charges shall be paid at the time of making
application for tapping and making connections with the water main to where a
curb stop box and service lead is not previously installed.  The charge
shall include the tapping of the water main, corporation cocks, the
installation of a service line, the  installation of a curb stop box, cost
of restoring disturbed areas and all other costs related to the installation.



      (3)   There shall be a connection charge pursuant to § 51.51
levied by the city to contribute to the payment of the costs of the Public
Water System Facilities.  The City Council shall set by resolution the
charges to be made for nonresidential installations.



      (4)   When water services have been stopped because of a
violation of this chapter, the city shall collect the fee established
pursuant to § 51.51 before service is recommenced.



      (5)   If a person desires to connect to the system and service
a parcel that has not been assessed for the cost of water main and lateral
construction, then before a permit is granted, the city shall collect an
amount from the applicant that is established pursuant to § 51.51.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.34  LOCATION OF CURB STOP BOX.



   Curb stop boxes will be installed on the right-of-way line or easement
limits at a location as determined by the City Engineer to be best suitable
to the property and shall be left in a vertical position when backfilling is
completed.  Curb stop boxes will be installed at an approximate depth of
seven feet below the finished ground elevation and the top of the curb stop
box shall be adjusted to be flush with the finished ground elevation.  Curb
stop boxes must be firmly supported by a masonry block.  No person shall
erect any fence or plant any tree or other landscaping that would obstruct,
or place a structure on, park a motor vehicle on, or otherwise obstruct the
use of the curb stop box, or cause damage to the same.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.35  WATER METERS.



   (A)   Generally.  Except for extinguishment of fires, no person,
unless otherwise authorized by the City Council or Public Utilities
Department, shall use water from the water system or permit water to be drawn
therefrom unless the same be metered by passing through a meter supplied or
approved by the city.  No person not authorized by the City Council or
Utilities Superintendent shall connect, disconnect, take apart, or in any
manner change or cause to be changed or interfere with any meter or the
action thereof, or break any meter or valve seal.



      (1)   A charge established pursuant to § 51.51 shall be paid
by customers to the city for water meters including installations and check
valves and payment for same shall be made at the time of water service
application.  This payment shall be made only once, subject to the following.



      (2)   Where a consumer has need for a larger line in addition
to his or her domestic line, as in the case of a commercial consumer who
needs a one-inch line for normal use and a six-inch or larger line for a fire
sprinkler system, he or she will be permitted to run one line into the
premises and “Y” off into two lines at the building.  When this is done,
the meter will be attached to the small or domestic line and a check valve as
well as one-inch detection meter shall be put on the large line.



      (3)   The city shall maintain and repair all meters when
rendered unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear and shall replace them
if necessary.  When replacement, repair, or adjustment of any meter is
rendered by the act, neglect (including damage from freezing or hot water
backup) or carelessness of the owner or occupant of the premises, any expense
caused the city thereby shall be charged against and collected from the water
consumer.



      (4)   A consumer may, by written request, have his or her
meter tested by depositing the amount established pursuant to § 51.51.  In
case a test should show an error of over 5% of the water consumed, a
correctly registering meter will be installed, and the bill will be adjusted
accordingly and the testing deposit refunded.  This adjustment shall not
extend back more than one billing period from the date of the written request.



      (5)   All water meters and remote readers shall be and remain
the property of the city.



      (6)   Authorized city employees shall have free access at
reasonable hours of the day to all parts of every building and premises
connected with the water system for reading of meters and inspections.



      (7)   It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to notify
the city to request a final reading at the time of the customer's billing
change.



   (B)   Water meter setting.  All water meters hereafter installed
shall be in accordance with the Minnesota Plumbing Code and any standards
established by resolution of the City Council.



Penalty, see § 10.99



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 51.50  WATER UNIT.



   A water unit (hereinafter called unit) shall be one residential
equivalent connection based on usage of 100,000 gallons per year or portion
thereof.



§ 51.51  RATES, FEES AND CHARGES GENERALLY.



   The City Council shall establish a schedule of all water rates, as that
ordinance may be amended from time to time.



§ 51.52  WATER SERVICE BILLING; CHANGE OF ADDRESS.



   All bills and notices shall be mailed or delivered to the address where
service is provided.  If nonresident owners or agents desire personal notice
sent to a different address, they shall so note on the water service
application.  Any change or error in address shall be promptly reported to
the City Clerk.



§ 51.53  WATER RATES.



   (A)   The rate  due and payable by each user within the city for
water taken from the water system shall be established pursuant to § 51.51.



   (B)   In case the meter is found to have stopped, or to be operating
in a faulty manner, the amount of water used will be estimated in accordance
with the amount used previously in comparable periods of the year.



   (C)   Rates due and payable by each water user located beyond the
territorial boundaries of the city shall be determined by special contract.



   (D)   The minimum rates established pursuant to § 51.51 shall begin
to accrue after connection of the service pipe with the curb stop box.



   (E)   A meter shall be installed on the water valve in the house and
a remote register outside regardless of whether inside piping is connected.



   (F)   In the event a water customer elects to discontinue the use of
the municipal water, the regular or minimum charge shall continue until the
date as service is disconnected at the curb box.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.54  PAYMENT OF CHARGES; LATE PAYMENT; COLLECTION.



   (A)   Any prepayment or overpayment of charges may be retained by
the city and applied on subsequent quarterly charges.



   (B)   A penalty of 5% shall be added to any water service charge not
paid when due.



   (C)   In the event a user fails to pay his or her water user fee
within a reasonable time, the fee shall be certified by the City Clerk and
forwarded to the County Auditor for collection.



Penalty, see § 10.99



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 51.70  SUPERVISION BY UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT; LICENSING.



   All piping connections from the curb stop box to house supply piping
shall be made under the supervision of a licensed plumber subject to
inspection by the Utilities Superintendent.  The piping connection made to
the curb stop box on the house side shall be inspected by the Utilities
Superintendent.  The water meter installation shall be inspected, tested and
the meter sealed by the Utilities Superintendent.



§ 51.71  POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   The Utilities Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
city, upon proper identification, are authorized, with the permission of the
licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property within the
city, to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspections,
observation and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property
within the city does not permit the entrance to the property, the city shall
obtain an administrative search warrant as provided for in § 10.20 before
entering the property, except in emergency situations.



§ 51.72  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.



   Water service may be shut off at any connection as provided for by City
Council.



§ 51.73  AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES TO TURN WATER ON AND OFF.



   No person, except an authorized city employee, shall turn on or off any
water supply at the curb stop box.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.74  LIABILITY FOR EXPENSE, LOSS OR DAMAGE.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by
reason of the violation.



CHAPTER 52:  SEWER REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   52.001   Definitions



   52.002   Control of sewers; administration of chapter



   52.003   Building sewers; general requirements



   52.004   Tampering with wastewater facilities



   52.005   Cost of repairing or restoring sewers




General Regulations




   52.015   Deposits of unsanitary manner prohibited



   52.016   Discharge of wastewater or other polluted waters



   52.017   Restrictions on wastewater disposal facilities



   52.018   Installation of service connection to public sewer




Private Wastewater Disposal




   52.035   Public sewer not available



   52.036   Permits



   52.037   Type, capacities, location and layout



   52.038   Direct connection required



   52.039   Operation and maintenance by owner



   52.040   Application of subchapter




Building Sewers and Connections




   52.055   Restrictions on new connections



   52.056   Building sewer permits



   52.057   Costs and expenses



   52.058   Separate building sewers required



   52.059   Old building sewers; restrictions on use



   52.060   Conformance to State Building and Plumbing Code requirements



   52.061   Elevation below basement floor



   52.062   Surface runoff or groundwater connections prohibited



   52.063   Excavations



   52.064   Licenses




Use of Public Services




   52.080   Discharges of unpolluted water



   52.081   Discharges of waters or wastes



   52.082   Limited discharges



   52.083   Discharges hazardous to life or constitute public nuisances



   52.084   Increasing use of process water



   52.085   Pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities



   52.086   Grease, oil and sand interceptors



   52.087   Industrial wastes; installations



   52.088   Industrial wastes; requirements



   52.089   Measurements, tests and analyses of waters and wastes



   52.090   Protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials



   52.091   Permitting substance or matter to flow or pass into public
sewers



   52.092   Repairing service connection



   52.093   Catch basin or waste traps required for motor vehicle
washing or servicing facilities



   52.094   Special agreement and arrangement




User Rate Schedule for Charges




   52.110   Charges generally



   52.111   Purpose



   52.112   Definitions



   52.113   Establishment of a sewer service charge system



   52.114   Determination of sewer service charges



   52.115   Sewer service fund



   52.116   Administration




Powers and Authority of Inspectors




   52.130   Authorized employees permitted to enter all properties



   52.131   Authorized employees obtaining information for industrial
processes



   52.132   Authorized employees to observe safety rules



   52.133   Authorized employees permitted to enter all property with
easements



 



   52.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also referred to as the
Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1252 et seq., as amended.



   ASTM.  American Society for Testing Materials.



   AUTHORITY.  This city or its representative thereof.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5).  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20° C, expressed in terms of milligrams per liter
(mg/l).



   BUILDING DRAIN.  The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning three feet outside the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal, also referred to as a house connection or
service connection.



   CITY.  The area within the corporate boundaries of the city as
presently established or as amended by ordinance or other legal actions at a
future time.  The term CITYwhen used herein may also be used to refer to the
City Council and its authorized representative.



   CONTROL MANHOLE.  A structure specially constructed for the purpose of
measuring flow and sampling of wastes.



   EASEMENT.  An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned
by others.



   GARBAGE.  Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of food.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Gaseous, liquid and solid wastes resulting from
industrial or manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the
development, recovery and processing of natural resources, as distinct from
residential or domestic strength wastes.



   INDUSTRY.  Any nongovernmental or nonresidential user of a publicly
owned treatment works which is identified in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, latest edition, which is categorized in Divisions A,
B, D, E and I.



   INFILTRATION.  Water entering the sewage system (including building
drains and pipes) from the ground through means as defective pipes, pipe
joints, connections and manhole walls.



   INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I).  The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow.



   INFLOW.  Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system
(including building drains) from sources such as, but not limited to, roof
leaders, cellar drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains, drains from
springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm
sewers, catch basins, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage.



   INTERFERENCE.  The inhibition or disruption of the city's wastewater
disposal system processes or operations which causes or significantly
contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES or SDS
permit.  The term includes sewage sludge use or disposal by the city in
accordance with published regulations providing guidelines under Section 405
of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any regulations developed pursuant to the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act (42
U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.), the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. §§
2601 et seq.), or more stringent state criteria applicable to the method of
disposal or use employed by the city.



   MAY.  The term is permissive.



   MPCA.  The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.  Federal regulations
establishing pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in
publicly-owned wastewater treatment facilities which are determined to be not
susceptible to treatment by those treatment facilities or would interfere
with the operation of those treatment facilities, pursuant to Section 307(b)
of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(b)).



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT.  A
permit issued by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may
legally discharge into navigable waters of the United States pursuant to
Sections 402 and 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342 and 33 U.S.C. § 1345).



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewers, which overflow into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface water or ground water.



   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER.  The water discharged from any use such as
air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only
pollutant added is heat.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE.  Wastewater that is primarily
introduced by residential users with a BOD5 concentration not greater than
287 mg/l and a suspended solids (TSS) concentration not greater than 287 mg/l.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.



   pH.  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions in terms of grams per liter of solution.



   PRETREATMENT.  The treatment of wastewater from industrial sources
prior to the introduction of the waste effluent into a publicly-owned
treatment works.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27 cm) in any
dimension.



   SEWAGE.  The spent water of a community.  The preferred term is
wastewater.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.



      (1)   COLLECTION SEWER.  A sewer whose primary purpose is to
collect wastewaters from individual point source discharges and connections.



      (2)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER.  A sewer whose primary purpose is to
transport wastewater from collection sewers to a treatment facility.



      (3)   PRIVATE SEWER.  A sewer which is not owned and
maintained by a public authority.



      (4)   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer owned, maintained and controlled
by a public authority.



      (5)   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer intended to carry only liquid
and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and
surface waters which are not admitted intentionally.



      (6)   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN.  A drain or sewer intended
to carry storm waters, surface runoff, ground water, subsurface water, street
wash water, drainage and unpolluted water from any source.



   SHALL.  The term is mandatory.



   STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT.  Any permit (including any terms,
conditions and requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. §
115.07, as it may be amended from time to time for a disposal system as
defined by M.S. § 115.01(8), as it may be amended from time to time.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS).  The total
suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in
water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering
as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, latest edition, and referred to as non-filterable residue.



   TOXIC POLLUTANT.  The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will
cause adverse affects as defined in standards issued pursuant to Section
307(a) of the Act (33 U.S.C. §  1317(a)).



   UNPOLLUTED WATER.  Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharge
to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.



   USER.  Any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the city's wastewater disposal system.



   UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT.  The person appointed by the City Council to
supervise the sewer and water systems of the city.



   WASTEWATER.  The spent water of a community and referred to as
sewage.  From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the
liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions together with any ground water, surface
water and storm water that may be present.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS.  An arrangement of any
devices, facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the
city for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or industrial wastewater, or
structures necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor sewers,
outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and other equipment and
their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and
alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water
supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any
works including land which is an integral part of the treatment process or is
used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from that treatment.



   WPCF.  The Water Pollution Control Federation.



§ 52.002  CONTROL OF SEWERS; ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER.



   The Utilities Superintendent, or other official designated by the City
Council shall have control and general supervision of all public sewers and
service connections in the city, and shall be responsible for administering
the provisions of this chapter to the end that a proper and efficient public
sewer is maintained.



§ 52.003  BUILDING SEWERS; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   Building sewer construction shall meet the pertinent requirements of
the Minnesota State Building Code, which is those chapters of Minn. Rules
referenced in Minn. Rules part 1300.2400, subpart 6, as they may be amended
from time to time, and the Minnesota Plumbing Code, Minn. Rules Ch. 4715, as
it may be amended from time to time.  The applicant shall notify the City
Clerk when the building sewer and connection is ready for inspection.  The
connection shall be made under the supervision of the Building Official or
the Building Official's representative, if the city has adopted the State
Building Code.  If the city has not adopted the State Building Code, the
Utilities Superintendent shall perform the inspection.  If the city does not
have a Utilities Superintendent, an installer licensed under § 52.064 shall
certify that the building sewer and connection comply with the State Building
Code.  No backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and
approved, or until the certification has been received.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.004  TAMPERING WITH WASTEWATER FACILITIES.



   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities.  Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of a
misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.005  COST OF REPAIRING OR RESTORING SEWERS.



   In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of any
provision of this chapter, the city may assess against any person the cost of
repairing or restoring sewers or associated facilities damaged as a result of
the discharge of prohibited wastes by that person, and may collect the
assessment as an additional charge for the use of the public sewer system or
in any other manner deemed appropriate by the city.



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 52.015  DEPOSITS OF UNSANITARY MANNER PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the city's jurisdiction, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or objectionable waste.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.016  DISCHARGE OF WASTEWATER OR OTHER POLLUTED WATERS.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any wastewater
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided
in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter and the city's
NPDES/SDS permit.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.017  RESTRICTIONS ON WASTEWATER DISPOSAL FACILITIES.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.018  INSTALLATION OF SERVICE CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER.



   The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes from which wastewater is
discharged, and which is situated within the city and adjacent to any street,
alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be
located, a public sanitary sewer of the city shall be required at the owner's
expense to install a suitable service connection to the public sewer in
accordance with provisions of this code within 365 days of the date the
public sewer is operational; provided, the public sewer is within 200 feet of
the structure generating the wastewater.  All future buildings constructed
on property adjacent to the public sewer shall be required to immediately
connect to the public sewer.  If sewer connections are not made pursuant to
this section, an official ten-day notice shall be served instructing the
affected property owner to make the connection.



Penalty, see § 52.999



PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL



§ 52.035  PUBLIC SEWER NOT AVAILABLE.



   Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of §
52.018, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater
disposal system complying with the provisions of this subchapter and Minn.
Rules Ch. 7080, Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Program, as they may be
amended from time to time.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.036  PERMITS.



   (A)   Required.  Prior to commencement of construction of a private
wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit
signed by the city.  The application for the permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as are deemed necessary to the city.



   (B)   Inspections.  A permit for a private wastewater disposal
system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the
satisfaction of the city or its authorized representative.  The city or its
representative shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
city when work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground
portions are covered.  The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the
receipt of notice.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.037  TYPE, CAPACITIES, LOCATION AND LAYOUT.



   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all requirements of Minn. Rules Ch. 7080,
Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Program, as they may be amended from time
to time.  No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.038  DIRECT CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   At the time as a public sewer becomes available to a property serviced
by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to
the public sewer within 365 days in compliance with this chapter, and within
365 days any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal
systems shall be cleaned of sludge.  The bottom shall be broken to permit
drainage, and the tank or pit filled with suitable material.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.039  OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE BY OWNER.



   The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city.



§ 52.040  APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.



   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the MPCA or
the Minnesota Department of Health.



BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



§ 52.055  RESTRICTIONS ON NEW CONNECTIONS.



   Any new connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited
unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities,
including but not limited to capacity for flow, BOD5 and suspended solids, as
determined by the Utilities Superintendent.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.056  BUILDING SEWER PERMITS.



   (A)   Required.  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.



   (B)   Applications.  Applications for permits shall be made by the
owner or authorized agent and the party employed to do the work, and shall
state the location, name of owner, street number of the building to be
connected and how occupied.  No person shall extend any private building
drain beyond the limits of the building or property for which the service
connection permit has been given.



   (C)   Classes.  There shall be two classes of building sewer
permits:  one for residential and commercial service, and one for service to
establishments producing industrial wastes.  In either case, the application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or any other information
considered pertinent in the judgement of the city.  The industry, as a
condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its
wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of activity.



   (D)   Inspection and connection.  The applicant for the building
sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer.  The connection and
inspection shall be made under the supervision of the Utilities
Superintendent or authorized representative thereof.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.057  COSTS AND EXPENSES.



   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.  The owner shall indemnify
the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.058  SEPARATE BUILDING SEWERS REQUIRED.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway.  The
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered one building sewer.  The city does not and will not
assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting
from any connection.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.059  OLD BUILDING SEWERS; RESTRICTIONS ON USE.



   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Utilities Superintendent
or his or her representative, to meet all requirements of this chapter.



§ 52.060  CONFORMANCE TO STATE BUILDING AND PLUMBING CODE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The size, slopes, alignment, materials of construction of
building sewers and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling of the trench, shall all conform to
the requirements of the State Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the city.



   (B)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the State Building and Plumbing Code or
other applicable rules and regulations of the city.  All connections shall
be made gastight and watertight, and verified by proper testing to prevent
the inclusion of infiltration/inflow.  Any deviation from the prescribed
procedures and materials must be approved by the city prior to installation.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.061  ELEVATION BELOW BASEMENT FLOOR.



   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor.  In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.062  SURFACE RUNOFF OR GROUNDWATER CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, sump pumps,
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or indirectly to the wastewater disposal
system.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.063  EXCAVATIONS.



   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. 
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.064  LICENSES.



   (A)   Required.  No person shall make a service connection with any
public sewer unless regularly licensed under this chapter to perform the
work, and no permit shall be granted to any person except a regularly
licensed person.  A person licensed as a plumber by the State of Minnesota,
or a person in the ditch installing the pipe who has a card showing that they
have completed a program of training that incorporates the Plumbing Code
installation requirements, issued by either the Associated Builders and
Contractors, Laborers-Employers Cooperation Educational Trust, or Minnesota
Utility Contractors Association, is not subject to the licensing requirements
of this section.



   (B)   Application.  Any person desiring a license to make a service
connection with public sewers shall apply in writing to the City Council with
satisfactory evidence that the applicant or employer is trained or skilled in
the business and qualified to receive a license.  All applications shall be
referred to the Utilities Superintendent for recommendations to the
Council.  If approved by the Council, the license shall be issued by the
City Clerk upon the filing of a bond as hereinafter provided.



   (C)   Issuance.  No license shall be issued to any person until a
policy of insurance to the city, approved by the Council, is filed with the
City Clerk conditioned that the licensee will indemnify and save harmless the
city from all suits, accidents and damage that may arise by reason of any
opening in any street, alley or public ground made by the licensee or by
those in the licensee's employment for any purpose whatever, and that the
licensee will replace and restore the street and alley over that opening to
the condition existing prior to installation, adequately guard with
barricades and lights, and will keep and maintain the same to the
satisfaction of the Utilities Superintendent, and shall conform in all
respects to any rules and regulations of the Council relative thereto, and
pay all fines that may be imposed on the licensee by law.



   (D)   Fee.  The license fee for making service connections shall be
as established by the City Council from time to time.  All licenses shall
expire on December 31 of the license year unless the license is suspended or
revoked by the Council for cause.



   (E)   Suspension or revocation.  The Council may suspend or revoke
any license issued under this subchapter for any of the following causes:



      (1)   Giving false information in connection with the
application for a license.



      (2)   Incompetence of the licensee.



      (3)   Willful violation of any provisions of this  chapter or
any rule or regulation pertaining to the making of service connections.



Penalty, see § 52.999



USE OF PUBLIC SERVICES



§ 52.080  DISCHARGES OF UNPOLLUTED WATER.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or caused to be discharged any water
such as stormwater, ground water, roof runoff, surface drainage or
non-contact cooling water to any sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to those sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to
a natural outlet approved by the city and other regulatory agencies. 
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a
storm sewer or natural outlet on approval of the city and upon approval and
the issuance of a discharge permit by the MPCA.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.081  DISCHARGES OF WATERS OR WASTES.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



   (A)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature
or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with
other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way
to the wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system. 
Prohibited materials include but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes,
peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.



   (B)   Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction to
the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities such as but not limited to grease, garbage
with particles greater than 1/2-inch in any dimension, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole
blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust,
metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent
hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing
wastes.



   (C)   Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than
9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater disposal
system.



   (D)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit
or disrupt any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater
disposal system.  A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any
pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act (33 U.S.C. §
1317(a)).



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.082  LIMITED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   The following described substances, materials, water or wastes
shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or
quantities which will not harm either sewers, the wastewater treatment works,
treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream and soil, vegetation and ground water, or will not otherwise
endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.  The
Utilities Superintendent may set limitations lower than limitations
established in the regulations below if, in his or her opinion, the more
severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives.  In forming
his or her opinion as to the acceptability of wastes, the Utilities
Superintendent will give consideration to factors as the quantity of subject
waste in reaction to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, the
city's NPDES/SDS permit, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent
factors.



   (B)   The limitations or restrictions on materials or
characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer
which shall not be violated without approval of the Utilities Superintendent
are as follows:



      (1)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F
(65.6°C), or causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater,
the influent at the wastewater treatment plant to have a temperature
exceeding 104°F (40°C), or having heat in amounts which will inhibit
biological activity in the wastewater treatment works resulting in
interference therein.



      (2)   Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F
(0°C and 65.6°C); and any wastewater containing oil and grease
concentrations of mineral origin of greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified
or not.



      (3)   Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which
constitute a slug as defined in § 52.001.



      (4)   Any garbage not properly shredded, as defined in §
52.001 of this chapter.  Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary
sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering
establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the
preparation of food on the premises or when served by caterers.



      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which
either singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of creating a
public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into
the sewers for their maintenance and repair.



      (6)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in
the treatment process such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions.



      (7)   Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted storm, drainage
or ground water.



      (8)   Wastewater containing inert suspended-solids such as but
not limited to fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues, or of
dissolved solids such as but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate, in quantities that would cause disruption with the wastewater
disposal system.



      (9)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Utilities
Superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.



      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing the following
substances to the degree that any material received in the composite
wastewater at the wastewater treatment works is detrimental to treatment
process, adversely impacts land application, adversely effects receiving
waters, or is in violation of standards pursuant to Section 307(b) of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1317(b)):  Arsenic, Cadmium, Copper, Cyanide, Lead, Mercury,
Nickel, Silver, total Chromium, Zinc and Phenolic compounds which cannot be
removed by the city's wastewater treatment system.



      (11)   Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the
wastewater disposal system which violates any statute, rule, regulation or
ordinance of any regulatory agency, or state or federal regulatory body.



      (12)   Any waters or wastes containing BOD5 or suspended
solids of character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle the materials at the wastewater treatment works, except as
may be permitted by specific written agreement subject to the provisions of
§ 52.094.



§ 52.083  DISCHARGES HAZARDOUS TO LIFE OR CONSTITUTE PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers which contain substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in § 52.082, or which in the judgement of the
Utilities Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater
treatment facilities, processes, or equipment, receiving waters or soil,
vegetation, and ground water, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the city may:



      (1)   Reject the wastes;



      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers, pursuant to Section 307(b) of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1317(b)) and all amendments thereof;



      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and



      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling,
treating and disposing of wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
service charges.



   (B)   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design, installation and maintenance of the facilities and
equipment shall be made at the owner's expense and shall be subject to the
review and approval of the city pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA.



§ 52.084  INCREASING USE OF PROCESS WATER.



   No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any manner,
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
§§ 52.081 and 52.082, or contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or any state requirements.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.085  PRETREATMENT OR FLOW-EQUALIZING FACILITIES.



   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation at the expense of the owner.



§ 52.086  GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Utilities Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts,
as specified in § 52.082(B)(2), any flammable wastes as specified in §
52.081(A), sand or other harmful ingredients; except that interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.  All
interceptors shall be of the type to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.  In the maintaining of these interceptors, the
owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the
captured materials by appropriate means, and shall maintain a record of dates
and means of disposal which are subject to review by the Utilities
Superintendent.  Any removal and hauling of the collecting materials not
performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by a currently licensed
waste disposal firm.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.087  INDUSTRIAL WASTES; INSTALLATIONS.



   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure,
or control manhole, with necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of
wastes.  The structure shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city.  The structure
shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained
by the owner to be safe and accessible at all times.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.088  INDUSTRIAL WASTES; REQUIREMENTS.



   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the city, be required to provide
laboratory measurements, tests or analyses of waters or wastes to illustrate
compliance with this chapter and any special condition for discharge
established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
discharge.  The number, type and frequency of sampling and laboratory
analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city. 
The industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with federal, state and local
standards are being met.  The owner shall report the results of measurements
and laboratory analyses to the city at times and in the manner as prescribed
by the city.  The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses
and reporting required by the city.  At those times as deemed necessary, the
city reserves the right to take measurements and supplies for analysis by an
independent laboratory.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.089  MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES OF WATERS AND WASTES.



   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. 
Sampling methods, location, times, duration and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Utilities
Superintendent.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.090  PROTECTION FROM ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE OF PROHIBITED MATERIALS.



   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a
sanitary sewer shall provide protection from an accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter.  Where
necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's expense.  Detailed
plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection
shall be submitted to the Utilities Superintendent for review and approval
prior to construction of the facility.  Review and approval of the plans and
operating procedures shall not relieve any user from the responsibility to
modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this
chapter.  Users shall notify the Utilities Superintendent immediately upon
having a slug or accidental discharge of substances of wastewater in
violation of this chapter to enable countermeasures to be taken by the
Utilities Superintendent to minimize damage to the wastewater treatment
works.  The notification will not relieve any user of any liability for any
expense, loss or damage to the wastewater treatment system or treatment
process, or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof under any
state and federal law.  Employers shall ensure that all employees who may
cause or discover a discharge are advised of the emergency notification
procedure.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.091  PERMITTING SUBSTANCE OR MATTER TO FLOW OR PASS INTO PUBLIC SEWERS.



   No person having charge of any building or other premises which drains
into the public sewer shall permit any substance or matter which may form a
deposit or obstruction to flow or pass into the public sewer.  Within 30
days after receipt of written notice from the city, the owner shall install a
suitable and sufficient catch basin or waste trap, or if one already exists,
shall clean out, repair or alter the same, and perform other work as the
Utilities Superintendent may deem necessary.  Upon the owner's refusal or
neglect to install a catch basin or waste trap or to clean out, repair, or
alter the same after the period of 30 days, the Utilities Superintendent may
cause the work to be completed at the expense of the owner or representative
thereof.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.092  REPAIRING SERVICE CONNECTION.



   Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, broken or
out of order, or detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or unfit for the
purpose of drainage, the owner shall repair or cause the work to be done as
the Utilities Superintendent may direct.  Each day after 30 days that a
person neglects or fails to so act shall constitute a separate violation of
this section, and the Utilities Superintendent may then cause the work to be
done, and recover from the owner or agent the expense thereof by an action in
the name of the city.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.093  CATCH BASIN OR WASTE TRAPS REQUIRED FOR MOTOR VEHICLE WASHING OR
SERVICING FACILITIES.



   The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or servicing
facility shall provide and maintain in serviceable condition at all times a
catch basin or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent grease,
oil, dirt or any mineral deposit from entering the public sewer system.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.094  SPECIAL AGREEMENT AND ARRANGEMENT.



   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefor by the industrial concern; provided, that National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards and the city's NPDES/SDS Permit limitations are not
violated.



USER RATE SCHEDULE FOR CHARGES



§ 52.110  CHARGES GENERALLY.



   Each user of sewer service shall pay the charges applicable to the type
of service, and in accordance with the provisions set forth in this
subchapter.



§ 52.111  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the subchapter is to provide for sewer service charges
to recover costs associated with operation, maintenance and replacement to
ensure effective functioning of the city's wastewater treatment system, and
local capital costs incurred in the construction of the city's wastewater
treatment system.



§ 52.112  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATION.  Those fixed costs attributable to administration of
the wastewater treatment works such as billing and associated bookkeeping and
accounting costs.



   CITY.  The area within the corporate boundaries of the city as
presently established or as amended by ordinance or other legal actions at a
future time.  When used herein the term CITY may also refer to the City
Council or its authorized representative.



   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.  A charge levied on users of wastewater treatment
facilities for the cost of repaying money bonded to construct the facilities.



   INCOMPATIBLE WASTE.  Waste that either singly or by interaction with
other wastes interferes with any waste treatment process, constitutes a
hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or creates any hazard
in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works.



   INDUSTRIAL USERS or INDUSTRIES.



      (1)   (a)   Entitles that discharge into a publicly owned
wastewater treatment works liquid wastes resulting from the processes
employed in industrial or manufacturing processes, or from the development of
any natural resources.  These are identified in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, latest edition, Office of Management and Budget, as
amended and supplemental under one of the following divisions:



 

Division A.
 
Agriculture, forestry and fishing


Division B.
 
Mining


Division D.
 
Manufacturing


Division E.
 
Transportation, communications, electric, gas, and sanitary sewers


Division I.
 
Services








         (b)   For the purpose of this definition, domestic waste
shall be considered to have the following characteristics: BOD5 - less than
287 mg/l; Suspended solids - less than 287 mg/l.



      (2)   Any nongovernmental user of a publicly owned treatment
works which discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic
pollutants or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity
either singly or by interaction with other wastes to contaminate the sludge
of any municipal systems, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage
treatment process, or which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals,
creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect
on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works.



   MAY.  The term is permissive.



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.  Activities required to provide for the
dependable and economical functioning of the treatment works, throughout the
design or useful life, whichever is longer of the treatment works, and at the
level of performance for which the treatment works were constructed.  The
term includes replacement.



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS.  Expenditures for operation and
maintenance, including replacement.



   REPLACEMENT.  Obtaining and installing of equipment, accessories or
appurtenances which are necessary during the design life or useful life,
whichever is longer, of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which the works were designed and constructed.



   REPLACEMENT COSTS.  Expenditures for replacement.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer intended to carry only liquid and
water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants
and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface
waters which are not admitted intentionally.



   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE.  The aggregate of all charges, including charges
for operation, maintenance, replacement, debt service, and other sewer
related charges that are billed periodically to users of the city's
wastewater treatment facilities.



   SEWER SERVICE FUND.  A fund into which income from sewer service
charges is deposited along with other income, including taxes intended to
retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for wastewater treatment. 
Expenditure of the sewer service fund will be for operation, maintenance and
replacement costs and to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for
wastewater treatment.



   SHALL.  The term is mandatory.



   TOXIC POLLUTANT.  The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants as defined in standards issued pursuant to Section 307(a) of the
Act (33 USC 1317(a)), which upon exposure to or assimilation into any
organism, will cause adverse effects.



   USER CHARGE.  A charge levied on a user of a treatment works for the
user's proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance,
including replacement.



   USERS.  Those residential, commercial, governmental, institutional and
industrial establishments which are connected to the public sewer collection
system.



   WASTEWATER.  The spent water of a community, also referred to as
sewage.  From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the
liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions together with any ground water, surface
water and storm water that may be present.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS.  An arrangement of any
devices, facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the
city for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or industrial wastewater, or
structures necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor sewers,
outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and other equipment and
their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and
alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water
supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any
works including land which is an integral part of the treatment process or is
used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from the treatment.



§ 52.113  ESTABLISHMENT OF A SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM.



   (A)   The city hereby establishes a Sewer Service Charge System
whereby all revenue collected from users of the wastewater treatment
facilities will be used to affect all expenditures incurred for annual
operation, maintenance and replacement and for debt service on capital
expenditure incurred in constructing the wastewater treatment works.



   (B)   Each user shall pay its proportionate share of operation,
maintenance, and replacement costs of the treatment works, based on the users
proportionate contribution to the total wastewater loading from all users.



   (C)   Each user shall pay debt service charges to retire local
capital costs as determined by the City Council.



   (D)   Sewer service rates and charges to users of the wastewater
treatment facility shall be determined and fixed in a Sewer Service Charge
System developed according to the provisions of this subchapter.  The Sewer
Service Charge System shall be the system enacted prior to the adoption of
this code.



   (E)   Revenues collected for sewer service shall be deposited in a
separate fund known as The Sewer Service Fund.  Income from revenues
collected will be expended to off-set the cost of operation, maintenance and
equipment replacement for the facility and to retire the debt for capital
expenditure.



   (F)   Sewer service charges and the sewer service fund will be
administrated in accordance with the provisions of § 52.116.



   (G)   A connection fee as fixed by the City Council from time to
time, shall be charged to each user connecting a new service to the Sanitary
Sewer System.  The connection fee shall be due and payable at the time a
building permit is issued.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.114  DETERMINATION OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.



   The sewer service rates and charges to users of the wastewater
treatment facility shall be as established by ordinance or resolution prior
to the adoption of this code, unless amended or modified by the City Council.



Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.115  SEWER SERVICE FUND.



   (A)   The city hereby establishes a Sewer Fund as an income fund to
receive all revenues generated by the sewer service charge system, and all
other income dedicated to the operation, maintenance, replacement and
construction of the wastewater treatment works, including taxes, special
charges, fees and assessments intended to retire construction debt.



   (B)   All revenue generated by the sewer service charge system, and
all other income pertinent to the treatment system, including taxes and
special assessments dedicated to retire construction debt, shall be held by
the City Clerk separate and apart from all other funds of the city.



§ 52.116  ADMINISTRATION.



   The sewer service charge system and sewer service fund shall be
administrated according to the following provisions:



   (A)   The City Clerk shall maintain a proper system of accounts
suitable for determining the operation and maintenance, equipment replacement
and debt retirement costs of the treatment works, and shall furnish the City
Council with a report of those costs annually.  The City Council shall
annually determine whether or not sufficient revenue is being generated for
the effective operation, maintenance, replacement and management of the
treatment works, and whether sufficient revenue is being generated for debt
retirement.  The Council will also determine whether the user charges are
distributed proportionately to each user in accordance with § 52.113(B). 
The city shall thereafter, reassess and as necessary revise the Sewer Service
Charge System then in use to ensure the proportionality of the user charges
and to ensure the sufficiency of funds to maintain the capacity and
performance to which the facilities were constructed, and to retire the
construction debt.



   (B)   In accordance with federal and state requirements, the City
Clerk shall be responsible for maintaining all records necessary to document
compliance with the Sewer Service Charge System adopted.



   (C)   Bills for sewer service charges shall be rendered on a monthly
basis succeeding the period for which the service was rendered and shall be
due on the fifteenth day of the following month.  Any bill not paid in full
by the due date will be considered delinquent.  The penalty shall be
computed at 5% of the original bill and shall be increased the same 5% for
every month the bill is outstanding. 



   (E)   The owner of the premises shall be liable to pay for the
service to their premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by
the city only upon the condition that the owner of the premises is liable
therefore to the city.



   (F)   Any additional costs caused by discharges to the treatment
works of toxics or other incompatible wastes, including the cost of restoring
wastewater treatment services, clean up and restoration of the receiving
waters and environs, and sludge disposal, shall be borne by the discharger of
the wastes, at no expense to the city.



POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS



§ 52.130  AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES PERMITTED TO ENTER ALL PROPERTIES.



   The Utilities Superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the
city, bearing proper credentials and identification, are authorized, with the
permission of the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
property within the city, to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observations, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to the
discharges to the city's sewer system in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.  If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control
of property within the city does not permit the entrance to the property, the
city shall obtain an administrative search warrant as provided for in §
10.20 before entering the property, except in emergency situations.



§ 52.131  AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES OBTAINING INFORMATION FOR INDUSTRIAL
PROCESSES.



   The Utilities Superintendent or other duly authorized employees are
authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a
direct bearing on the type and source of discharge to the wastewater
collection system.  An industry may withhold information considered
confidential; however, the industry must establish that the revelation to the
public of the information in question might result in an advantage to
competitors.



§ 52.132  AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES TO OBSERVE SAFETY RULES.



   While performing necessary work on private properties, the Utilities
Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the
property owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city
employees and the city shall indemnify the property owner against loss or
damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as may be
caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as
required in § 52.087.



§ 52.133  AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES PERMITTED TO ENTER ALL PROPERTY WITH
EASEMENTS.



   The Utilities Superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of but not limited to inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
wastewater facilities lying within the easement.  All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms
of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of
§§ 52.001 through 52.094 and 52.130 through 52.133 shall be served by the
city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.  The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all
violations.



      (2)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the
time limit provided for in division (A) of this section shall be punished as
provided in § 10.99.  Each day in which any violation occurs shall be
deemed as a separate offense.



      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
52.001 through 52.094 and 52.130 through 52.133 shall become liable to the
city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of that
violation.



   (B)   (1)   Each and every sewer service charge levied by and
pursuant to §§ 52.110 through 52.116 is made a lien upon the lot or
premises served, and all charges which are on October 1 of each year past due
and delinquent shall be certified to the County Auditor by November 29, for
collection.  Nothing in §§ 52.110 through 52.116 shall be held or
construed as in any way stopping or interfering with the right of the city to
levy as taxes or assessments against any premises affected any delinquent or
past due sewer service charges.



      (2)   As an alternative to levying a lien, the city may, at
its discretion, file suit in a civil action to collect amounts as are
delinquent and due against the occupant, owner or user of the real estate,
and shall collect as well all attorney's fees incurred by the city in filing
the civil action.  Attorney's fees shall be fixed by order of the court.



      (3)   In addition to all penalties and costs attributable and
chargeable to recording notices of the lien or filing a civil action, the
owner or user of the real estate being serviced by the treatment works shall
be liable for interest upon all unpaid balances at the rate of 8% per annum.



CHAPTER 53: STORM WATER



Section




Pumping of Storm Water from a Storm Water Detention Pond for Irrigation
Purposes




   53.01   Findings



   53.02   General purpose



   53.03   Primary purpose of irrigation



   53.03   Irrigation plan and permit



   53.04   City Engineer review



   53.05   State agency review and permitting



   53.06   City approval



   53.07   Effective date



PUMPING OF STORM WATER FROM A STORM WATER DETENTION POND FOR IRRIGATION
PURPOSES



§ 53.01  FINDINGS.



   (A)   The City of Cologne is located in a section of the Twin Cities
seven-county metropolitan area which is experiencing rapid growth.



   (B)   Providing a means for recycling storm water held in storm
water detention ponds is, under certain limited circumstances, a viable and
efficient means of recycling the water with overall benefits to the
environment in general, and the city’s water facilities specifically.



   (C)   Removal of storm water from the city’s storm water detention
ponds is only viable for large scale irrigation projects which generally
provide irrigation to public and quasi-public improvements such as roadway
rights-of-way, boulevards, medians, parkways, and trail corridors.  To the
extent that providing irrigation to public and quasi-public areas, as set
forth in the proceeding sentence, is the primary objective of the irrigation
system, it is also permissible to provide ancillary benefit to commercial and
industrial properties.



   (D)   Maintenance of an irrigation system which includes both
pumping storm water from a city storm water detention pond and constructing a
well to provide backup water into the storm water detention pond is a
significant undertaking which requires the involvement of a large scale
commercial developer or a property owners’ association with the financial
strength and resources to obtain appropriate contractors to administer the
irrigation system, the pump from the storm water detention pond, and the
water well.



   (E)   In certain limited circumstances, as defined under the terms
of this subchapter, both the use of storm water held in the city’s storm
water detention ponds and the use of a backup well to provide supplemental
water into the storm water detention ponds is appropriate and provides a
viable means of recycling storm water for irrigation purposes.



(Ord. 162, passed 9-20-2005)



§ 53.02  GENERAL PURPOSE.



   Under certain circumstances as further defined, the city will permit
the pumping of storm water from a storm water detention pond for irrigation
purposes and will allow a private well to be drilled to pump into the storm
water detention pond to supplement, as needed, due to climatic conditions,
water available for irrigation.



(Ord. 162, passed 9-20-2005)



§ 53.03  PRIMARY PURPOSE OF IRRIGATION.



   The primary purpose of the irrigation must be to irrigate public and
quasi-public areas, including roadway rights-of-way, boulevards, medians,
parkways, and trail corridors.  Ancillary to the public and quasi-public
aspect of irrigation, the system may also provide (provided it is less than
50% of the total area to be irrigated) irrigation for commercial, industrial,
and institutional (church and school) properties.  This type of irrigation
system is not permitted for any type of residential property, including
multi-unit and higher density residential properties.



(Ord. 162, passed 9-20-2005)



§ 53.04  IRRIGATION PLAN AND PERMIT.



   Any applicant who seeks to remove water from a storm water detention
pond for irrigation purposes and to replenish the water in the storm water
detention pond with a well must seek a permit from the city and provide the
following information:



   (A)   Irrigation system plan;



   (B)   Detailed plan sheet showing the pumping outlet from the storm
water detention pond;



   (C)   Detailed plan sheet showing the location of the well and the
proposed inflow into the storm water detention pond;



   (D)   Management and maintenance plan detailing how the applicant
will manage and maintain the irrigation system and the well;



   (E)   Projected annual pumping needs for the irrigation system; and



   (F)   Projected annual pumping needs for the well into the storm
water detention pond.



(Ord. 162, passed 9-20-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.05  CITY ENGINEER REVIEW.



   (A)   The application shall be provided to the City Engineer for
review and comment.



   (B)   The applicant shall reimburse the city for the expenses of the
City Engineer in reviewing the application.



   (C)   The City Engineer shall make recommendations to the City
Council as to the plan of the applicant and the appropriateness of granting
the permit.



(Ord. 162, passed 9-20-2005)



§ 53.06  STATE AGENCY REVIEW AND PERMITTING.



   (A)   The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any and all
permits, including a permit for the well from the Minnesota Department of
Health and, if appropriate, a water appropriation permit from the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources.



   (B)   The applicant may not drill the well into the Mount
Simon-Hinckley aquifer.



(Ord. 162, passed 9-20-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.07  CITY APPROVAL.



   The city may approve the issuance of the permit for pumping of water
from a storm water detention pond, and the construction of a water well which
pumps into the storm water detention pond to replenish the pond, provided the
terms and conditions of the application are met and the applicant agrees to
abide by the terms and conditions of the City Engineer and any other terms
and conditions as the City Council deems appropriate.



(Ord. 162, passed 9-20-2005)



§ 53.08  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect upon adoption and
publication in the official newspaper of the City of Cologne in accordance
with applicable law.



(Ord. 162, passed 9-20-2005)



CHAPTER 54:  BROADBAND SERVICE



Section



   54.01   Findings and purpose



   54.02   Broadband service established



   54.03   Functions, powers and duties



   54.04   Reservation of powers



   54.05   Non-exclusive



   54.06   Application for services



   54.07   Fees for broadband service



   54.08   Rules and regulations



   54.09   Broadband service access



   54.10   Deficiency in broadband service



   54.11   Inspections



   54.12   Relay antennas



   54.13   City-owned equipment



   54.14   Basic and standard rates



   54.15   Discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills



   54.16   Effective date



§ 54.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   Findings.  The City Council recognizes the importance of
reliable high-speed internet (broadband).  M.S. § 237.012 establishes goals
for deployment and up- and download speeds for advanced broadband services
throughout the state, which goals are supported by the city.  The city makes
the following findings:



      (1)   The existing broadband providers in and near the city do
not provide adequate service to meet the needs of the businesses and
residents in and around the city, and the goals of the state.



      (2)   Municipally owned and operated broadband service will
provide a good value to users and enhance the city's image.  The cost to
municipal broadband service users/residents is estimated to be
$19.95-$24.95/month; significantly less than private-party providers, whose
costs range from $24.95-$39.95/month in addition to required phone service.



      (3)   The city has a desire to improve delivery of municipal
services.  Wireless broadband will improve efficiencies in various
departments by providing mobile staff the ability to monitor infrastructure
and utilities remotely through the use of in-vehicle laptop computers,
including but not limited to:



         (a)   Public Works, Fire Department and building
inspections can access GIS web-based utility mapping services to access
utility locations, record drawings, permits and other property-specific
information in the field;



         (b)   Public Works staff will have the ability to
monitor and adjust levels and flows of water towers, wells, lift stations and
the wastewater treatment plant.



      (4)   Municipally owned and operated wireless broadband
service will allow the city to serve its citizens more effectively and
efficiently, and bring a new level of convenience and connectedness to people
who live, work and play in the city.



      (5)   Municipally owned and operated broadband service is
anticipated to enhance economic development opportunities. The service will
help the city not only retain existing businesses and residents, but will
also attract new businesses and residents to the community.



      (6)   Municipally owned and operated broadband service
introduces a new source of revenue for the city, with the potential to expand
service to neighboring cities and/or townships.



      (7)   Based on the information gathered, the City Council
hereby finds that the establishment of a broadband service is in the best
interests of the city.



   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a highly
reliable and secure broadband service that will be municipally owned and
operated, and will provide a high-speed internet network solution at an
affordable cost to government agencies, residents, businesses and visitors in
the region.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 54.02  BROADBAND SERVICE ESTABLISHED.



   A municipal broadband service to be known as “Cologne-ISP.net” is
hereby created and established.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 54.03  FUNCTIONS, POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The city shall be primarily responsible for the design,
funding, implementation and maintenance of the broadband network.



   (B)   The city shall contract with an internet service provider
(“ISP”) to provide technical guidance and related ISP services.



   (C)   The City Council shall have the authority to provide general
oversight and strategic management for the Cologne-ISP.net Enterprise Fund
(“the Fund”).  The City Council shall ensure that the Fund meets city
and state statutory requirements for financial management and reporting.



   (D)   The City Council shall appoint a Broadband Internet Advisory
Committee, consisting of two members of the City Council and the City
Administrator, to review and make recommendations related to broadband
internet services and the expansion thereof.



   (E)   The City Council grants authority to the City Administrator to
negotiate joint powers agreements with other governmental entities in
relation to improved broadband service, subject to final approval by the City
Council.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 54.04  RESERVATION OF POWERS.



   Except as delegated by this chapter, and subject to amendment of this
chapter, the City Council reserves its rights and powers regarding
Cologne-ISP.net, including but not limited to, the power to:



   (A)   Adopt the annual budget;



   (B)   Approve capital improvements;



   (C)   Review rates and fees; and



   (D)   Approve potential expansions of the service area of
Cologne-ISP.net.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 54.05  NON-EXCLUSIVE.



   The broadband service to be provided by the city is non-exclusive;
other providers of broadband internet service, assuming compliance with any
requirements of the city code of ordinances, may provide broadband service
within the city.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 54.06  APPLICATION FOR SERVICES.



   All applications for broadband service shall be made through the office
of the City Clerk, and shall contain the name of the owner, the name of the
street upon which the property fronts, the official street number assigned to
the premises, and the signature of the applicant agreeing to conform to the
rules and regulations that may be established by the city as conditions for
the city providing and the applicant using broadband service from the city.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 54.07  FEES FOR BROADBAND SERVICE.



   The city shall establish the fees for providing broadband service to
residents and businesses.  The fees may be differentiated based upon whether
the broadband service provided is within or out of the corporate limits of
the city, the speed of the connection and such other matters as the city may
deem appropriate.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 54.08  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Broadband Internet Advisory Committee may adopt, subject to
ratification by the City Council, rules and regulations under which broadband
service will be provided.  The rules and regulations may address such
matters as the Broadband Internet Advisory Committee deems appropriate
including, but not limited to, the following:



   (A)   The criteria for installing city-owned equipment on the
premises of any owner seeking broadband service from the city.



   (B)   A right of entry to enter upon the premises owned by an owner
seeking broadband service from the city to install city-owned equipment to
facilitate the broadband service to the premises.



   (C)   The terms and conditions under which the city may terminate
providing broadband service to any businesses, residents or other users,
including but not limited to, termination for failure to pay for services.



   (D)   Service discounts for payment by ACH.



   (E)   Means and methods of invoicing for servicing, including
authorization to invoice via email, recognizing the goal of the city to save
on paper, processing costs and postage.



   (F)   Prohibiting access to the city's broadband service without:



      (1)   Establishing and paying for an account for broadband
service with the city; and



      (2)   Utilizing city-owned equipment to enable the broadband
service connection at the premises.



   (G)   Reasonable restrictions and limitations on internet game
playing that may unnecessarily slow down the city's broadband service network.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 54.09  BROADBAND SERVICE ACCESS.



   No premises may access the city's broadband service without first
executing an application, having the city install the head-end antenna at the
premises, and paying for the broadband service as required by the city.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 54.10  DEFICIENCY IN BROADBAND SERVICE.



   The city is not liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of
broadband service to any consumer, whether occasioned by:



   (A)   Shutdown of the broadband service to make repairs to the
system;



   (B)   Failure of equipment owned by the city, or any internet
service provider with whom the city has entered into a contract; or



   (C)   Any other reason.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 54.11  INSPECTIONS.



   The city has the authority to make regular inspections of the
city-owned equipment installed upon a premises for broadband service, and the
owner of the premises shall provide reasonable access to the premises for
such purpose.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 54.12  RELAY ANTENNAS.



   Any owner who contracts with the city for broadband service shall allow
the city to install, as part of the city-owned equipment on the premises, a
relay antenna to facilitate wireless distribution of broadband service.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 54.13  CITY-OWNED EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   To facilitate providing broadband service, the city will
install on each premise for which the city agrees to provide broadband
service the following equipment: antenna, transceiver, cabling, POE connector.



   (B)   All such equipment remains the sole property of the city. 
The owner of the premises shall be entitled to use the city-owned equipment
to facilitate providing broadband service so long as the owner’s account
for broadband service remains in good standing with the city.  If for any
reason the broadband service to a particular premise is terminated, the city
has the right to enter upon the premises and remove the equipment.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 54.14  BASIC AND STANDARD RATES.



   (A)   The basic and standard rates for providing broadband service
are as follows:



 




Within City Limits




Type

 

Rate



Basic
 
1.5 megabits per second
 
$19.95/month


Standard
 
3.0 megabits per second
 
$24.95/month



Rural Areas




Type

 

Rate



Basic
 
786 kilobits per second
 
$19.95/month


Standard
 
1.5 megabits per second
 
$24.95/month




 



   (B)   Additionally, the city may impose a deposit of $50.00 upon the
owner of any premises that has more than two late payments in any
12-consecutive-month period.



   (C)   The city may revise its rates and deposit requirements
annually when it adopts its annual fee ordinance, or by City Council
resolution in the interim of the annual fee ordinance.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 54.15  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR NONPAYMENT OF BILLS.



   All charges for broadband service shall be due on the monthly due dates
specified by the city for the respective account.  In all cases where
satisfactory arrangements for payments have not been made and the account is
more than 30 days delinquent, the city may discontinue the provision of
broadband service following electronic or written notification.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 54.16  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall become effective upon passage, approval and
publication of Ordinance 164 according to law.



(Ord. 164, passed 5-2-2011)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS





         71.   PARKING REGULATIONS





         72.   SNOWMOBILES





         73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES





         74.   BICYCLES, ROLLER BLADES, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER
SKIS AND SKATEBOARDS




CHAPTER 70:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   70.01   State highway traffic regulations adopted by reference



   70.02   Trucks prohibited on certain streets



   70.03   Stop intersections



   70.04   Through streets and one-way streets



   70.05   Turning restrictions



   70.06   U-turns restricted



   70.07   Excessive noise



   70.08   Exhibition driving prohibited



   70.09   Cruising prohibited



   70.10   Motor vehicle noise




Parades




   70.20   Definitions



   70.21   Permit required



   70.22   Application for permit



   70.23   Standards for issuance of permit



   70.24   Notice of rejection of permit application



   70.25   Appeal procedure when permit denied



   70.26   Alternative permit



   70.27   Notice to city and other officials when permit issued



   70.28   Contents of permit



   70.29   Duties of permittee



   70.30   Public conduct during parades



   70.31   Revocation of permit



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  STATE HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The Highway Traffic Regulations Act is hereby adopted by
reference.  The regulatory provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted as a traffic ordinance
regulating the use of highways, streets and alleys within the city and are
hereby incorporated in and made a part of this section as completely as if
set out in full herein.



   (B)   The penalty for violation of the provisions of state statutes
adopted by reference in this section shall be identical with the penalty
provided for in the statutes for the same offense.



§ 70.02  TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   (A)   The City Council by resolution may designate streets on which
travel by commercial vehicles in excess of 10,000 pounds axle weight is
prohibited.  The Chief of Police shall cause appropriate signs to be erected
on those streets.  No person shall operate a commercial vehicle on posted
streets in violation of the restrictions posted.



   (B)   The weight restrictions established in division (A) shall not
apply to city or emergency vehicles, public school buses or to garbage and
refuse trucks making regular collections and are under contract with the
city, nor shall the weight restrictions in division (A) apply if a commercial
vehicle must use the particular street in question for the purpose of local
pick-up or delivery.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.03  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   The city may designate intersections as a stop intersection and require
all vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to those intersections.  The
city shall post signs at those designated intersections, giving notice of the
designation as a stop intersection.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
fail to obey the markings or signs posted under this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.04  THROUGH STREETS AND ONE-WAY STREETS.



   The City Council by resolution may designate any street or portion of a
street as a through street or one-way street where necessary to preserve the
free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents.  No trunk highway shall be so
designated unless the consent of the Commissioner of Transportation to the
designation is first secured.  The city shall cause appropriate signs to be
posted at the entrance to designated streets.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to fail to obey the markings or signs posted under this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.05  TURNING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The City Council by resolution may, whenever
necessary to preserve a free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents,
designate any intersection as one where turning of vehicles to the left or to
the right, or both, is to be restricted at all times or during specified
hours.  No intersection on a trunk highway shall be so designated until the
consent of the Commissioner of Transportation to the designation is first
obtained.



      (2)   The city shall mark by appropriate signs any
intersection so designated.



      (3)   No person shall turn a vehicle at any intersection
contrary to the direction on those signs.



   (B)   Except at intersections, and then only if not posted
otherwise, it shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle on
any street to cross the center of the street for the purpose of parking on
the side of the street opposite the original direction of travel.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle
on any street to back up or drive from a parked position and commence travel
in the opposite direction from which the motor vehicle faced when parked.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.06  U-TURNS RESTRICTED.



   No person shall turn a vehicle so as to reverse its direction on any
street in the business district or at any intersection where traffic is
regulated by a traffic control signal.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.07  EXCESSIVE NOISE.



   (A)   As used in this section, LIGHT-MOTOR VEHICLES means any
automobile, van, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motor scooter, go-cart,
minibike, trail bike, or truck with a gross vehicular weight of less than
10,000 pounds.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to
operate, or use a light-motor vehicle in a manner as to cause, or allow to be
caused, excessive noise levels as a result of unreasonable rapid
accelerations, deceleration, revving of engine, squealing of tires, honking
of horns, or as a result of the operation of audio devices including but not
limited to radios, phonograph, tape players, compact disc players or any
other sound-amplifying device on or from the light-motor vehicle.



   (C)   No person shall operate, or cause to operate, or use a
light-motor vehicle in violation of the noise standards contained in Minn.
Rules parts 7030.1050 and 7030.1060, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   No person shall operate, or cause to operate, or use a
light-motor vehicle that discharges its exhaust other than through a muffler
or other device that effectively prevents loud or explosive noises. No person
shall operate, or cause to operate, or use a light-motor vehicle whose
exhaust system has been modified, altered, or repaired in any way, including
the use of a muffler cut-out or by-pass, that amplifies or otherwise
increases noise above that emitted by the light-motor vehicle as originally
equipped.



   (E)   The following are exempted from the provisions of this section:



      (1)   Sound emitted from sirens of authorized emergency
vehicles;



      (2)   Burglar alarms on light-motor vehicles of the electronic
signaling type which also transmit an audible signal to a receiver which can
be carried by the owner or operator of the vehicle; and



      (3)   Celebrations on Halloween and other legal holidays and
celebrations in connection with duly authorized parades.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.08  EXHIBITION DRIVING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate a
motor vehicle within the city in a manner which causes unnecessary engine
noise or backfire, squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of
sand or gravel, or in a manner simulating a race.  Unreasonable squealing or
screeching sounds emitted by tires or the unreasonable throwing of sand or
gravel by the tires is prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.09  CRUISING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   As used in this section, CRUISINGmeans the operation of a
motor vehicle as defined in M.S. § 169.01, Subd. 3, as it may be amended
from time to time, past a traffic control point as determined by a peace
officer on a street in an area designated “No Cruising Zone” by City
Council resolution four or more times between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 3:30
a.m.



   (B)   The passing of a traffic control point under the conditions
previously stated, shall constitute unnecessary repetitive driving and is a
violation of this section.



   (C)   The following use of vehicles shall constitute valid
exceptions to this prohibition: taxicabs for hire, buses, authorized
emergency vehicle, vehicles use used by or under contract with any
governmental jurisdiction, any vehicle being used to conduct legitimate
business activities.



   (D)   This section may be enforced only in an area that has been
posted as a “No Cruising Zone.”  Signs shall be posted at the beginning
and the end of any public street, alley or highway, or portion thereof which
is a no cruising zone.



§ 70.10  MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
phrases are defined as follows:



      ABNORMAL OR EXCESSIVE NOISE.



         (a)   Distinct and loudly audible noise that
unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort and repose
of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their
property's value;



         (b)   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. §
169.69, as it may be amended from time to time, which requires every motor
vehicle to be equipped with a muffler in good working order; or



         (c)   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. §
169.693 and Minn. Rules parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as this statute
and these rules may be amended from time to time, which establish motor
vehicle noise standards.



      ENGINE-RETARDING BRAKE.  A dynamic brake, jake brake, Jacobs
brake, C-brake, Paccar brake, transmission brake or other similar
engine-retarding brake system which alters the normal compression of the
engine and subsequently releases that compression.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge the exhaust
or permit the discharge of the exhaust from any motor vehicle except through
a muffler that effectively prevents abnormal or excessive noise and complies
with all applicable state laws and regulations.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck to
intentionally use an engine-retarding brake on any public highway, street,
parking lot or alley within the city which causes abnormal or excessive noise
from the engine because of an illegally modified or defective exhaust system,
except in an emergency.



   (D)   Minnesota Statutes §§ 169.69 and 169.693 (motor vehicle
noise limits) and Minn. Rules parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as these
statutes and rules may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by
reference.



   (E)   Signs stating “VEHICLE NOISE LAWS ENFORCED” may be
installed at locations deemed appropriate by the City Council to advise
motorists of the prohibitions contained in this section, except that no sign
stating “VEHICLE NOISE LAWS ENFORCED” shall be installed on a state
highway without a permit from the Minnesota Department of Transportation. The
provisions of this section are in full force and effect even if no signs are
installed.



PARADES



§ 70.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARADE.  Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or
procession of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk,
park, or other public place in the city.



   PARADE PERMIT.  A permit required by this subchapter.



   PARKING LOT.  Any paved or unpaved area used by a place of business or
shopping center for the parking of vehicles of their customers, but shall not
include those operated for hire.



§ 70.21  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person or persons shall engage or participate in, aid, form
or start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the City
Clerk or other authorized city official.



   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Funeral processions;



      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or
participating in educational activities; provided, that the conduct is under
the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities;



      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.22  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Generally.  A person seeking issuance of a parade permit
shall file an application with the City Clerk.



   (B)   Filing period.  The application for a parade permit shall be
filed not less than 72 hours but not more than 60 days before the date on
which it is proposed to conduct the parade.  Failure to file an application
72 hours in advance will not result in automatic denial of the permit;
provided, that the applicant shows reasonable grounds why the application
could not be filed 72 hours in advance.



   (C)   Required information.  The application for a parade permit
shall set forth the following information:



      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct the parade;



      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of, or by an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads
of the organization;



      (3)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person
who will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its
conduct;



      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;



      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the
termination point;



      (6)   The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles
which will constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the
description of the vehicles;



      (7)   The hours when the parade will start and terminate;



      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park or other public
place proposed to be traversed;



      (9)   The location by street of any assembly area for the
parade;



      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to
assemble at any assembly area or areas;



      (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of
the parade;



      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf
of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit
shall file a communication in writing from the person authorizing the
applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf;



      (13)   Any additional information reasonably necessary to a
fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued.



   (D)   There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a
parade permit a fee as set by City Council from time to time.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.23  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   The City Clerk shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of the
application and from other information obtained, he or she finds that:



   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;



   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the city;



   (C)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly
areas;



   (D)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement
of firefighting equipment en route to a fire;



   (E)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to
its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en
route;



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.24  NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT APPLICATION.



   If the City Clerk disapproves the application, he or she shall mail to
the applicant within the three regular business days after the date on which
the application was filed a notice of his or her action stating the reasons
for his or her denial of the permit.



§ 70.25  APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.



   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a
parade permit to the City Council.  The appeal shall be taken within 30 days
after notice of denial.  The City Council shall act on the appeal within 30
days after its receipt.



§ 70.26  ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.



   The City Clerk or other authorized city official, in denying an
application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct
of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different than that named
by the applicant.  An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall
file a written notice of his or her acceptance.  An alternate parade permit
shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade
permit under this subchapter.



§ 70.27  NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.



   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be
sent to the Police Chief and the Fire Chief.



§ 70.28  CONTENTS OF PERMIT.



   Each parade permit shall state the following information:



   (A)   Starting time;



   (B)   Minimum speed;



   (C)   Maximum speed;



   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units
of the parade;



   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park or other public
place to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;



   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;



   (G)   Other information as is reasonably necessary to the
enforcement of this subchapter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.29  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.



   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.  The parade
chairperson or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the
parade permit on his or her person during the conduct of the parade.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.30  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.



   (A)   Interference.  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct,
impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person,
vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.



   (B)   Driving through parades.  No driver of a vehicle except a
police car or other emergency vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or
persons comprising a parade when the vehicles or persons are in motion and
are conspicuously designated as a parade.



   (C)   Parking on parade route.  The Police Chief or other
authorized city official shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary,
to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or other
public thoroughfare or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a
parade.  Signs shall be posted to the effect, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof.  No
person shall be liable for parking on a street or other public thoroughfare
unless signs have been posted in accordance with this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.31  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The city shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
hereunder on application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.



CHAPTER 71:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   71.01   No parking where posted



   71.02   Limited parking



   71.03   Other parking restrictions



   71.04   Snow removal parking restrictions



   71.05   Restrictions for parking on Paul Avenue during snow removal



   71.06   Parking certain semi-trailers or tractors on public streets
prohibited



   71.07   Overnight parking



   71.08   Repairing of vehicles



   71.09   Prohibiting parking areas in front yards in residential zones



   71.10   Impoundment



   71.11   Prima facie violation



§ 71.01  NO PARKING WHERE POSTED.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon the public streets
of the city at any place where official signs or where appropriate devices,
marks, or painting, either upon the surface of the street or the curb
immediately adjacent thereto, prohibit these acts.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.02  LIMITED PARKING.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon the public streets
of the city where official signs are erected limiting the parking time
thereon, for a period of time in excess of the time as designated by the
official signs.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.03  OTHER PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   The City Council may by resolution order the placing of signs,
devices or marks, or the painting of streets or curbs prohibiting or
restricting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any street
where, in its opinion, as evidenced by a finding in its official minutes, the
stopping, standing or parking is dangerous to those using the highway, or
where the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere
with the free movement of traffic.  The signs, devices, marks or painting
shall be official signs, devices, marks or painting, and no person shall
stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation of the restrictions thereon or
as indicated thereby.



   (B)   “No parking” signs may be placed by city employees on any
street of the city to permit construction, repair, snow removal, street
cleaning or similar temporary activities.  While the signs are in place, it
shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the streets or portion thereof so
posted.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person to park in an area
designated by Council resolution and posted as a fire lane.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person to park a vehicle or permit
it to stand, whether attended or unattended, on an alley within the city,
provided that this does not prohibit the parking of vehicles for less than
one hour on an alley for the purpose of access to abutting property for
loading or unloading merchandise or other material when parking on the
property itself is not available.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for a person to park a motor vehicle in
an area designated by posted signs pursuant to Council resolution for certain
types of vehicles, unless the motor vehicle is one of the types of vehicles
specifically permitted.



   (F)   Every vehicle parked upon any street with a curb shall be
parked parallel to the curb, unless angle parking is designated by
appropriate signs or markings. On streets with a curb, the right-hand wheels
of any vehicle parked shall be within one foot of the curb. On streets
without a curb, the vehicle shall be parked to the right of the main traveled
portion of the street and parallel to it and in such a manner as not to
interfere with the free flow of traffic, unless angle parking is designated
by appropriate signs or markings.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.04  SNOW REMOVAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



   No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle on any public street
in the City of Cologne after a snowfall of two inches or more in depth until
after the snow from the street has been removed or plowed to the curb or
other street boundaries.  Any vehicle left standing or parked under those
conditions may be removed as hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 76A, passed 10-4-1993)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.05  RESTRICTIONS FOR PARKING ON PAUL AVENUE DURING SNOW REMOVAL.



   At any time in which snow is being removed from Paul Avenue and signs
have been posted on Paul Avenue by 4:00 p.m. of the evening preceding the
removal of the snow, there shall be no parking on Paul Avenue from 1:00 a.m.
until 7:00 a.m. following the posting of the signs.  Any vehicle left
standing or parked within the time period recited in this section may be
removed as hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 76A, passed 10-4-1993)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.06  PARKING CERTAIN SEMI-TRAILERS OR TRACTORS ON PUBLIC STREETS
PROHIBITED.



   No person shall park a semi-tractor or trailer, or any truck rated with
a gross vehicle weight in excess of 10,000 pounds, in any area of the city
zoned for residential use or other area designated by City Council resolution
except when the vehicle is parked in a completely enclosed garage.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.07  OVERNIGHT PARKING.



   The following vehicles shall not be allowed to park on city streets
overnight: repair, delivery, rented vehicles with commercial plates and
refuse and recycling haulers or any other vehicle not registered as a
passenger vehicle.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.08  REPAIRING OF VEHICLES.



   Minor repairs and tune-ups, such as replacement of spark plugs, spark
plug wires, thermostat, radiator or heater hoses, oil changes and brake jobs
shall be permitted on city streets; provided, that they can be accomplished
within the same day and completed by 10:00 p.m.  All other repairs shall be
considered major repairs and shall not be permitted on any city street,
unless the repairs are made within an enclosed structure allowed within the
zoning district.  Damage to city streets because of repairs or lack of
repairs shall be charged to the person responsible for the damage to the city
streets.



§ 71.09  PROHIBITING PARKING AREAS IN FRONT YARDS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.



   (A)   The construction, operation or maintaining a parking area,
either paved or unpaved, in the front yard of any lot is prohibited in any
area zoned for residential use.  For the purpose of this section, front yard
shall mean and include that area between the sidewalk, or street line in the
event there is no sidewalk, and the front line of the principal building,
extending in both directions to the side lot lines.



   (B)   Use of that portion of a vacant lot within 30 feet of the
sidewalk lines for parking in an area zoned for residential use is prohibited.



   (C)   Driveways in any area zoned for residential use shall not
exceed 25% of the width at the front or side lot line.  Where more than one
driveway is desired or required, they shall be at least 70 feet apart.



   (D)   The front part of any lot shall not be used for the parking of
an automobile, truck, trailer, tractor, recreational vehicle, camper, travel
trailer, camper top, tent, wagon, boat, boat trailer, storage area or motor
home.



   (E)   No person, being the owner or having control of any building,
shall violate or fail to conform to any provision of this section, or fail to
obey any lawful order of an officer charged with its enforcement.  Each and
every day on which any person continues to violate the provisions of this
section, after having been notified of the violation, shall constitute a
separate offense.  This conviction shall not relieve any person from
thereafter complying with the provisions of this section, and shall be
sufficient cause to refuse further building or land use permits to the
offender until a time as the orders have been complied with.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.10  IMPOUNDMENT.



   Any police officer may order the removal of a vehicle from a street to
a garage or other place of safety when the vehicle is left unattended and
constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hinders snow removal, street
improvements or maintenance operations.  The vehicle shall not be released
until the fees for towing and storage are paid in addition to any fine
imposed for violation of this chapter.



§ 71.11  PRIMA FACIE VIOLATIONS.



   The presence of any motor vehicle on any street when standing or parked
in violation of this chapter is prima facie evidence that the registered
owner of the vehicle committed or authorized the commission of the violation.



CHAPTER 72: SNOWMOBILES



Section



   72.01   Intent



   72.02   Definitions



   72.03   Application of traffic ordinances



   72.04   Restrictions



   72.05   Stopping and yielding



   72.06   Persons under 18



   72.07   Equipment



   72.08   Unattended snowmobiles



   72.09   Emergency operation permitted



   72.10   State laws adopted by reference



§ 72.01  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this chapter to supplement M.S. §§ 84.81 to
84.91, and M.S. Ch. 169, as these statutes may be amended from time to time
and Minn. Rules parts 6100.5000 through 6100.6000, as these rules may be
amended from time to time, with respect to the operation of snowmobiles. 
These statutes and rules are incorporated herein by reference.  This section
is not intended to allow what the state statutes and rules prohibit, nor to
prohibit what the state statutes and rules allow.



§ 72.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEADMAN THROTTLE or SAFETY THROTTLE.  A device which, when pressure is
removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be
disengaged from the driving mechanism.



   OPERATE.  To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.



   OPERATOR.  Every person who operates or is in actual physical control
of a snowmobile.



   OWNER.  A person, other than a lien holder having the property in or
title to a snowmobile, or entitled to the use or possession thereof.



   PERSON.  Includes an individual, partnership, corporation, the state
and its agencies and subdivision, and any body of persons, whether
incorporated or not.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The entire strip of land traversed by a highway or
street in which the public owns the fee or an easement for roadway purposes.



   ROADWAY.  That portion of a highway or street improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.



   SNOWMOBILE.  A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or
ice, steered by skis or runners.



   STREET.  A public thoroughfare, roadway, alley or trail used for motor
vehicular traffic which is not an interstate, trunk, county-state aid, or
county highway.



§ 72.03  APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC ORDINANCES.



   The provisions of Ch. 70 of this code shall apply to the operation of
snowmobiles upon streets and highways, except for those relating to required
equipment, and except those which by their nature have no application.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.04  RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to enter, operate or stop a
snowmobile within the limits of the city:



      (1)   On the roadway of any street, except the most right hand
lane then available for traffic or as close as practicable to right hand curb
or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle
stopped in the lane or proceeding in the same direction, or in making a left
turn.  Snowmobiles may also be operated upon the outside slope of trunk,
county-state aid and county highways where the highways are so configured
within the corporate limits.



      (2)   On a public sidewalk or trail provided for pedestrian
travel.



      (3)   On boulevards within any public right-of-way.



      (4)   On private property of another without specific
permission of the owner or person in control of the property.



      (5)   Upon any school grounds, except as permission is
expressly obtained from responsible school authorities.



      (6)   On public property, playgrounds and recreation areas,
except areas previously listed or authorized for the use by resolution of the
City Council, in which case the use shall be lawful, and snowmobiles may be
driven in and out of those areas by the shortest route.



      (7)   On streets as permitted by this chapter at a speed
exceeding ten miles per hour.



      (8)   During the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., Sunday
through Thursday, and 12:01 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. on other days closer than 100
feet from any residence.  This provision is not intended to prohibit
snowmobiles from operating on city streets during the hours specified herein.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within
the limits of the city:



      (1)   So as to tow any person or thing in a public street or
highway except through use of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the
snowmobile; provided, that a disabled snowmobile may be towed to a private
residence or a place of business where snowmobiles are repaired without the
use of a rigid tow bar.



      (2)   Within 100 feet of any fisherman, pedestrian, skating
rink or sliding area where the operation would conflict with use or endanger
other persons or operation.



      (3)   To intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any
animal.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.05  STOPPING AND YIELDING.



   No snowmobile shall enter any uncontrolled intersection without making
a complete stop.  The operator shall then yield the right-of-way to any
vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close to the intersection
as to constitute an immediate hazard.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.06  PERSONS UNDER 18.



   (A)   No person under 14 years of age shall operate on streets or
make a direct crossing of a city street as the operator of a snowmobile.  A
person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, may operate a
snowmobile on streets as permitted under this chapter and make a direct
crossing of those streets only if he or she has in his or her immediate
possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued pursuant to M.S. §
84.872, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to permit the
snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provision of this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.07  EQUIPMENT.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile any place within
the limits of the city unless it is equipped with the following:



   (A)   Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce
the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. 
No person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass straight pipe or similar device
on a snowmobile motor.



   (B)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and
hold the snowmobile under any condition of operation.



   (C)   A safety or so called deadman throttle in operating condition.



   (D)   When operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset
to one-half hour before sunrise, or at times of reduced visibility, at least
one clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient intensity to reveal
persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the
hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.  The head lamp shall
be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming
snowmobile operator.  It shall also be equipped with at least one red light
plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during hours of
darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.



   (E)   Snowmobiles shall fly a pennant flag or red or blaze material,
of a size not less than 12 inches by nine inches, at a height of not less
than six feet from ground level at any time when the vehicle is operated on
public streets.



   (F)   Reflective material at least 16 square inches on each side,
forward of the handlebars and at the highest practical point on any towed
object, so as to reflect lights at a 90-degree angle.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.08  UNATTENDED SNOWMOBILES.



   Every person leaving a snowmobile on a public place shall lock the
ignition, remove the key and take the same with him or her.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.09  EMERGENCY OPERATION PERMITTED.



   Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this chapter, a snowmobile may be
operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time
and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile
impractical.



§ 72.10  STATE LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The regulatory provisions of Chapter 70, including, but not limited to,
the incorporation of the Highway Traffic Regulations Act, M.S. Chapter 169,
as it may be amended from time to time, contained therein, except for those
relating to required equipment, and except those which by their nature have
no application, and the Laws of Minnesota, 1967, Chapter 876, as it may be
amended from time to time, and any and all rules and regulations promulgated
by the Commissioner of Highways and Commissioner of Conservation pursuant to
the M.S. Chapter 169, and Laws 1967, Chapter 876, as they may be amended from
time to time, are hereby applicable to snowmobiles and are hereby
incorporated in and made a part of this chapter as completely as if set out
here in full.



(Ord. 79, passed 7-29-1970)



CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



Section



   73.01   Purpose and intent



   73.02   Definition



   73.03   Operation requirements



   73.04   Street crossings



   73.05   Hours of operation



   73.06   Minimum equipment requirements



   73.07   Designation of public areas for use



   73.08   Motorized golf carts



§ 73.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable
regulations for the use of recreational motor vehicles on public and private
property in the city.



      (2)   This chapter is not intended to allow what the Minnesota
Statutes prohibit nor to prohibit what the Minnesota Statutes expressly allow.



   (B)   It is intended to ensure the public safety and prevent a
public nuisance.



§ 73.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any self-propelled vehicle and any
vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle used for recreational
purposes including, but not limited to trail bike, off-highway motorcycle, as
defined by M.S. § 84.787, Subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to time,
or other all-terrain vehicle as defined by M.S. § 84.92, Subd. 8, it may be
amended from time to time, motorized go-carts, hovercraft or motor vehicle
licensed for highway operation which is being used for off-road recreational
purposes.



§ 73.03  OPERATION REQUIREMENTS.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate a recreational motor vehicle:



   (A)   On private property of another without specific written
permission of the owner of the property; (Written permission may be given by
a posted notice of any kind or description, so long as it specifies the kind
of vehicles allowed, that the owner, occupant or lessee prefers, such as by
saying “Recreational Vehicles Allowed,” “Trail Bikes Allowed,”
“All-Terrain Vehicles Allowed” or words substantially similar.)



   (B)   On publicly-owned land, including school, park property,
playgrounds, recreation areas and golf courses, except where permitted by
this chapter;



   (C)   In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual
noise which disturbs, annoys or interferes with the peace and quiet of other
persons;



   (D)   On a public sidewalk or walkway provided or used for
pedestrian travel;



   (E)   At a place while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
narcotics or habit-forming drugs;



   (F)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all
the surrounding circumstances;



   (G)   At any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as
to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or to cause
injury or damage thereto;



   (H)   On any public street, highway or right-of-way unless licensed
pursuant to Minnesota law;



   (I)   To intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal,
wild or domestic;



   (J)   By halting any recreational motor vehicle carelessly or
heedlessly in disregard of the rights or the safety of others or in a manner
so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or in
excess of 25 miles per hour on publicly-owned lands; and/or



   (K)   Within 150 yards of any public recreational area or gathering
of people. This provision does not apply to the occasional use of
recreational motor vehicles on private property for the purpose of loading or
unloading it from a trailer or for mechanically checking it.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.04  STREET CROSSINGS.



   No person under 14 years of age operating the vehicles regulated herein
shall make a direct crossing of any street, highway or public right-of-way.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.05 HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Hours for use are 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.06 MINIMUM EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Standard mufflers shall be properly attached and in constant
operation to reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum
necessary for operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass,
straight pipe or similar device on a recreational motor vehicle motor. The
exhaust system shall not emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling sound.



   (B)   Brakes shall be adequate to control the movement of and to
stop and hold under any conditions of operation.



   (C)   At least one clear lamp shall be attached to the front with
sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least
100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions. The head lamp shall be so that glaring rays are not projected
into the eyes of an oncoming vehicle operator.  It shall also be equipped
with at least one red tail lamp having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet
to the rear during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions.  This equipment shall be required and shall be in operating
condition when the vehicle is operated between the hours of 1/2 hour after
sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise, or at times of reduced visibility.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.07  DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC AREAS FOR USE.



   (A)   The Council may designate areas for use of recreational motor
vehicles by approval of a majority of the members of the City Council. The
areas designated may be changed from time to time by the City Council. Any
area designated shall be published in the official newspaper of the city in a
conspicuous place after the approval. If an area is changed, the change shall
be published in like manner in the official newspaper of the city. An
up-to-date map of any designated park areas open for recreational motor
vehicle use shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, who shall
provide on request a copy of the map together with the applicable rules,
regulations and this chapter to each person requesting the information from
the city.



   (B)   Unless designated by the City Council as an area for
recreational motor vehicles, the use on city park property shall be unlawful.
Further, the use of city parks designated by the City Council shall be in
accordance with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.08  MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a motorized golf cart on
streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public property without obtaining a
permit as provided herein.



      (2)   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form
supplied by the city and shall contain the following information:



         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;



         (b)   The nature of the applicant's physical handicap,
if any;



         (c)   Model name, make and year and number of the
motorized golf cart;



         (d)   Current driver's license or reason for not having
a current license; and



         (e)   Other information as the city may require.



      (3)   The annual permit fee shall be as set forth by City
Council from time to time.



      (4)   Permits shall be granted for a period of one year and
may be renewed annually January 1 to December 31.



      (5)   No permit shall be granted or renewed unless the
following conditions are met:



         (a)   The applicant must demonstrate that he or she
currently holds or has held a valid Minnesota driver's license;



         (b)   The applicant may be required to submit a
certificate signed by a physician that the applicant is able to safely
operate a motorized golf cart on the roadways designated;



         (c)   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance
in compliance with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes concerning insurance
coverage for the golf cart;



         (d)   The applicant has not had his or her driver's
license revoked as the result of criminal proceedings.



      (6)   Motorized golf carts are permitted to operate only on
city streets, not state or federal highways, except to cross at designated
intersections.



      (7)   Motorized golf carts may only be operated on designated
roadways from sunrise to sunset. They shall not be operated in inclement
weather conditions or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly
see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance of 500 feet.



      (8)   Motorized golf carts shall display the slow-moving
vehicle emblem provided for in M.S. § 169.522, as it may be amended from
time to time, when operated on designated roadways.



      (9)   Motorized golf carts shall be equipped with a wing-style
rear view mirror to provide the driver with adequate vision from behind.



      (10)   The operator of a motorized golf cart may cross any
street or highway intersecting a designated roadway.



      (11)   Every person operating a motorized golf cart under
permit on designated roadways has all the rights and duties applicable to the
driver of any other vehicle under the provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it
may be amended from time to time, except when these provisions cannot
reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts and except as otherwise
specifically provided in M.S. § 169.045(7), as it may be amended from time
to time.



      (12)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a permit granted
hereunder upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any of the
provisions of this section or M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from
time to time, or if there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely
operate the motorized golf cart on the designated roadways.



      (13)   The number of occupants in the golf cart may not exceed
the design occupant load.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DRIVER.  The person driving and having physical control over the
motorized golf cart and being the licensee.



      MOTORIZED GOLF CART.  Any passenger conveyance being driven with
four wheels with four low pressure tires that is limited in engine
displacement of less than 800 cubic centimeters and total dry weight less
than 800 pounds.



CHAPTER 74: BICYCLES, ROLLER BLADES, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER SKIS AND
SKATEBOARDS



Section




Bicycles




   74.01   Definition



   74.02   Traffic laws apply



   74.03   Manner and number riding



   74.04   Hitching rides



   74.05   Where to ride



   74.06   Right-of-way; sidewalks



   74.07   Carrying articles



   74.08   Lighting and brake equipment



   74.09   Sale with reflectors




Roller Blades, Roller Skates, Roller Skis and Skateboards




   74.25   Definitions



   74.26   Unlawful acts



   74.27   Right-of-way



   74.28   Hours of use



 



   74.99   Violations



BICYCLES



§ 74.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE.  Every device propelled solely by human power upon which any
person may ride, having two tandem wheels, except scooters and similar
devices, and including any device generally recognized as a BICYCLE though
equipped with two front or rear wheels.



§ 74.02  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY.



   Every person riding a bicycle on a street or upon any path set aside
for the exclusive use of bicycles shall be granted all of the rights and
shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by this title, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as
to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no
application.



§ 74.03  MANNER AND NUMBER RIDING.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person propelling a bicycle to ride
other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.



   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time
than the number for which it is designed and equipped, except on a baby seat
attached to the bicycle, provided that the seat is equipped with a harness to
hold the child securely in the seat and that protection is provided against
the child's feet hitting the spokes of the wheel, or in a seat attached to
the bicycle operator.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.04  HITCHING RIDES.



   It is unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, roller blades, skate board, sled, or toy vehicle to attach the same
or themselves to any vehicle upon a street.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.05  WHERE TO RIDE.



   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a street shall ride as
near to the right side of the street as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a street shall not ride more than
two abreast except on paths or parts of streets set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.06  RIGHT-OF-WAY; SIDEWALKS.



   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person shall
yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before
overtaking and passing the pedestrian.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.07  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   It is unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to carry any package,
bundle, or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand
upon the handlebars.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.08  LIGHTING AND BRAKE EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Every bicycle, when in use at night time, shall be equipped
with, or its operator shall carry a lamp on the front which shall emit a
white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front, and
with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Department of
Public Safety which is visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet
to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a
motor vehicle.  A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.  No person
may, at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly
discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500 feet
ahead, operate a bicycle unless the bicycle or its operator is equipped with
reflective surfaces that shall be visible during the hours of darkness from
600 feet when viewed in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle. The reflective surfaces shall include reflective materials on each
side of each pedal to indicate their presence from the front or the rear and
with a minimum of 20 square inches on each side of the bicycle or its
operator of white reflective material. All reflective materials used in
compliance with this section shall meet the requirements as prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety.



   (B)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable
the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.09  SALE WITH REFLECTORS.



   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any new bicycle
unless it is equipped with such reflectors as are prescribed in § 74.08.



Penalty, see § 74.99



ROLLER BLADES, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER SKIS AND SKATEBOARDS



§ 74.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  That part of the City so designated by Council
resolution.



   OPERATE.  To ride on or upon or control the operation of roller
blades, roller skates, or a skateboard.



   OPERATOR.  Every person who operates or is in actual physical control
of roller blades, roller skates, or a skateboard.



   ROLLER BLADES/ROLLER SKATES.  A shoe with wheels attached or a device
with wheels which is designed to be attached to a shoe.



   ROLLER SKIS.  A pair of skis platformed with wheels attached which is
intended to simulate skiing.



   SKATEBOARD.  A device for riding-upon, usually while standing,
consisting of an oblong piece of wood, or of other composition, mounted on
skate wheels.



§ 74.26  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate roller blades, roller
skates, roller skis or a skateboard under the circumstances set forth
hereafter:



      (1)   On any public sidewalk, street, or public parking lot
within the Business District;



      (2)   On private property of another without the express
permission to do so by the owner or occupant of the property; or



      (3)   In any careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to
endanger or be likely to endanger the safety of any person or property of any
other person.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person operating roller blades, roller
skates, roller skis or a skateboard to attach the same, or the person of the
operator, to any vehicle upon a street.



   (C)   Every person operating roller blades, roller skates, roller
skis or a skateboard upon a street shall ride as close as possible to the
right-hand curb or edge of the street.



   (D)   Every person operating roller blades, roller skates, roller
skis or a skateboard upon a street shall observe the same rules of the road
as required of bicycles, pursuant to M.S. § 169.222.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.27  RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   The operator of roller blades, roller skates, roller skis or a
skateboard emerging from any alley, driveway, or building, upon approaching a
sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area
and upon entering the street shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the street.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.28  HOURS OF USE.



   It is unlawful for any person to use roller blades, roller skates,
roller skis or a skateboard upon a public street, sidewalk, or other roadway
from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., except on private property with express
permission of owner, and except if the roller blades, roller skates, roller
skis, skateboard or operator are equipped with reflective surfaces that shall
be visible during the hours of darkness from 600 feet when viewed in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. The reflective material
shall be a minimum of 40 square inches. All reflective materials used in
compliance with this section shall meet the requirements as prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.99  VIOLATIONS.



   A person apprehended by a peace officer in violation of the provisions
of this chapter does, by his or her use of the public sidewalks, streets, and
public parking lots, consent to the impoundment by a police officer of the
roller blades, roller skates, roller skis or skateboard for a period of three
days upon a first offense, a week upon the second offense and 30 days upon a
third or additional offense. Any operator aggrieved by the impoundment of his
or her roller blades, roller skates roller skis or skateboard may petition
the Council for a hearing thereon at the next regular Council meeting
following the impoundment. This provision is in addition to the provisions
for fines and penalties as set forth in § 10.99.



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   ALARM USERS





         91.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT





         92.   ANIMALS





         93.   PARKS AND RECREATION





         94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         95.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES





         96.   LAWN SPRINKLING AND IRRIGATION





         97.   SUMP PUMPS





         98.   SOLID WASTE




CHAPTER 90:  ALARM USERS



Section



   90.01   Title



   90.02   Purpose and scope



   90.03   Definitions



   90.04   Compliance



   90.05   User fees



   90.06   Enforcement



   90.07   Effective date



 



   90.98   Violations



§ 90.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the Alarm Users
Ordinance, except as herein referred to as this chapter.



(Ord. 101, passed 10-4-1982)



§ 90.02  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public safety services
which serve the City of Cologne from misuse and to provide for the maximum
possible service to alarm users.  This chapter provides regulation for the
use of burglary, robbery, fire, and medical alarms and establishes a system
of administration and alarm users fee.



(Ord. 101, passed 10-4-1982)



§ 90.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  Any equipment or device which emits an audible, visual,
or electronic signal upon the detection of a potential burglary, robbery,
fire, medical emergency, trespass, or property intrusion.  The term ALARM
SYSTEM does not include anti-theft or tampering alarms installed in any motor
vehicle.



   ALARM USER.  Any person in control of any building, structure,
facility, or tract of land wherein or whereon an alarm system is used or
maintained within the City of Cologne.



   FALSE ALARM.  An alarm signal eliciting a response by public safety
personnel when a situation requiring a response does not exist, and which is
caused by the activation of the alarm system through mechanical failure,
alarm malfunction, improper installation, or the inadvertence of the owner or
lessee of the alarm system or of his or her employees or agents.  FALSE
ALARMS do not include alarms caused by climatic conditions such as tornadoes,
thunderstorms, utility line mishaps, violent conditions of nature, or any
other conditions which are clearly beyond the control of the alarm
manufacturer, installer, or alarm user.



   PERSON.  Any human being, any corporation, partnership, fire
association, or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent,
or other legal representative of any of the foregoing, or any other legal
entity.



   PUBLIC SAFETY COMMUNICATIONS CENTER.  The central facility used to
receive emergency requests for public safety services and general information
from the public to be dispatched to public safety personnel.



   PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL.  All personnel employed by any law
enforcement agency, and any firefighting personnel and any ambulance
personnel.



   SHERIFF.  The Carver County Sheriff or his or her designee.



(Ord. 101, passed 10-4-1982)



§ 90.04  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Generally.  No person shall locate, install, construct,
alter, repair, use, or maintain any alarm system within the City of Cologne
except in full compliance with this chapter and the standards adopted herein.



   (B)   Audible alerts.  All audible alarms shall meet the following
requirements.



      (1)   Every person maintaining an alarm system with an audible
alarm signal shall post a notice containing the name and telephone number of
a person to be notified to render repairs or service to the alarm system
during any hour of the day or night, upon activation of the alarm system. 
The notice shall be posted at the main entrance to the premises or near the
alarm in such a position as to be legible from the ground level adjacent to
the building.



      (2)   Alarm systems with audible alarm signals that sound like
police or fire sirens are prohibited.



      (3)   All alarm systems with audible alarm signals, except for
the fire alarms, shall have an automatic shut-off which will silence the
audible alarm signal within a period not to exceed 15 minutes.



   (C)   Registration.



      (1)   All persons using or maintaining any alarm system within
the City of Cologne shall register the alarm system with the Sheriff,
utilizing registration forms to be furnished by the Sheriff, no later than
the later of the following dates:



         (a)   The sixtieth day after the effective date of this
chapter; or



         (b)   The thirtieth day after the installation of the
alarm system.



      (2)   Any alteration or modification of any previously
registered alarm system shall be registered with the Sheriff, utilizing
registration forms to be furnished by the Sheriff, within 30 days of the
commencement of the alteration or modification.



   (D)   Multiple function alarm system.  Alarm systems that have more
than one alarm signal function (burglary, fire, and the like) must report
specifically which of the functions has been violated, when reporting to the
Public Safety Communications Center for the purpose of dispatching public
safety personnel to the site of the alarm system.



   (E)   Communications Center.  No alarm system shall connect
directly to the Public Safety Communications Center except financial
institutions and/or public buildings.  All other alarms must report to the
Public Safety Communications Center in some other manner.  No automatic
telephone dialing device shall be allowed to dial direct or be programmed so
that it dials directly into the Public Safety Communications Center.



(Ord. 101, passed 10-4-1982)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.05  USER FEES.



   (A)   User fee imposed.  An alarm user fee is hereby imposed upon
any alarm user from whose alarm systems emanates more than three false alarms
within any 12-consecutive-month period.  The fees payable under this
division (A) shall be consistent with those set from time to time by Carver
County Board ordinance.



   (B)   Exemptions.



      (1)   Public buildings.  All federal, state, county, and/or
municipal buildings and all public schools shall be exempt from the alarm
users fee.



      (2)   New alarm systems.  All newly installed alarm systems
are hereby granted a 30-day probationary period, commencing on the date of
first operational use thereof, during which period false alarms will not be
counted for the purpose of computing the amount of any alarm user fee imposed
by this chapter.



      (3)   Alterations to existing alarm systems.  All alarm
systems which are altered by the addition to any new alarm feature are hereby
granted a 15-day probationary period, commencing on the date of first
operational use of the new feature, during which period false alarms will not
be counted for the purpose of computing the amount of any alarm user fee
imposed by this chapter.



   (C)   Payment of alarm user fees.  Subsequent to any false alarm,
the Sheriff shall notify the affected alarm user in writing of the date of
the false alarm, the apparent reason therefor, and the alarm user fee imposed
pursuant to this chapter.  It shall be the duty of each alarm user to pay
all alarm user fees imposed by this chapter to the Sheriff within 30 days of
the date of mailing of the Sheriff’s fee statement specifying the amount of
the alarm user fees.  For the purpose of mailing the Sheriff’s fee
statement under this section, the statement shall be mailed to the affected
alarm user at his or her or its address shown on the registration from
required by § 90.04(C).  One half of all alarm user fees collected by the
Sheriff shall be remitted to the city to defray its administrative and
prosecution costs incurred in connection with the enforcement of this
chapter.  The other half of the alarm user fees shall be retained by the
Sheriff to defray his or her administrative costs incurred in enforcing this
chapter.



(Ord. 101, passed 10-4-1982; Ord. 101A, passed 5-4-2005)



§ 90.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   User to respond.  If, in the judgment of public safety
personnel at the scene of an alarm, it is determined that the alarm user
should appear at the location of any alarm for the purpose of admitting
public safety personnel to the subject premises to investigate any alarm
system signal, or for the purposes of deactivating any alarm system signal,
or for the purpose of identifying third parties found on the subject premises
during the investigation of any alarm system signal, the alarm user shall
appear immediately if so requested by the Sheriff.



   (B)   Remedial action by user.  If an alarm user has had more than
three false alarms in a 12-month period, the alarm user, upon the written
request of the Sheriff, shall be required to submit in written form a
description of any steps being taken to remedy any problems with false alarms
emanating from the alarm user’s location.



   (C)   Administrative rules/regulations.  The Sheriff shall
promulgate the rules/regulations as necessary for the implementation and/or
administration of this chapter.



(Ord. 101, passed 10-4-1982)



§ 90.07  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The standards, procedures, and provisions adopted herein shall be
effective immediately from and after the passage and publication of this
chapter.



(Ord. 101, passed 10-4-1982)



§ 90.98  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Misdemeanor.  Any person who fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, in addition to being
subject to the alarm users fees imposed by this chapter.  A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continued.



   (B)   Injunctive relief.  In the event of a violation or a threat
of violation of this chapter the city may institute appropriate action or
proceeding, including requesting injunctive relief to prevent, restrain,
correct, or abate the violation or threatened violation.



   (C)   Civil action.  If a person fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, the city may recover costs, damages, or alarm
user fees in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   Governmental services lien.  In addition to the remedies
specified in divisions (A) and (B) above, but in lieu of the remedy specified
in division (C) above, the city may certify any unpaid alarm user fees to the
County Auditor or County Finance Director as a governmental services lien for
collection with the real property taxes imposed on the real property upon
which the alarm system is or was located.



(Ord. 101, passed 10-4-1982)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 91:  RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT



Section



   91.01   Findings and purpose



   91.02   Definitions



   91.03   Administration



   91.04   Registration and right-of-way occupancy



   91.05   Registration information



   91.06   Reporting obligations



   91.07   Permit requirement



   91.08   Permit applications



   91.09   Issuance of permit; conditions



   91.10   Permit fees



   91.11   Right-of-way repair and restoration



   91.12   Joint applications



   91.13   Supplementary applications



   91.14   Other obligations



   91.15   Denial of permit



   91.16   Installation requirements



   91.17   Inspection



   91.18   Work done without a permit



   91.19   Supplementary notification



   91.20   Revocation of permits



   91.21   Mapping data



   91.22   Location of equipment



   91.23   Relocation of equipment



   91.24   Pre-excavation equipment location



   91.25   Damage to other equipment



   91.26   Right-of-way vacation



   91.27   Indemnification and liability



   91.28   Future uses



   91.29   Abandoned and unusable equipment



   91.30   Reservation of regulatory and police powers



   91.31   Effective date



§ 91.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   To provide for the health, safety, and well-being of its
citizens, and to ensure the structural integrity of its streets and the
appropriate use of the rights-of-way, the city strives to keep its
rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary
encumbrances.  Although the general population bears the financial burden
for the upkeep of the rights-of-way, a primary cause for the early and
excessive deterioration of its rights-of-way is frequent excavation.



   (B)   Right-of-way obstruction is a source of frustration for
merchants, business owners, and the general population which must avoid these
obstructions or change travel or shopping plans because of them and has a
detrimental effect on commerce.  Persons whose equipment is within the
right-of-way are the primary cause of these frequent obstructions.



   (C)   The city holds the rights-of-way within its geographical
boundaries as an asset in trust for its citizens.  The city and other public
entities have invested millions of dollars in public funds to build and
maintain the rights-of-way.  It also recognizes that some persons, by
placing their equipment in the right-of-way and charging the citizens of the
city for goods and services delivered thereby, are using this property held
for the public good.  Although the services are often necessary or
convenient for the citizens, the persons receive revenue and/or profit
through their use of public property.



   (D)   In response to the foregoing facts, the city hereby enacts
this chapter relating to right-of-way permits and administration, together
with an ordinance making necessary revisions to other code provisions.  This
chapter imposes reasonable regulations on the placement and maintenance of
equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some
future time.  It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and
federal agencies.  Under this chapter, persons disturbing and obstructing
the rights-of-way will bear a fair share of the financial responsibility for
their integrity.  Finally, this chapter provides for recovery of
out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way.



   CITY.  The City of Cologne, Minnesota.  For purposes of § 91.27,
CITY means its elected officials, officers, employees, and agents.



   CITY COST.  The actual cost incurred by the city for public
rights-of-way management; including, but not limited to, costs associated
with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way
permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user equipment during public
right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration;
restoring work inadequately performed; and revoking right-of-way permits and
performing all other tasks required by this chapter, including other costs
the city may incur in managing the provisions of this chapter.



   DEGRADATION.  The accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way caused
by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct the right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
did not occur.



   DEGRADATION COST.  Money paid to the city to cover the cost associated
with a decrease in the useful life of a public right-of-way caused by
excavation.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Department of Public Works of the city.



   DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR.  Any person authorized by the Director to carry
out inspections related to the provisions of this chapter.



   DIRECTOR.  The city or the City Clerk/Treasurer.



   DISRUPTIVE FEE.  The penalty imposed as a result of the adverse impact
on city citizens and others who are required to alter travel routes and times
resulting from right-of-way obstructions.



   DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT.  The portion of the city abutting State
Highway 284 bounded by the following streets:  between State Highway No. 212
and Benton Meadow Drive.



   EMERGENCY.  A condition that:



      (1)   Poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or
of a significant loss of property; or



      (2)   Requires immediate repair or replacement in order to
restore service to a customer.



   EQUIPMENT.  Any tangible thing in any right-of-way; but shall not
include boulevard plantings or gardens planted or maintained in the
right-of-way between a person’s property and the street curb.



   EXCAVATE.  To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way, except horticultural practices of
penetrating the boulevard area to a depth of less than 12 inches.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT.  The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must
be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way.  An EXCAVATION
PERMIT allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described
in the permit.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE.  Money paid to the city by an applicant to
cover the costs as provided in § 91.10.



   IN.  When used in conjunction with RIGHT-OF-WAY, means over, above,
in, within, on, or under a right-of-way.



   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE.  A local person or persons, or designee of the
person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this
chapter.



   OBSTRUCT.  To place any object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free
and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.



   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT.  The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must
be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder
to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that
right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way for
the duration specified therein.



   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE.  Money paid to the city by a registrant to
cover the costs as provided in § 91.10.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way has been granted by the city under this chapter.



   PERSON.  Any natural or corporate person, business association, or
other business entity, including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity which has or seeks to have equipment in any right-of-way.



   REGISTRANT.  Any person who:



      (1)   Has or seeks to have its equipment located in any
right-of-way; or



      (2)   In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use,
the right-of-way or any equipment in the right-of-way.



   REPAIR.  The temporary construction work necessary to make the
right-of-way useable for travel.



   RESTORATION BOND.  A performance bond, a letter of credit, or cash
deposit posted to ensure the availability of sufficient funds to assure that
right-of-way excavation and obstruction work is completed in both a timely
and quality manner.



   RESTORATION COST.  An amount of money paid to the city by a permittee
to cover the cost of restoration.



   RESTORE or RESTORATION.  The process by which an excavated
right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is
returned to the same condition that existed before the commencement of the
work.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The surface and space above and below a public roadway,
highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, and public sidewalk in which the city
has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes
and utility easements of the city.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT.  Either the excavation permit or the obstruction
permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.



   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE.  Includes, but is not limited to:



      (1)   Those services provided by a public utility as defined
in M.S. § 216B.02, Subds. 4 and 6, as they may be amended from time to time;



      (2)   Telecommunications, pipeline, community antenna
television, fire and alarm communications, water, electricity, light, heat,
cooling energy, or power services;



      (3)   The services provided by a corporation organized for the
purposes set forth in M.S. § 301B.01, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (4)   The services provided by a district heating or cooling
system; and



      (5)   Cable communications systems as defined in M.S. Chapter
238, as it may be amended from time to time.



   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION.  An application made to excavate or
obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit
that had already been issued.



   TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHTS-OF-WAY USER.  A person owning or controlling
a facility in the public right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a
facility in the public right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used
for transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information.  For
purposes of this chapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated
under M.S. Chapter 238, as it may be amended from time to time, and
telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric
energy services are not TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USERS.



   UNUSABLE EQUIPMENT.  Equipment in the right-of-way which has remained
unused for one year and for which the registrant is unable to provide proof
that it has either a plan to begin using it within the next 12 months or a
potential purchaser or user of the equipment.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.03  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto.  The Director may delegate any or all of the duties
hereunder.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.04  REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Registration.  Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to
occupy or use the right-of-way or any equipment in the right-of-way,
including by lease, sublease, or assignment, or who has, or seeks to have,
equipment in any right-of-way must register with the Director.  Registration
will consist of providing application information and paying a registration
fee.



   (B)   Registration prior to work.  No person may construct,
install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any
equipment or any part thereof in, any right-of-way without first being
registered with the Director.



   (C)   Exceptions.  Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or
amend the provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or
maintain boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way
between their property and the street curb.  Persons planting or maintaining
boulevard plantings or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the
right-of-way, and shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any
other requirements for planting or maintaining the boulevard plantings or
gardens under this chapter.  However, excavations deeper than 12 inches are
subject to the permit requirements of § 91.07.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.05  REGISTRATION INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information required.  The information provided to the
Director at the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Each registrant’s name, Gopher One-Call registration
certificate number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers;



      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative.  The local
representative or designee shall be available at all times.  Current
information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency
shall be provided at the time of registration;



      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:



         (a)   Shall be on a form approved by the city;



         (b)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued
to the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
State of Minnesota covered by self-insurance which the Director determines to
provide the city with protections equivalent to that of a Minnesota-licensed
insurance company, legally independent from the registrant;



         (c)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against
claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property
damage arising out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and placement
and use of equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers,
agents, employees, and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
equipment, and collapse of property;



         (d)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to
whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom
defense will be provided as to all the coverages;



         (e)   Requiring that the Director be notified 30 days in
advance of cancellation of the policy; and



         (f)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage,
automobile liability coverage, workers compensation, and umbrella coverage
established by the Director in amounts sufficient to protect the city and
carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.



      (4)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the
certificate required to be filed, as recorded and certified to by the
Secretary of State;



      (5)   A copy of the person’s certificate of authority from
the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or
federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have the certificate
from the Commission or other state or federal agency; and



      (6)   Any other information as the city may require.



   (B)   Notice of changes.  The registrant shall keep all of the
information listed above current at all times by providing to the Director
information as to changes within 15 days following the date on which the
registrant has knowledge of any change.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.06  REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Operations.



      (1)   Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and
by December 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan
with the Director.  The plan shall be submitted using a format designated by
the Director and shall contain the information determined by the Director to
be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of
excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.



      (2)   The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:



         (a)   The locations and the estimated beginning and
ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year
(in this section, a next-year project); and



         (b)   The tentative locations and estimated beginning
and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five years following
the next calendar year (in this section, a five-year project).



      (3)   The term project in this section shall include both
next-year projects and five-year projects.



      (4)   By January 1 of each year, the Director will have
available for inspection in the Director’s office a composite list of all
projects of which the Director has been informed in the annual plans.  All
registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of the current
status of this list.



      (5)   Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change
any project in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the Director
and all other registrants of all the changes in the list.  Notwithstanding
the foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of
another registrant listed by the other registrant.



   (B)   Additional next-year projects.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Director may, for good cause shown, allow a registrant to
submit additional next-year projects.  Good cause includes, but is not
limited to, the criteria set forth in § 91.15 concerning the discretionary
issuance of permits.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.07  PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Permit required.  Except as otherwise provided in this code,
no person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having
obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit from the Director to do so.



      (1)   Excavation permit.  An excavation permit is required by
a registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in the
permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the
right-of-way by placing equipment described therein, to the extent and for
the duration specified therein.



      (2)   Obstruction permit.  An obstruction permit is required
by a registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of
right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to
the extent and for the duration specified therein.



   (B)   Permit extensions.  No person may excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless the
person:



      (1)   Makes a supplementary application for another
right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit; and



      (2)   A new permit or permit extension is granted.



   (C)   Disruptive fee.  Notwithstanding division (B) above, even if
a new permit or permit extension is granted, the Director shall establish and
impose a disruptive fee as a civil penalty for unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, repair, or restoration.



   (D)   Permit display.  Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed at all times at the indicated work site and shall be
available for inspection by the Director.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.08  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Application for a permit is made to the Director.



   (B)   Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be
considered complete only upon compliance with, the requirements of the
following provisions:



      (1)   Registration with the Director pursuant to this chapter;



      (2)   Submission of a completed permit application form,
including all required attachments and scaled drawings showing the location
and area of the proposed project and the location of all existing and
proposed equipment;



      (3)   Payment of all money due to the city for:



         (a)   Permit fees and costs;



         (b)   Prior obstructions or excavations;



         (c)   Any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the
rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city; and



         (d)   Franchise fees, if applicable.



      (4)   When an excavation permit is requested for purposes of
installing additional equipment, and the posting of a restoration bond for
the additional equipment is insufficient, the posting of an additional or
larger restoration bond for the additional equipment may be required.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.09  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Permit issuance.  If the Director determines that the
applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter, the Director may
issue a permit.



   (B)   Conditions.  The Director may impose reasonable conditions
upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant
thereunder to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, to ensure the
structural integrity of the right-of-way, to protect the property and safety
of other users of the right-of-way, and to minimize the disruption and
inconvenience to the traveling public.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.10  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Excavation permit fee.  The excavation permit fee shall be
established by the Director in an amount sufficient to recover the following
costs:



      (1)   The city cost; and



      (2)   Degradation cost, if applicable.



   (B)   Obstruction permit fee.  The obstruction permit fee shall be
established by the city by resolution and shall be in an amount sufficient to
recover the city cost.



   (C)   Payment of permit fees.  No excavation permit or obstruction
permit shall be issued without payment of the fees before the issuance of
such a permit unless the applicant shall agree to pay the fees within 30 days
of billing therefor.



   (D)   Nonrefundable.  Permit fees that were paid for a permit that
the Director has revoked for a breach as stated in § 91.20 are not
refundable.



   (E)   Use of permit fees.  All obstruction and excavation permit
fees shall be used solely for city management, construction, maintenance, and
repair costs of the right-of-way.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.11  RIGHT-OF-WAY REPAIR AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   Timing.  The work to be done under the excavation permit, and
the repair and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of extraordinary circumstances beyond the
control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or
unreasonable under § 91.14.  In addition to repairing its own work, the
permittee must restore the general area of the work, and the surrounding
areas, including the paving and its foundations, to the same condition that
existed before the commencement of the work and must inspect the area of the
work and use reasonable care to maintain the same condition for 36 months
thereafter.



   (B)   Repair and restoration.  Permittee shall repair its own
work.  In addition, in its application for an excavation permit, the
permittee may choose either to have the city restore the right-of-way or to
restore the right-of-way itself.



      (1)   City restoration.  If the permittee chooses to have the
city restore the right-of-way, it shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days
of billing.  If, during the 36 months following the restoration, the
pavement settles due to permittee’s improper backfilling, the permittee
shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of repairing the
pavement.



      (2)   Permittee restoration.  If the permittee chooses to
restore the right-of-way itself, it shall at the time of application for an
excavation permit post a restoration bond in an amount determined by the
Director to be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring the right-of-way to
its pre-excavation condition.  If, 36 months after completion of the
restoration of the right-of-way, the Director determines that the
right-of-way has been properly restored, the surety on the restoration bond
shall be released.



   (C)   Standards.  The permittee shall perform repairs and
restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by
the Director.  The Director shall have the authority to prescribe the manner
and extent of the restoration, and may do so in written procedures of general
application or on a case-by-case basis.  The Director in exercising this
authority shall be guided by the following standards and considerations:



      (1)   The number, size, depth, and duration of the
excavations, disruptions, or damage to the right-of-way;



      (2)   The traffic volume carried by the right-of-way; the
character of the neighborhood surrounding the right-of-way;



      (3)   The pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way; the
remaining life expectancy of the right-of-way affected by the excavation;



      (4)   Whether the relative cost of the method of restoration
to the permittee is in reasonable balance with the prevention of an
accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise result from
the excavation, disturbance, or damage to the right-of-way; and



      (5)   The likelihood that the particular method of restoration
would be effective in slowing the depreciation of the right-of-way that would
otherwise take place.



   (D)   Guarantees.  By choosing to restore the right-of-way itself,
the permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for 36 months
following its completion.  During this 36-month period, it shall, upon
notification from the Director, correct all restoration work to the extent
necessary, using the method required by the Director.  The work shall be
completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the
Director, not including days during which work cannot be done because of
circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as
unseasonal or unreasonable under § 91.14.



   (E)   Failure to restore.  If the permittee fails to restore the
right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the Director, or
fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the
Director, the Director at his or her option may do the work.  In that event,
the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of
restoring the right-of-way.  If permittee fails to pay as required, the city
may exercise its rights under the restoration bond.



   (F)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration.  In lieu of
right-of-way restoration, a permittee shall pay to the city a degradation fee
to cover city costs associated with a decrease in the useful life of a public
right-of-way caused by excavation and repairs.  Payment of a degradation fee
does not relieve permittee of the obligation to make necessary right-of-way
repairs.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.12  JOINT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Generally.  Registrants may jointly apply for permits to
excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.



   (B)   With city projects.  Registrants who join in a scheduled
obstruction or excavation performed by the Director, whether or not it is a
joint application by two or more registrants or a single application, are not
required to pay the obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee.



   (C)   Shared fees.  Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the Director does not perform, may share in
the payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee.  Registrants must
agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same
on their applications.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.13  SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Limitation on area.  A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit.  No permittee may do
any work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided
herein.  Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that
specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must, before working
in that greater area:



      (1)   Make application for a permit extension and pay any
additional fees required thereby; and



      (2)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.



   (B)   Limitation on dates.  A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the dates specified in the permit.  No permittee may begin its work before
the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after
the end date.  If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end
date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and
receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after
the end date of the previous permit.  This supplementary application must be
done before the permit end date.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.14  OTHER OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Compliance with other laws.  Obtaining a right-of-way permit
does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits,
licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by any other city,
county, state, or federal rules, laws, or regulations.  A permittee shall
comply with all requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including
M.S. §§ 216D.01-216D.09 (One Call Excavation Notice System), as they may be
amended from time to time.  A permittee shall perform all work in
conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations,
and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its
permit, regardless of who does the work.



   (B)   Prohibited work.  Except in an emergency, and with the
approval of the Director, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be
done when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for the
work.



   (C)   Interference with right-of-way.  A permittee shall not so
obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water
through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with.  Private
vehicles may not be parked within or next to a permit area.  The loading or
unloading of trucks next to a permit area is prohibited unless specifically
authorized by the permit.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.15  DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Mandatory denial.  Except in an emergency, no right-of-way
permit will be granted:



      (1)   To any person required by § 91.04 to be registered who
has not done so;



      (2)   To any person required by § 91.06 to file an annual
report but has failed to do so;



      (3)   For any next-year project not listed in the construction
and major maintenance plan required under § 91.07;



      (4)   For any project which requires the excavation of any
portion of a right-of-way which was constructed or reconstructed within the
preceding five years;



      (5)   To any person who has failed within the past three years
to comply, or is presently not in full compliance, with the requirements of
this chapter;



      (6)   To any person as to whom there exists grounds for the
revocation of a permit under § 91.20; or



      (7)   If, in the discretion of the Director, the issuance of a
permit for the particular date and/or time would cause a conflict or
interfere with an exhibition, celebration, festival, or any other event. 
The Director, in exercising this discretion, shall be guided by the safety
and convenience of ordinary travel of the public over the right-of-way, and
by considerations relating to the public health, safety, and welfare.



   (B)   Permissive denial.  The Director may deny a permit to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare, to prevent interference with the
safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way, or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its users.  The Director, in her
or his or her discretion, may consider one or more of the following factors:



      (1)   The extent to which right-of-way space where the permit
is sought is available;



      (2)   The competing demands for the particular space in the
right-of-way;



      (3)   The availability of other locations in the right-of-way
or in other rights-of-way for the equipment of the permit applicant;



      (4)   The applicability of ordinance or other regulations of
the right-of-way that affect location of equipment in the right-of-way;



      (5)   The degree of compliance of the applicant with the terms
and conditions of its franchise, this chapter, and other applicable
ordinances and regulations;



      (6)   The degree of disruption to surrounding communities and
businesses that will result from the use of that part of the right-of-way;



      (7)   The condition and age of the right-of-way, and whether
and when it is scheduled for total or partial reconstruction; and/or



      (8)   The balancing of the costs of disruption to the public
and damage to the right-of-way, against the benefits to that part of the
public served by the expansion into additional parts of the right-of-way.



   (C)   Discretionary issuance.  Notwithstanding the provisions of
divisions (A)(3) and (A)(4) above, the Director may issue a permit in any
case where the permit is necessary to prevent substantial economic hardship
to a customer of the permit applicant, or to allow the customer to materially
improve its utility service, or to allow a new economic development project,
or otherwise required by law; and where the permit applicant did not have
knowledge of the hardship, the plans for improvement of service, or the
development project when the applicant was required to submit its list of
next-year projects.



   (D)   Permits for additional next-year projects.  Notwithstanding
the provisions of division (A)(3) above, the Director may issue a permit to a
registrant who was allowed under § 91.06(B), to submit an additional
next-year project, the permit to be subject to all other conditions and
requirements of law, including the conditions as may be imposed under §
91.09.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.16  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   The excavation, backfilling, repair, and restoration, and all other
work performed in the right-of-way, shall be done in conformance with The
Standard Specifications for Street Openings as promulgated by the Director
and at a location as required by § 91.22.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.17  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Notice of completion.  When the work under any permit
hereunder is completed, the permittee shall notify the Director.



   (B)   Site inspection.  Permittee shall make the work site
available to the Director and to all others as authorized by law for
inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon
completion of the work.



   (C)   Authority of Director.  At the time of inspection, the
Director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious
threat to the life, health, safety, or well-being of the public.  The
Director may issue an order to the registrant for any work which does not
conform to the applicable standards, conditions, or codes.  The order shall
state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of
the permit.  Within ten days after issuance of the order, the registrant
shall present proof to the Director that the violation has been corrected. 
If the proof has not been presented within the required time, the Director
may revoke the permit pursuant to § 91.20.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.18  WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   Emergency situations.  Each registrant shall immediately
notify the Director of any event regarding its equipment which it considers
to be an emergency.  The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are
necessary to respond to the emergency.  Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary
permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for
the actions it took in response to the emergency.  If the Director becomes
aware of an emergency regarding a registrant’s equipment, the Director may
attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or
potentially affected, by the emergency.  In any event, the Director may take
whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of
which shall be borne by the registrant whose equipment occasioned the
emergency.



   (B)   Non-emergency situations.  Except in an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or
excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, pay double the
normal fee for the permit, pay double all the other fees required by this
code, deposit with the Director the fees necessary to correct any damage to
the right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.19  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.



   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or
ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the
Director of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.20  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Substantial breach.  Registrants hold permits issued pursuant
to this chapter as a privilege and not as a right.  The city reserves its
right, as provided herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee
refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit.  A
substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to,
the following:



      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the
right-of-way permit;



      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of
the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;



      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a right-of-way permit;



      (4)   The failure to maintain the required bonds and/or
insurance;



      (5)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner;
and/or



      (6)   The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order
issued pursuant to § 91.17.



   (B)   Written notice of breach.  If the Director determines that
the permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of
any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit, the
Director shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy the
violation.  The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause
for revocation of the permit.  Further, a substantial breach, as stated
above, will allow the Director, at his or her discretion, to place additional
or revised conditions on the permit.



   (C)   Response to notice of breach.  Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, permittee shall contact the Director with a plan,
acceptable to the Director, for its correction. Permittee’s failure to so
contact the Director, or the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable
plan, or permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan,
shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit.  Further,
permittee’s failure to so contact the Director, or the permittee’s
failure to submit an acceptable plan, or permittee’s failure to reasonably
implement the approved plan, shall automatically place the permittee on
probation for one full year.



   (D)   Cause for probation.  From time to time, the Director may
establish a list of conditions of the permit, which if breached will
automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year, such as,
but not limited to, working out of the allotted time period or working on
right-of-way grossly outside of the permit.



   (E)   Automatic revocation.  If a permittee, while on probation,
commits a breach as outlined above, permittee’s permit will automatically
be revoked and permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full
year, except for emergency repairs.



   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs.  If a permit is revoked, the
permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs,
including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred in connection with the revocation.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.21  MAPPING DATA.



   (A)   Information required.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (B) below, each
registrant shall provide to the Director information indicating the
horizontal and vertical location, relative to the boundaries of the
right-of-way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it has control and
which is located in any right-of-way (mapping data).  Mapping data shall be
provided with the specificity and in the format requested by the Director for
inclusion in the mapping system used by the Director.



      (2)   Within six months after the acquisition, installation,
or construction of additional equipment or any relocation, abandonment, or
disuse of existing equipment, each registrant shall supplement the mapping
data required herein.



      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, mapping data shall be
submitted by all registrants for all equipment which is to be installed or
constructed after the date of passage of this chapter at the time any permits
are sought under this chapter.



      (4)   After six months after the passage of this chapter, a
new registrant, or a registrant which has not submitted a plan as required
above, shall submit complete and accurate mapping data for all its equipment
at the time any permits are sought under these ordinances.



   (B)   Telecommunication equipment.  Information on existing
facilities and equipment of telecommunications right-of-way users need only
be supplied in the form maintained by the telecommunications right-of-way
user.



   (C)   Trade secret information.  At the request of any registrant,
any information requested by the Director, which qualifies as a trade secret
under M.S. § 13.37(b), as it may be amended from time to time, shall be
treated as trade secret information as detailed therein.  With respect to
the provision of mapping data, the city may consider unique circumstances
from time to time required to obtain mapping data.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.22  LOCATION OF EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Underground.  Unless otherwise permitted by an existing
franchise or M.S. § 216B.34, as it may be amended from time to time, or
unless existing above-ground equipment is repaired or replaced, new
construction and the installation of new equipment and replacement of old
equipment shall be done underground or contained within buildings or other
structures in conformity with applicable codes.



   (B)   Corridors.  The Director may assign specific corridors within
the right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for
each type of equipment that is or, pursuant to current technology, the
Director expects will someday be located within the right-of-way.  All
excavation, obstruction, or other permits issued by the Director involving
the installation or replacement of equipment shall designate the proper
corridor for the equipment at issue.  Any registrant whose equipment is in
the right-of-way in a position at variance with the corridors established by
the Director shall, no later than at the time of the next reconstruction or
excavation of the area where its equipment is located, move that equipment to
its assigned position within the right-of-way, unless this requirement is
waived by the Director for good cause shown, upon consideration of the
factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety,
customer service needs, and hardship to the registrant.



   (C)   Nuisance.  One year after the passage of this chapter, any
equipment found in a right-of-way that has not been registered shall be
deemed to be a nuisance.  The city may exercise any remedies or rights it
has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance
or taking possession of the equipment and restoring the right-of-way to a
usable condition.



   (D)   Limitation of space.  To protect health and safety, the
Director shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or
additional equipment within the right-of-way if there is insufficient space
to accommodate all of the requests of registrants or persons to occupy and
use the right-of-way.  In making the decisions, the Director shall strive to
the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the
right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public
interest, the public’s needs for the particular utility service, the
condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing equipment in the right-of-way, and
future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have
been determined to be in the public interest.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.23  RELOCATION OF EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   A registrant must promptly and at its own expense, with due
regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate its
equipment and facilities in the right-of-way whenever the Director requests
the removal and relocation, and shall restore the right-of-way to the same
condition it was in prior to the removal or relocation.



   (B)   The Director may make the request to prevent interference by
the company’s equipment or facilities with:



      (1)   A present or future city use of the right-of-way;



      (2)   A public improvement undertaken by the city;



      (3)   An economic development project in which the city has an
interest or investment;



      (4)   When the public health, safety, and welfare require it;
or



      (5)   When necessary to prevent interference with the safety
and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person shall not be required
to remove or relocate its equipment from any right-of-way which has been
vacated in favor of a nongovernmental entity unless and until the reasonable
costs thereof are first paid to the person therefor.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.24  PRE-EXCAVATION EQUIPMENT LOCATION.



   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§
216D.01-216D.09, as they may be amended from time to time (One Call
Excavation Notice System), before the start date of any right-of-way
excavation, each registrant who has equipment in the area to be excavated
shall mark the horizontal and approximate vertical placement of all the
equipment.  Any registrant whose equipment is less that 20 inches below a
concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation
contractor to establish the exact location of its equipment and the best
procedure for excavation.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.25  DAMAGE TO OTHER EQUIPMENT.



   When the Director does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary
to maintain, support, or move a registrant’s equipment to protect it, the
Director shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably
possible.  The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant
and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing.  Each registrant
shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any equipment in the
right-of-way which it or its equipment damages.  Each registrant shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the equipment of another
registrant caused during the city’s response to an emergency occasioned by
that registrant’s equipment.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.26  RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.



   (A)   Reservation of right.  If the city vacates a right-of-way
which contains the equipment of a registrant, and if the vacation does not
require the relocation of registrant or permittee equipment, the city shall
reserve, to and for itself and all registrants having equipment in the
vacated right-of-way, the right to install, maintain, and operate any
equipment in the vacated right-of-way and to enter upon the right-of-way at
any time for the purpose of reconstructing, inspecting, maintaining, or
repairing the same.



   (B)   Relocation of equipment.  If the vacation requires the
relocation of registrant or permittee equipment; and if the vacation
proceedings are initiated by the registrant or permittee, the registrant or
permittee must pay the relocation costs; or if the vacation proceedings are
initiated by the city, the registrant or permittee must pay the relocation
costs unless otherwise agreed to by the city and the registrant or permittee;
or if the vacation proceedings are initiated by a person or persons other
than the registrant or permittee, the other person or persons must pay the
relocation costs.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.27  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   (A)   Limitation of liability.  By reason of the acceptance of a
registration or the grant of a right-of-way permit, the city does not assume
any liability:



      (1)   For injuries to persons, damage to property, or loss of
service claims by parties other than the registrant or the city; or



      (2)   For claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the
installation, presence, maintenance, or operation of equipment by registrants
or activities of registrants.



   (B)   Indemnification.  By registering with the Director, a
registrant agrees, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a permittee
is required, to defend, indemnify, and hold the city whole and harmless from
all costs, liabilities, and claims for damages of any kind arising out of the
construction, presence, installation, maintenance, repair, or operation of
its equipment, or out of any activity undertaken in or near a right-of-way,
whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or
prohibited by a right-of-way permit.  It further agrees that it will not
bring, nor cause to be brought, any action, suit, or other proceeding
claiming damages, or seeking any other relief against the city for any claim
nor for any award arising out of the presence, installation, maintenance, or
operation of its equipment, or any activity undertaken in or near a
right-of-way, whether or not the act or omission complained of is authorized,
allowed or prohibited by a right-of-way permit.  The foregoing does not
indemnify the city for its own negligence except for claims arising out of or
alleging the city’s negligence where the negligence arises out of or is
primarily related to the presence, installation, construction, operation,
maintenance, or repair of the equipment by the registrant or on the
registrant’s behalf, including, but not limited to, the issuance of permits
and inspection of plans or work.  This section is not, as to third parties,
a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the registrant or
to the city; and the registrant, in defending any action on behalf of the
city, shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity
that the city could assert in its own behalf.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.28  FUTURE USES.



   In placing any equipment, or allowing it to be placed, in the
right-of-way, the city is not liable for any damages caused thereby to any
registrant’s equipment which is already in place.  No registrant is
entitled to rely on the provisions of this chapter, and no special duty is
created as to any registrant.  This chapter is enacted to protect the
general health, welfare, and safety of the public at large.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.29  ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Discontinued operations.  A registrant who has determined to
discontinue its operations in the city must either:



      (1)   Provide information satisfactory to the Director that
the registrant’s obligations for its equipment in the right-of-way under
this chapter have been lawfully assumed by another registrant; or



      (2)   Submit to the Director a proposal and instruments for
transferring ownership of its equipment to the city.  If a registrant
proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option:



         (a)   Purchase the equipment; or



         (b)   Require the registrant, at its own expense, to
remove it; or



         (c)   Require the registrant to post a bond in an amount
sufficient to reimburse the city for reasonably anticipated costs to be
incurred in removing the equipment.



   (B)   Abandoned equipment.  Equipment of a registrant who fails to
comply with division (A) above, and which, for two years, remains unused
shall be deemed to be abandoned.  Abandoned equipment is deemed to be a
nuisance.  The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to:



      (1)   Abating the nuisance;



      (2)   Taking possession of the equipment and restoring it to a
usable condition; or



      (3)   Requiring removal of the equipment by the registrant, or
the registrant’s successor in interest.



   (C)   Removal.  Any registrant who has unusable and abandoned
equipment in any right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way during
the next scheduled excavation, unless this requirement is waived by the
Director.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.30  RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.



   The city, by the granting of a right-of-way permit or by registering a
person under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive,
impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be
hereafter granted to the city under the constitution and statutes of the
State of Minnesota (or the Charter of the city) to regulate the use of the
right-of-way by the permittee; and the permittee by its acceptance of a
right-of-way permit or of registration under this chapter agrees that all
lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as
are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city,
shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the
city at any time.  A permittee or registrant is deemed to acknowledge that
its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to
adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of
the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws
and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to the powers.  Any conflict
between the provisions of a registration or of a right-of-way permit and any
other present or future lawful exercise of the city’s regulatory or police
powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 91.31  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter is effective following publication of a summary of the
chapter.



(Ord. 152, passed 8-7-2000)



CHAPTER 92:  ANIMALS



Section



   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Dogs and cats



   92.03   Non-domestic animals



   92.04   Farm animals



   92.05   Impounding



   92.06   Kennels



   92.07   Nuisances



   92.08   Seizure of animals



   92.09   Animals presenting a danger to health and safety of city



   92.10   Diseased animals



   92.11   Dangerous animals



   92.12   Dangerous animal requirements



   92.13   Basic care



   92.14   Breeding moratorium



   92.15   Enforcing officer



   92.16   Pound



   92.17   Interference with officers



 



   92.99   Penalty



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS. 



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL.  Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all
fowl and poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal
kingdom.  Animals shall be classified as follows:



      (1)   DOMESTIC ANIMALS.  Those animals commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets.  Unless otherwise defined, domestic animals
shall include dogs, cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs,
domesticated rabbits, fish, non-poisonous, non-venomous and non-constricting
reptiles or amphibians, and other similar animals.



      (2)   FARM ANIMALS.  Those animals commonly associated with a
farm or performing work in an agricultural setting.  Unless otherwise
defined, farm animals shall include members of the equine family (horses,
mules), bovine family (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl
(ducks, geese), swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees,
and other animals associated with a farm, ranch, or stable.



      (3)   NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS.  Those animals commonly
considered to be naturally wild and not naturally trained or domesticated, or
which are commonly considered to be inherently dangerous to the health,
safety, and welfare of  people.  Unless otherwise defined, non-domestic
animals shall include:



         (a)   Any member of the large cat family (family
felidae) including lions, tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but
excluding commonly accepted domesticated house cats.



         (b)   Any naturally wild member of the canine family
(family canidae) including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but
excluding commonly accepted domesticated dogs.



         (c)   Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a
wolf and a dog, unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated
house pet.



         (d)   Any member or relative of the rodent family
including any skunk (whether or not descented), raccoon, squirrel, or ferret,
but excluding those members otherwise defined or commonly accepted as
domesticated pets.



         (e)   Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or
inherently dangerous member of the reptile or amphibian families including
rattlesnakes, boa constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators.



         (f)   Any other animal which is not explicitly listed
above but which can be reasonably defined by the terms of this section,
including but not limited to bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.



   AT LARGE.  Off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and
control of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord, chain, or
otherwise restrained or confined.



   CAT.  Both the male and female of the felidae species commonly
accepted as domesticated household pets.



   DOG.  Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly
accepted as domesticated household pets, and other domesticated animals of a
dog kind.



   OWNER.  Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation
owning, keeping, or harboring an animal.



   RELEASE PERMIT.  A permit issued by the Animal Control Officer or
other person in charge of the pound for the release of any animal that has
been taken to the pound.  A release permit may be obtained upon payment of a
fee to the City Clerk in accordance with the regular license requirement if
the animal is unlicensed, payment of a release fee, and any maintenance costs
incurred in capturing and impounding the animal.  The release fee shall be
as established by the City Council from time to time.



§ 92.02  DOGS AND CATS.



   (A)   Running at large prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for the
dog or cat of any person who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat, to run at
large. A person, who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat which runs at large
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Dogs or cats on a leash and accompanied by
a responsible person or accompanied by and under the control and direction of
a responsible person, so as to be effectively restrained by command as by
leash, shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless the city has
posted an area with signs reading “Dogs or Cats Prohibited.”



   (B)   License required.



      (1)   All dogs over the age of six months kept, harbored, or
maintained by their owners in the city, shall be licensed and registered with
the city. Dog licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk upon payment of the
license fee as established by the City Council from time to time. The owner
shall state, at the time application is made for the license and upon forms
provided, his or her name and address and the name, breed, color, and sex of
each dog owned or kept by him or her. No license shall be granted for a dog
that has not been vaccinated against distemper and rabies, as evidenced by a
certificate by a veterinarian qualified to practice in the state in which the
dog is vaccinated.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog subject to
this section to pay to the City Clerk the license fee established by the City
Council from time to time.



      (3)   Upon payment of the license fee as established by the
City Council from time to time, the Clerk shall issue to the owner a license
certificate and metallic tag for each dog licensed. The tag shall have
stamped on it the year for which it is issued and the number corresponding
with the number on the certificate. Every owner shall be required to provide
each dog with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed, and shall
see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. In case a dog tag is lost or
destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued by the City Clerk.  A charge shall be
made for each duplicate tag in an amount established by the City Council from
time to time.  Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another
and no refunds shall be made on any dog license fee or tag because of death
of a dog or the owner's leaving the city before the expiration of the license
period.



      (4)   The licensing provisions of this division (B) shall not
apply to dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the city, nor
to dogs brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any dog
show.  If the animal owned is a service animal which is capable of being
properly identified as from a recognized school for seeing eye, hearing ear,
service or guide animals, and the owner is a blind or deaf person, or a
person with physical or sensory disabilities, then no license shall be
required.



      (5)   The funds received by the City Clerk from all dog
licenses and metallic tags fees as established by the City Council from time
to time, shall first be used to defray any costs incidental to the
enforcement of this chapter; including, but not restricted to, the costs of
licenses, metallic tags, and impounding and maintenance of the dogs.



   (C)   Cats.  Cats shall be included as controlled by this
division  insofar as running-at-large, pickup, impounding, boarding,
licensing and proof of anti-rabies vaccine is concerned. All other provisions
of this section shall also apply to cats unless otherwise provided.



   (D)   Vaccination.



      (1)   All dogs and cats kept harbored, maintained, or
transported within the city shall be vaccinated at least once every three
years by a licensed veterinarian for:



         (a)   Rabies - with a live modified vaccine; and



         (b)   Distemper.



      (2)   A certificate of vaccination must be kept on which is
stated the date of vaccination, owner's name and address, the animal's name
(if applicable), sex, description and weight, the type of vaccine, and the
veterinarian's signature. Upon demand made by the City Clerk, the Animal
Control Officer or a police officer, the owner shall present for examination
the required certificate(s) of vaccination for the animal(s). In cases where
certificates are not presented, the owner or keeper of the animal(s) shall
have seven days in which to present the certificate(s) to the City Clerk or
officer. Failure to do so shall be deemed a violation of this section.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.03  NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS. 



   It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess, harbor, or offer
for sale, any non-domestic animal within the city.  Any owner of a
non-domestic animal at the time of adoption of this code shall have 30 days
in which to remove the animal from the city after which time the city may
impound the animal as provided for in this section.  An exception shall be
made to this prohibition for animals specifically trained for and actually
providing assistance to the handicapped or disabled, and for those animals
brought into the city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic,
scientific research laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.04  FARM ANIMALS. 



   Farm animals shall only be kept in an agricultural district of the
city, or on a residential lot of at least ten acres in size provided that no
animal shelter shall be within 300 feet of an adjoining piece of property. 
An exception shall be made to this section for those animals brought into the
city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research
laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition.



§ 92.05  IMPOUNDING.



   (A)   Running at large.  Any unlicensed animal running at large is
hereby declared a public nuisance.  Any Animal Control Officer or police
officer may impound any dog or other animal found unlicensed or any animal
found running at large and shall give notice of the impounding to the owner
of the dog or other animal, if known.  The Animal Control Officer or police
officer shall not enter the property of the owner of an animal found running
at large or the owner of an unlicensed animal unless the officer has first
obtained the permission of the owner to do so or has obtained a warrant
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided for in § 10.20, to
search for and seize the animal.  In case the owner is unknown, the officer
shall post notice at the city office that if the dog or other animal  is not
claimed within the time specified in division (C) of this section, it will be
sold or otherwise disposed of. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
it shall be unlawful to kill, destroy, or otherwise cause injury to any
animal, including dogs and cats running at large.



   (B)   Biting animals.  Any animal that has not been inoculated by a
live modified rabies vaccine and which has bitten any person, wherein the
skin has been punctured or the services of a doctor are required, shall be
confined in the city pound for a period of not less than ten days, at the
expense of the owner.  The animal may be released at the end of the time if
healthy and free from symptoms of rabies, and by the payment of all costs by
the owner.  However, if the owner of the animal shall elect immediately upon
receipt of notice of need for the confinement by the officer to voluntarily
and immediately confine the animal for the required period of time in a
veterinary hospital of the owner's choosing, not outside of the county in
which this city is located, and provide immediate proof of confinement in the
manner as may be required, the owner may do so.  If, however, the animal has
been inoculated with a live modified rabies vaccine and the owner has proof
of the vaccination by a certificate from a licensed veterinarian, the owner
may confine the dog or other animal to the owner's property.



   (C)   Reclaiming.  All animals conveyed to the pound shall be kept,
with humane treatment and sufficient food and water for their comfort, at
least five regular business days, unless the animal is a dangerous animal as
defined under § 92.11 in which case it shall be kept for seven regular
business days or the times specified in § 92.11, and except if the animal is
a cruelly-treated animal in which case it shall be kept for ten regular
business days, unless sooner reclaimed by their owners or keepers as provided
by this section. In case the owner or keeper shall desire to reclaim the
animal from the pound, the following shall be required, unless otherwise
provided for in this code or established from time to time by resolution of
the City Council:



      (1)   Payment of the release fee and receipt of a release
permit as established by City Council  from time to time.



      (2)    Payment of maintenance costs, as provided by the pound,
per day or any part of day while animal is in the pound; and



      (3)   If a dog is unlicensed, payment of a regular license fee
as established by the City Council from time to time, and valid certificate
of vaccination for rabies and distemper shots is required.



   (D)   Unclaimed animals.  At the expiration of the times
established in division (C) of this section, if the animal has not been
reclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this section, the officer
appointed to enforce this section may let any person claim the animal by
complying with all provisions in this section, or the officer may sell the
animal to the University of Minnesota, or cause the animal to be destroyed in
a proper and humane manner and shall properly dispose of the remains thereof.
Any money collected under this section shall be payable to the City Clerk.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.06  KENNELS.



   (A)   Definition of kennel.  The keeping of three or more dogs on
the same premises, whether owned by the same person or not and for whatever
purpose kept, shall constitute a kennel; except that a fresh litter of pups
may be kept for a period of three months before that keeping shall be deemed
to be a kennel.



   (B)   Kennel license. No person, firm, or corporation shall maintain
in this city a private or commercial kennel without securing a license
therefor from the City Council, and the fees for the kennel license shall be
determined each year by the City Council.



   (C)   Renewal of kennel license.



      (1)   Kennel licenses shall expire on the twenty-eighth day of
April following their issuance. Upon application for renewal of a kennel
license, an authorized agent of the city shall inspect the kennel of the
applicant and shall submit to the City Clerk/Treasurer either an affirmative
certification that the kennel is maintained in a neat, orderly, and safe
condition or a negative certification that the kennel is not so maintained..
The City Clerk/Treasurer may issue a renewal kennel license provided that:



         (a)   The aforementioned certificate is affirmative; and



         (b)   No complaints have been received by the city.



      (2)   In all other cases, the kennel license shall be renewed
only upon City Council approval.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.07  NUISANCES.



   (A)   Habitual barking.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep or harbor a dog which habitually barks or cries.  Habitual barking
shall be defined as barking for repeated intervals of at least five minutes
with less than one minute of interruption.  The barking must also be audible
off of the owner's or caretaker's premises.



   (B)   Damage to property.  It shall be unlawful for any person's
dog or other animal to damage any lawn, garden, or other property, whether or
not the owner has knowledge of the damage.



   (C)   Cleaning up litter.  The owner of any animal or person having
the custody or control of any animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any
feces of the animal and disposing of the feces in a sanitary manner whether
on their own property, on the property of others or on public property.



   (D)   Warrant required.  The Animal Control Officer or police
officer shall not enter the property of the owner of an animal described in
this section unless the officer has first obtained the permission of the
owner to do so or has obtained a warrant issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction, as provided for in § 10.20, to search for and seize the animal.



   (E)   Other.  Any animals kept contrary to this section are subject
to impoundment as provided in § 92.05.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.08  SEIZURE OF ANIMALS.



   Any police officer or Animal Control Officer may enter upon private
property and seize any animal with the permission of the owner of the
property, if that person is also the owner of the animal, provided that the
following exist:



   (A)   There is an identified complainant other than the police
officer or Animal Control Officer making a contemporaneous complaint about
the animal;



   (B)   The officer reasonably believes that the animal meets either
the barking dog criteria set out in § 92.07(A); the criteria for cruelty set
out in § 92.13; or the criteria for an at large animal set out in §
92.01(E);



   (C)   The officer can demonstrate that there has been at least one
previous complaint of a barking dog; inhumane treatment of the animal; or
that the animal was at large at this address on a prior date;



   (D)   The officer has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner
of the animal and the property to be entered and those attempts have either
failed or have been ignored;



   (E)   The Animal Control Officer or police officer shall not enter
the property of the owner of an animal described in this section unless the
officer has first obtained the permission of the owner to do so or has
obtained a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided
for in § 10.20, to search for and seize the animal.  If the officer has the
permission of the owner, a property manager, landlord, innkeeper, or other
authorized person to enter the property or has obtained a pass key from a
property manager, landlord, innkeeper, or other authorized person to have
that key shall not be considered unauthorized entry, and a warrant to search
for and seize the animal need not be obtained; and



   (F)   Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place
if personal contact with the owner of the animal is not possible.



§ 92.09  ANIMALS PRESENTING A DANGER TO HEALTH AND SAFETY OF CITY.



   If, in the reasonable belief of any person or the Animal Control
Officer or police officer, an animal presents an immediate danger to the
health and safety of any person, or the animal is threatening imminent harm
to any person, or the animal is in the process of attacking any person, the
person or officer may destroy the animal in a proper and humane manner
whether or not the animal is on the property of its owner.  Otherwise, the
person or officer may apprehend the animal and deliver it to the pound for
confinement under § 92.05. If the animal is destroyed, the owner or keeper
of the animal destroyed shall be liable to the city for the cost of
maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus the costs of any veterinarian
examination. If the animal is found not to be a danger to the health and
safety of the city, it may be released to the owner or keeper in accordance
with § 92.05(C).



§ 92.10  DISEASED ANIMALS.



   (A)   Running at large.  No person shall keep or allow to be kept
on his or her premises, or on premises occupied by them, nor permit to run at
large in the city, any animal which is diseased so as to be a danger to the
health and safety of the city, even though the animal be properly licensed
under this section, and a warrant to search for and seize the animal is not
required.



   (B)   Confinement.  Any animal reasonably suspected of being
diseased and presenting a threat to the health and safety of the public, may
be apprehended and confined in the pound by any person, the Animal Control
Officer or a police officer. The officer shall have a qualified veterinarian
examine the animal. If the animal is found to be diseased in a manner so as
to be a danger to the health and safety of the city, the officer shall cause
the animal to be painlessly killed and shall properly dispose of the remains.
The owner or keeper of the animal killed under this section shall be liable
to the city for the cost of maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus the
costs of any veterinarian examinations.



   (C)   Release.  If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be
diseased the animal shall be released to the owner or keeper free of charge.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.11  DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   (A)   Attack by an animal.  It shall be unlawful for any person's
animal to inflict or attempt to inflict bodily injury to any person or other
animal whether or not the owner is present. This section shall not apply to
an attack by a dog under the control of an on-duty law enforcement officer or
to an attack upon an uninvited intruder who has entered the owner’s home
with criminal intent.



   (B)   Destruction of dangerous animal.  The Animal Control Officer
shall have the authority to order the destruction of dangerous animals in
accordance with the terms established by this chapter.



   (C)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this division, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      (1)   DANGEROUS ANIMAL.  An animal which has:



         (a)   Caused bodily injury or disfigurement to any
person on public or private property;



         (b)   Engaged in any attack on any person under
circumstances which would indicate danger to personal safety;



         (c)   Exhibited unusually aggressive behavior, such as
an attack on another animal;



         (d)   Bitten one or more persons on two or more
occasions; or



         (e)   Been found to be potentially dangerous and/or the
owner has personal knowledge of the same, the animal aggressively bites,
attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.



      (2)   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL. An animal which has:



         (a)   Bitten a human or a domestic animal on public or
private property;



         (b)   When unprovoked, chased or approached a person
upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public property in an apparent attitude
of attack; or



         (c)   Has engaged in unprovoked attacks causing injury
or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals.



      (3)   PROPER ENCLOSURE. Securely confined indoors or in a
securely locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping
and to provide protection for the animal from the elements. A proper
enclosure does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or
other structure that would allow the animal to exit of its own volition, or
any house or structure in which windows are open or in which door or window
screens are the only barriers which prevent the animal from exiting. The
enclosure shall not allow the egress of the animal in any manner without
human assistance. A pen or kennel shall meet the following minimum
specifications:



         (a)   Have a minimum overall floor size of 32 square
feet.



         (b)   Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet
and be constructed of 11-gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall
not exceed two inches, support posts shall be 1-1/4-inch or larger steel pipe
buried in the ground 18 inches or more. When a concrete floor is not
provided, the sidewalls shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the ground.



         (c)   A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be
provided. The cover shall be constructed of the same gauge wire or heavier as
the sidewalls and shall also have no openings in the wire greater than two
inches.



         (d)   An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be
constructed of the same material as the sidewalls and shall also have no
openings in the wire greater than two inches. The gate shall be equipped with
a device capable of being locked and shall be locked at all times when the
animal is in the pen or kennel.



      (4)   UNPROVOKED. The condition in which the animal is not
purposely excited, stimulated, agitated or disturbed.



   (D)   Designation as potentially dangerous animal. The Animal
Control Officer shall designate any animal as a potentially dangerous animal
upon receiving evidence that the potentially dangerous animal has, when
unprovoked, then bitten, attacked, or threatened the safety of a person or a
domestic animal as stated in division (C)(2). When an animal is declared
potentially dangerous, the Animal Control Officer shall cause one owner of
the potentially dangerous animal to be notified in writing that the animal is
potentially dangerous.



   (E)   Evidence justifying designation. The Animal Control Officer
shall have the authority to designate any animal as a dangerous animal upon
receiving evidence of the following:



      (1)   That the animal has, when unprovoked, bitten, attacked,
or threatened the safety of a person or domestic animal as stated in division
(C)(1).



      (2)   That the animal has been declared potentially dangerous
and the animal has then bitten, attacked, or threatened the safety of a
person or domestic animal as stated in division (C)(1).



   (F)   Authority to order destruction. The Animal Control Officer,
upon finding that an animal is dangerous hereunder, is authorized to order,
as part of the disposition of the case, that the animal be destroyed based on
a written order containing one or more of the following findings of fact:



      (1)   The animal is dangerous as demonstrated by a vicious
attack, an unprovoked attack, an attack without warning or multiple attacks;
or



      (2)   The owner of the animal has demonstrated an inability or
unwillingness to control the animal in order to prevent injury to persons or
other animals.



   (G)   Procedure. The Animal Control Officer, after having determined
that an animal is dangerous, may proceed in the following manner:  The
Animal Control Officer shall cause one owner of the animal to be notified in
writing or in person that the animal is dangerous and may order the animal
seized or make orders as deemed proper. This owner shall be notified as to
dates, times, places and parties bitten, and shall be given 14 days to appeal
this order by requesting a hearing before the City Council for a review of
this determination.



      (1)   If no appeal is filed, the Animal Control Officer shall
obtain an order or warrant authorizing the seizure and the destruction of the
animal from a court of competent jurisdiction, unless the animal is already
in custody or the owner consents to the seizure and destruction of the animal.



      (2)   If an owner requests a hearing for determination as to
the dangerous nature of the animal, the hearing shall be held before the City
Council, which shall set a date for hearing not more than three weeks after
demand for the hearing. The records of the Animal Control or City Clerk’s
office shall be admissible for consideration by the Animal Control Officer
without further foundation. After considering all evidence pertaining to the
temperament of the animal, the City Council shall make an order as it deems
proper. The City Council may order that the Animal Control Officer take the
animal into custody for destruction, if the animal is not currently in
custody. If the animal is ordered into custody for destruction, the owner
shall immediately make the animal available to the Animal Control Officer. 
If the owner does not immediately make the animal available, the Animal
Control Officer shall obtain an order or warrant authorizing the seizure and
the destruction of the animal from a court of competent jurisdiction.



      (3)   No person  shall harbor an animal after it has been
found by to be dangerous and ordered into custody for destruction.



   (H)   Stopping an attack. If any police officer or Animal Control
Officer is witness to an attack by an animal upon a person or another animal,
the officer may take whatever means the officer deems appropriate to bring
the attack to an end and prevent further injury to the victim.



   (I)   Notification of new address. The owner of an animal which has
been identified as dangerous or potentially dangerous shall notify the Animal
Control Officer in writing if the animal is to be relocated from its current
address or given or sold to another person. The notification shall be given
in writing at least 14 days prior to the relocation or transfer of ownership.
The notification shall include the current owner's name and address, the
relocation address, and the name of the new owner, if any.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.12  DANGEROUS ANIMAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Requirements. If the City Council does not order the
destruction of an animal that has been declared dangerous, the City Council
may, as an alternative, order any or all of the following:



      (1)   That the owner provide and maintain a proper enclosure
for the dangerous animal as specified in § 92.11(C)(3);



      (2)   Post the front and the rear of the premises with clearly
visible warning signs, including a warning symbol to inform children, that
there is a dangerous animal on the property as specified in M.S. § 347.51 as
may be amended from time to time;



      (3)   Provide and show proof annually of public liability
insurance in the minimum amount of $300,000;



      (4)   If the animal is a dog and is outside the proper
enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or
leash (not to exceed six feet in length) and under the physical restraint of
a person 16 years of age or older. The muzzle must be of a design as to
prevent the dog from biting any person or animal, but will not cause injury
to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration;



      (5)   If the animal is a dog, it must have an easily
identifiable, standardized tag identifying the dog as dangerous affixed to
its collar at all times as specified in M.S. § 347.51 as it may be amended
from time to time, and shall have a microchip implant as provided by M.S. §
347.151, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (6)   All animals deemed dangerous by the Animal Control
Officer shall be registered with the county in which this city is located
within 14 days after the date the animal was so deemed and provide
satisfactory proof thereof to the Animal Control Officer.



      (7)   If the animal is a dog, the dog must be licensed and up
to date on rabies vaccination. If the animal is a cat or ferret, it must be
up to date with rabies vaccination.



   (B)   Seizure. As authorized by M.S. § 347.54, as it may be amended
from time to time, the Animal Control Officer shall immediately seize any
dangerous animal if the owner does not meet each of the above requirements
within 14 days after the date notice is sent to the owner that the animal is
dangerous. Seizure may be appealed to district court by serving a summons and
petition upon the city and filing it with the district court.



   (C)   Reclaiming animals. A dangerous animal seized under §
92.12(B),  may be reclaimed by the owner of the animal upon payment of
impounding and boarding fees and presenting proof to animal control that each
of the requirements under § 92.12(B), is fulfilled. An animal not reclaimed
under this section within 14 days may be disposed of as provided under §
92.11(F), and the owner is liable to the city for costs incurred in confining
and impounding the animal.



   (D)   Subsequent offenses. If an owner of an animal has subsequently
violated the provisions under § 92.11 with the same animal, the animal must
be seized by animal control. The owner may request a hearing as defined in §
92.11(F). If the owner is found to have violated the provisions for which the
animal was seized, the Animal Control Officer shall order the animal
destroyed in a proper and humane manner and the owner shall pay the costs of
confining the animal. If the person is found not to have violated the
provisions for which the animal was seized, the owner may reclaim the animal
under the provisions of § 92.12(C). If the animal is not yet reclaimed by
the owner within 14 days after the date the owner is notified that the animal
may be reclaimed, the animal may be disposed of as provided under § 92.11(F)
and the owner is liable to the animal control for the costs incurred in
confining, impounding and disposing of the animal.



§ 92.13  BASIC CARE.



   All animals shall receive from their owners or keepers kind treatment,
housing in the winter, and sufficient food and water for their comfort. Any
person not treating their pet in a humane manner will be subject to the
penalties provided in this section.



§ 92.14  BREEDING MORATORIUM.



   Every female dog or female cat in heat shall be confined in a building
or other enclosure in a manner that it cannot come in contact with another
dog or cat except for planned breeding.  Upon capture and failure to reclaim
the animal, every dog or cat shall be neutered or spayed prior to being
transferred to a new owner.



§ 92.15  ENFORCING OFFICER.



   The Council is hereby authorized to appoint an animal control
officer(s) to enforce the provisions of this section. In the officer's duty
of enforcing the provisions of this section, he or she may from time to time,
with the consent of the City Council, designate assistants.



§ 92.16  POUND.



   Every year the Council shall designate an official pound to which
animals found in violation of this chapter shall be taken for safe treatment,
and if necessary, for destruction.



§ 92.17  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS.



   No person shall in any manner molest, hinder, or interfere with any
person authorized by the City Council to capture dogs, cats or other animals
and convey them to the pound while engaged in that operation.  Nor shall any
unauthorized person break open the pound, or attempt to do so, or take or
attempt to take from any agent any animal taken up by him or her in
compliance with this chapter, or in any other manner to interfere with or
hinder the officer in the discharge of his or her duties under this chapter.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Separate offenses.  Each day a violation of this chapter is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable under this section.



   (B)   Misdemeanor.  Unless otherwise provided, violation of this
chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in § 10.99.



   (C)   Petty misdemeanor.  Violations of §§ 92.02, 92.07, 92.13
and 92.14 are petty misdemeanors punishable as provided in § 10.99.



CHAPTER 93:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Purpose



   93.03   Hours



   93.04   Rules



   93.05   Permits



   93.06   Natural resources and wildlife



   93.07   Trees, shrubbery, and lawns



   93.08   Wild animals, birds, and the like



   93.09   Sanitation



   93.10   Ball field scheduling



   93.11   Security and damages



   93.12   Effective date



 



   93.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Permit Application



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.  Any beverage containing more than 1/2 of 1%
alcohol by volume.



   COUNCIL.  The elected members of the Cologne City Council.



   DRUGS.  Any controlled substance, as defined by M.S. Chapter 152, as
it may be amended from time to time, the possession of which is a violation
of M.S. §§ 152.021 through 152.025, as it may be amended from time to time.



   IN-TOWN TEAMS.  Any team sponsored by an organization or business
located within the corporate limits of the City of Cologne.



   MOTORIZED RECREATION VEHICLE.  Any self-propelled, off-the-road, or
all-terrain vehicle, including, but not limited to, snowmobile, mini-bike,
amphibious vehicle, motorcycle, go-cart, trail bike, dune buggy, or
all-terrain cycle.



   NATURAL RESOURCES.  All flora and fauna within parks and physical
factors upon which they depend; including air, water, soil, and minerals.



   OUT-OF-TOWN TEAMS.  Any team not sponsored by an organization or
business located within the corporate limits of the City of Cologne.



   PARK, PARK SYSTEM, or SYSTEM.  Any property owned by the City of
Cologne or under control of the City of Cologne used or intended to be used
as park or recreation land, be same as active recreation sites or the linear
park system, whether or not same is improved or unimproved.



   PERSON or PERSONS.  Individuals, firms, corporations, societies, or
any group or gathering whatsoever.



   VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   WILDLIFE.  Any living creature, not human, wild by nature, endowed
with sensation, power or voluntary motion, including, but not limited to,
mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, reptiles, crustaceans, and mollusks.



(Ord. 121, passed 5-2-1988)



§ 93.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to afford a means of maintaining and
using the parks under the jurisdiction of the City of Cologne in a manner
which is consistent with the maximum enjoyment by all persons and protective
of the natural resources therein.



(Ord. 121, passed 5-2-1988)



§ 93.03  HOURS.



   Hours for all parks are 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.



(Ord. 121, passed 5-2-1988)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.04  RULES.



   (A)   Animals.



      (1)   No person owning, being in custody of, or having control
of any animal, whether wild, pet, or domestic, shall cause or allow the
animal to roam or be at large in any portion of the park system.



      (2)   No person in custody of any animal shall permit the
animal to enter any beach area whether leashed or otherwise.



      (3)   No person in custody or control of any pet shall allow
the animal to disturb, harass, or interfere with any other park users on
their property.



   (B)   Littering.  No person shall deposit, drop, or abandon
garbage, rubbish, offal, waste of any kind, or litter in or upon any waters
or land within a park other than in a designated container.



   (C)   Loud and disturbing behavior.  Engaging in loud, boisterous,
threatening, abusive, insulting, or indecent language, or engaging in any
disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace with
or without music devices is prohibited.



   (D)   Motorized vehicles.



      (1)   No person, other than law enforcement officers or
Cologne City employees, while engaged in official activities of the City of
Cologne, shall drive or operate a motor vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, trail
bike, mini-bike, amphibious vehicles, snowmobiles, and similar devices in any
portion of the system except on roads or trails specifically designated for
the travel.



      (2)   No person shall park any motorized vehicle in any place
in the park system, including parking lots, between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m.



      (3)   No person other than persons authorized shall operate a
motor vehicle in any park or driveway at a speed in excess of ten mph.



   (E)   Alcohol consumption.  No person shall transport, possess,
offer for sale, or consume any alcoholic beverages in any portion of the park
system except under the conditions set forth below.



      (1)   At certain specifically designated recreation centers,
the sale of alcoholic beverages may be permitted under the strict regulation
and control of the City Council.  Sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made
only in individual drinks (not in original packages or otherwise in bulk) and
shall be served for consumption on the immediate premises of the
concession.  Only beer and wine may be possessed, consumed, or served within
park boundaries.



      (2)   No person shall enter a city park while under the
influence of intoxicating liquor.



   (F)   Controlled substance.  No person shall use, possess, or sell
any controlled substance in violation of state statutes.



   (G)   Fires.



      (1)   No person shall start or maintain a fire in any portion
of the park system except small recreational fires in the fireplaces, fire
rings, and grills provided for that purpose in the areas specifically
designated for the use.  Private grills may be used in designated areas,
provided that all ashes and residue therefrom be disposed of in containers
provided for the disposal.



      (2)   Any person who starts or maintains a fire in any
authorized area shall exercise continuous supervision from the time the fire
is kindled until it is extinguished.  If a fire shall cause damage or
constitute a threat to site vegetation and resources, the City Council may,
in its discretion, prohibit fires for limited periods at any location for any
purpose when it is necessary for the continued protection of the park
property and resources.



   (H)   Soliciting.



      (1)   No person shall distribute or disseminate leaflets,
pamphlets, or other printed material, or use any mechanical or electrical
device in a park for soliciting or advertising, except upon prior written
consent of the Council.



      (2)   No person shall carry on or conduct any business or
service within a park without the prior written approval of the Council.



   (I)   Tennis rules.



      (1)   No street shoes shall be permitted on the tennis
courts.  Tennis shoes and very soft-soled shoes are only allowed for
protection of the court surface.



      (2)   Playing tennis is the only activity permitted on the
courts.



      (3)   Tennis court usage is restricted to 45 minutes when
others are waiting.



      (4)   Tennis court gates shall be closed at all times.



      (5)   No music devices (e.g., boom boxes) are permitted on or
at courtside.



      (6)   No bicycles, skates, skateboards, or other types of
equipment are allowed on the courts.



      (7)   No pets are allowed on the courts.



      (8)   Hours of court use are from 6:00 a.m. to 10:10 p.m.



   (J)   Defacing.  No defacing of any structure or other type of
improvement to any portion of a city park shall be allowed.  Violation of
this division (J) is a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 121, passed 5-2-1988)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.05  PERMITS.



   (A)   Activities permit.  A permit shall be obtained from the City
Clerk/Treasurer before participating in any of the following park
activities:  carnivals, community celebrations, gatherings of 25 or more
persons, including picnics, political gatherings, and activity contests,
including those requesting exclusive use or charging admission; and
exhibitions either as a stage production or otherwise.  (See Appendix A of
this chapter.)



   (B)   Application.  A person seeking issuance of a permit under
this section shall file an application with the City Clerk/Treasurer.  The
application shall state:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   The name and address of the person, persons,
corporation, or association sponsoring the activity, if any;



      (3)   The day and hours for which the permit is desired;



      (4)   The park or portion thereof for which the permit is
desired;



      (5)   An estimate of the anticipated attendance;



      (6)   Any other information which the City Council shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued;



   (C)   Standards.



      (1)   The City Council shall issue a permit when it determines:



         (a)   That the proposed activity or use of the park will
not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment
of the park;



         (b)   That the proposed activity or use of the park will
not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public
health, welfare, safety, and recreation;



         (c)   That the proposed activity or use is not
reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime, or disorderly conduct;



         (d)   That the proposed activity will not entail
unusual, extraordinary, or burdensome expenses or police operation by the
city; and



         (e)   That the facilities desired have not been reserved
for other use at the day and hour required in the application.



      (2)   The City Council will review each application and make
its decision at the next meeting following receipt of the application. 
However, the application must be received by the City Clerk/Treasurer on the
Wednesday preceding the next City Council meeting in order for it to be
considered by the Council at the meeting.



   (D)   Effect of permit.  A permittee is bound by all park rules and
regulations and all applicable provisions of this section fully as though the
same were contained in the permit.



   (E)   Liability of permittee.  The grantee of a permit shall be
liable for any loss, damage, or injury to the park system or facilities by
any such person whatsoever, by reason of negligence of the person or persons
to whom such a permit is issued.



(Ord. 121, passed 5-2-1988)



§ 93.06  NATURAL RESOURCES AND WILDLIFE.



   (A)   No person shall intentionally injure, destroy, or remove any
tree, flower, shrub, plant, rock, soil, or mineral in a park.



   (B)   No person shall intentionally kill, trap, hunt, pursue, or in
any manner disturb or cause to be disturbed any species of wildlife within a
park, except that fishing may be permitted in designated areas.



   (C)   No person shall intentionally release within a park any
insect, fish, or other wildlife, or introduce within a park any plant,
chemical, or other agent, potentially harmful to the vegetation or wildlife
of the park.



   (D)   No person shall remove any animal, living or dead, from the
park; and any animal so taken will be considered contraband and subject to
seizure and confiscation.



   (E)   No person shall bring any dog, cat, or other pet into a park
unless caged or kept on a leash not more than six feet in length, or tether
any animal to a tree or other plant.



   (F)   No person shall bring any dog, cat, or other pet to a beach
area, nature center area, refuge area, picnic area, or park building.



   (G)   No person shall permit a dog, cat, or other pet to disturb,
harass, or interfere with any park visitor or a park visitor’s property.



(Ord. 121, passed 5-2-1988)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.07  TREES, SHRUBBERY, AND LAWNS.



   (A)   No person in the park shall damage, cut, carve, transfer, or
move any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of
any tree or plant.  Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire, or other
contrivance to any tree or plant.  A person shall not dig in or otherwise
disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty
or usefulness of any area.



   (B)   No person shall climb any tree or walk, stand, or sit upon
monuments, vases, fountains, railing, fences, or upon any other property not
designated or customarily used for those purposes.



(Ord. 121, passed 5-2-1988)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.08  WILD ANIMALS, BIRDS, AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   No person in any park shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten,
kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot, or throw any projectiles at any animal,
reptile, or bird; nor shall he or she remove or have in his or her possession
the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest, or young of any reptile or
bird; nor shall he or she collect, remove, have in his or her possession,
give away, sell, or offer to sell, or buy or offer to buy, or accept as a
gift, any specimen, alive or dead, of any of the group of tree snails.



   (B)   No person shall give or offer, or attempt to give, to any
animal or bird any tobacco, alcohol, or other known noxious substances.



(Ord. 121, passed 5-2-1988)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.09  SANITATION.



   (A)   No person in a park shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place
or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay,
or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream,
storm sewer, or drain flowing into the waters any substance, matter, or
thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of the
waters.



   (B)   No person shall have brought in or shall dump, deposit, or
leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish,
waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash.  No refuse or trash shall be
placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the
grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these
are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all the rubbish or waste
shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.  Deposit or leave garbage cans
or other containers on park property.



(Ord. 121, passed 5-2-1988)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.10  BALL FIELD SCHEDULING.



   Any party desiring to schedule the use of baseball/softball field(s)
shall file a written application with the City Clerk/Treasurer so that it
will be heard by the City Council by April.



(Ord. 121, passed 5-2-1988)



§ 93.11  SECURITY AND DAMAGES.



   Any permittee shall be obligated to make sure that the park and all
facilities used pursuant to the permit are clean at the end of the
permittee’s use.  If the facilities of the City Park are not so cleaned,
the permittee shall be liable to the city for cleaning and/or repair and
maintenance services at the rate of $30 per hour for all the cleaning,
maintenance, or repairs necessary due to permittee’s use.  Permittee shall
not be eligible to receive another permit for use of the City Park until the
time as the costs required by this section are paid.  The City Council may,
in its discretion, require the permittee to post a security deposit before
being issued a permit in the future.



(Ord. 121, passed 5-2-1988)



§ 93.12  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after passage,
approval, and publication according to law.



(Ord. 121, passed 5-2-1988)



§ 93.99 PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any section of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor pursuant to M.S. § 609.02, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from
time to time.



(Ord. 121, passed 5-2-1988)  Penalty, see § 10.99



APPENDIX A:  PERMIT APPLICATION



 



Date Received:  __________________


Name of Applicant: 
_________________________________________________________________


Phone Number:  ____________________


Address of Applicant: 
_______________________________________________________________


_______________________________________________________________________________
___


Name of Sponsor of Event: 
___________________________________________________________


                  (Corporation, Association, and the Like)


Phone Number:  ____________________


Address of Sponsor: 
________________________________________________________________


_______________________________________________________________________________
___


Date and Time of Activity: 
___________________________________________________________


Park Location: 
_____________________________________________________________________


Anticipated Number of Participants:  ________________


Additional Information Pertinent to the Activity: 
__________________________________________


_______________________________________________________________________________
___


_______________________________________________________________________________
___


_______________________________________________________________________________
___


_______________________________________________________________________________
___


Fee:  $_________________


Receipt No.:  ________________


Approved Date:  _________________




 



(Ord. 121, passed 5-2-1988)



CHAPTER 94:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



   94.01   Unloading on street or sidewalk



   94.02   Street and sidewalk obstruction



   94.03   Materials on street or sidewalk



§ 94.01  UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the city by
throwing or letting the material fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public way, without first placing some sufficient
protection over the pavement.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.02  STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.



   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public
way within the city by erecting thereon any fence or building, or permitting
any fence or building to remain thereon.  Each day that any fence or
building is permitted to remain upon the public way shall constitute a
separate offense.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.03  MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk.  No owner, occupant,
or person having the care of any building or lot of land, bordering on any
street or sidewalk, shall permit it to be encumbered with barrels, boxes,
cans, articles, or substances of any kind, so as to interfere with the free
and unobstructed use thereof.



Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 95:  HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES



Section




General Provisions




   95.01   Assessable current services



   95.02   Tree diseases



   95.03   Violations




Nuisances




   95.15   Public nuisance



   95.16   Public nuisances affecting health



   95.17   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency



   95.18   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety



   95.19   Nuisance parking and storage



   95.20   Inoperable motor vehicles



   95.21   Building maintenance and appearance



   95.22   Duties of city officers



   95.23   Abatement



   95.24   Recovery of cost



   95.25   Outside storage of recreational equipment other than motor
vehicles



   95.26   Outside storage of motor vehicles




Weeds




   95.35   Short title



   95.36   Jurisdiction



   95.37   Definitions; exclusions



   95.38   Owners responsible for trimming, removal, and the like



   95.39   Filing complaint



   95.40   Notice of violations



   95.41   Appeals



   95.42   Abatement by city



   95.43   Liability




Open Burning




   95.55   Definitions



   95.56   Prohibited materials



   95.57   Permit required for open burning



   95.58   Purposes allowed for open burning



   95.59   Permit application for open burning; permit fees



   95.60   Permit process for open burning



   95.61   Permit holder responsibility



   95.62   Revocation of open burning permit



   95.63   Denial of open burning permit



   95.64   Burning ban or air quality alert



   95.65   Rules and laws adopted by reference



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.01  ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CURRENT SERVICE.  One or more of the following: snow, ice, or
rubbish removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots
adjacent to sidewalks or from private property; removal or elimination of
public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any
hazardous building included in M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.26, as they may
amended from time to time; installation or repair of water service lines;
street sprinkling, street flushing, light street oiling, or other dust
treatment of streets; repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of
trees and removal of unsound and insect-infected trees from the public
streets or private property; and the operation of a street lighting system.



   (B)   Snow, ice, dirt, and rubbish.



      (1)   Duty of owners and occupants.  The owner and the
occupant of any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to
keep the walk safe for pedestrians.  No owner or occupant shall allow snow,
ice, dirt, or rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 24 hours after its
deposit thereon.  Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a
violation.



      (2)   Removal by city.  The City Clerk/Treasurer or other
person designated by the City Council may cause removal from all public
sidewalks all snow, ice, dirt, and rubbish as soon as possible beginning 24
hours after any matter has been deposited thereon or after the snow has
ceased to fall.  The City Clerk/Treasurer or other designated person shall
keep a record showing the cost of removal adjacent to each separate lot and
parcel.



   (C)   Public health and safety hazards.  When the city removes or
eliminates public health or safety hazards from private property under the
following provisions of this chapter, the administrative officer responsible
for doing the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal or
elimination against each parcel of property affected and annually deliver
that information to the City Clerk/Treasurer.



   (D)   Installation and repair of water service lines.  Whenever the
city installs or repairs water service lines serving private property under
this code, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall keep a record of the total cost of
the installation or repair against the property.



   (E)   Repair of sidewalks and alleys.



      (1)   Duty of owner.  The owner of any property within the
city abutting a public sidewalk or alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in
repair and safe for pedestrians.  Repairs shall be made in accordance with
the standard specifications approved by the City Council and on file in the
office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.



      (2)   Inspections; notice.  The City Council or its designee
shall make inspections as are necessary to determine that public sidewalks
and alleys within the city are kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or
vehicles.  If it is found that any sidewalk or alley abutting on private
property is unsafe and in need of repairs, the City Council shall cause a
notice to be served, by registered or certified mail or by personal service,
upon the record owner of the property, ordering the owner to have the
sidewalk or alley repaired and made safe within 30 days and stating that if
the owner fails to do so, the city will do so and that the expense thereof
must be paid by the owner, and if unpaid it will be made a special assessment
against the property concerned.



      (3)   Repair by city.  If the sidewalk or alley is not
repaired within 30 days after receipt of the notice, the City Clerk/Treasurer
shall report the facts to the City Council and the City Council shall by
resolution order the work done by contract in accordance with law.  No
person shall enter private property to repair a sidewalk, except with the
permission of the owner or after obtaining an administrative warrant. The
City Clerk/Treasurer shall keep a record of the total cost of the repair
attributable to each lot or parcel of property.



   (F)   Personal liability.  The owner of property on which or
adjacent to which a current service has been performed shall be personally
liable for the cost of the service.  As soon as the service has been
completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk/Treasurer, or other
designated official, shall prepare a bill and mail it to the owner and
thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of
the City Clerk/Treasurer.



   (G)   Damage to public property.  Any person driving any vehicle,
equipment, object, or contrivance upon any street, road, highway, or
structure shall be liable for all damages which the surface or structure
thereof may sustain as a result of any illegal operation, or driving or
moving of the vehicle, equipment, object, or contrivance; or as a result of
operating, driving, or moving any vehicle, equipment, object, or contrivance
weighing in excess of the maximum weight permitted by statute or this code. 
When the driver is not the owner of the vehicle, equipment, object, or
contrivance, but is operating, driving, or moving it with the express or
implied permission of the owner, then the owner and the driver shall be
jointly and severally liable for any such damage.  Any person who willfully
acts or fails to exercise due care and by that act damages any public
property shall be liable for the amount thereof, which amount shall be
collectable by action or as a lien under M.S. § 514.67, as it may be amended
from time to time.



   (H)   Assessment.  On or before October 1 of each year, the City
Clerk/Treasurer shall list the total unpaid charges for each type of current
service and charges under this section against each separate lot or parcel to
which they are attributable under this section.  The City Council may then
spread the charges against property benefitted as a special assessment under
the authority of M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and
other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and
collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each
case.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.02  TREE DISEASES.



   (A)   Trees constituting nuisance declared.  The following are
public nuisances whenever they may be found within the city:



      (1)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected
to any degree with the Dutch Elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman)
Moreau or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus
(Eichh.) or Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh);



      (2)   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches,
stumps, firewood, or other elm material from which the bark has not been
removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide;



      (3)   Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected
to any degree with the Oak Wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;



      (4)   Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion
of the designated officer constitutes a hazard, including, but not limited
to, logs, branches, stumps, roots, firewood, or other oak material which has
not been stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective
fungicide; and



      (5)   Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease.



   (B)   Abatement of nuisance.  It is unlawful for any person to
permit any public nuisance as defined in division (A) above to remain on any
premises the person owns or controls within the city.  The nuisance may be
abated as provided in §§ 95.22 and 95.23.



   (C)   Record of costs.  The City Clerk/Treasurer shall keep a
record of the costs of abatement done under this section for all work done
for which assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the description
of the land, lots, parcels involved, and the amount chargeable to each.



   (D)   Unpaid charges.  On or before September 1 of each year, the
City Clerk/Treasurer shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement
against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this
section.  The City Council may then spread the charges or any portion
thereof against the property involved as a special assessment as authorized
by M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and other
pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection the
following year along with the current taxes.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.03  VIOLATIONS.



   Violation of any provision of this chapter, including maintaining a
nuisance after being notified in writing by first-class mail of a violation
of any provision of this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor and punished as
provided in § 10.99.



NUISANCES



§ 95.15  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty
intentionally does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public
nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:



   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys,
injures, or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort, or repose of any
considerable number of members of the public;



   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage
any public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or



   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or §§
95.16, 95.17, or 95.18, or any other part of this code to be a public
nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically provided.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.16  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.



   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:



   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or
vegetable matter;



   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;



   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;



   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours
after death;



   (E)   Accumulations of manure, refuse, or other debris;



   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or
flytight or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to
emit foul and disagreeable odors;



   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake,
canal, or body of water by sewage, industrial waste, or other substances;



   (H)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon
public or private property;



   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities;



   (J)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and



   (K)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not
operating under local license.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.17  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.



   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public
morals and decency:



   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines, and punch boards, except
as otherwise authorized by federal, state, or local law;



   (B)   Betting, bookmaking, and all apparatus used in those
occupations;



   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous
sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame, and bawdy houses;



   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or
disposed of in violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are
permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where
intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of
law, and all liquor and other property used for maintaining that place; and



   (E)   Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of
intoxicating liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other
immoral or illegal purpose.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.18  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.



   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:



   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours
after the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to
fall;



   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards, or other obstructions which
prevent people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an
intersection;



   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface
of a sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;



   (D)   All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules chapter 7030,
as it may be amended from time to time, which are hereby incorporated by
reference into this code;



   (E)   The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging
of the exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat,
motor vehicle, motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile, or any
recreational device except through a muffler or other device that effectively
prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable
state laws and regulations;



   (F)   The using or operation or permitting the using or operation of
any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system,
machine, or other device for producing or reproduction of sound in a
distinctly and loudly audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet, and
comfort of any person nearby.  Operation of any device referred to above
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly
audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is
located, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a
structure or building shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this
section;



   (G)   No person shall participate in any party or other gathering of
people giving rise to noise, unreasonably disturbing the peace, quiet, or
repose of another person.  When a police officer determines that a gathering
is creating such a noise disturbance, the officer may order all persons
present, other than the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance
is occurring, to disperse immediately.  No person shall refuse to leave
after being ordered by a police officer to do so.  Every owner or tenant of
the premises who has knowledge of the disturbance shall make every reasonable
effort to see that the disturbance is stopped;



   (H)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use
of streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds except under conditions as
are permitted by this code or other applicable law;



   (I)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in
a dangerous manner;



   (J)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or
any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to
gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;



   (K)   All hanging signs, awnings, and other similar structures over
streets and sidewalks, so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not
constructed and maintained as provided by ordinance;



   (L)   The allowing of rain water, ice, or snow to fall from any
building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any
sidewalk;



   (M)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and
within three feet of a public sidewalk or way;



   (N)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so
situated or operated on private property as to attract the public;



   (O)   Wastewater cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or
other public properties;



   (P)   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery,
household appliances, automobile bodies, or other material in a manner
conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, or vermin, or the rank
growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating
fire, health, or safety hazards from accumulation;



   (Q)   Any well, hole, or similar excavation which is left uncovered
or in another condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other
person coming on the premises where it is located;



   (R)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or
a public street drain, gutter, or ditch with trash of other materials;



   (S)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk, or other
public property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles, or other substance which
may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing
over the substance;



   (T)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way
or on adjacent private property;



   (U)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause
injury to the person or property of anyone;



   (V)   (1)   Noises prohibited. 



         (a)   General prohibition.  No person shall make or
cause to be made any distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably
annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace,
safety, or welfare of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or
affects their property’s value.  This general prohibition is not limited
by the specific restrictions of this section.



         (b)   Defective vehicles or loads.  No person shall use
any vehicle so out of repair or so loaded as to create loud and unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.



         (c)   Loading, unloading, unpacking.  No person shall
create loud or excessive noise in loading, unloading, or unpacking any
vehicle.



         (d)   Radios, phonographs, paging systems, and the
like.  No person shall use or operate or permit the use or operation of any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine,
or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a distinct and
loudly audible manner as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet, and
comfort of any person nearby.  Operation of any such set, instrument,
phonograph, machine, or other device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the
structure or building in which it is located, in the hallway or apartment
adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a
structure or building, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.



         (e)   Schools, churches, hospitals, and the like.  No
person shall create any excessive noise on a street, alley, or public grounds
adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or hospital when the
noise unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or disturbs
or unduly annoys its occupants or residents and when conspicuous signs
indicate the presence of the institution.



      (2)   Hourly restriction of certain operations.



         (a)   Domestic power equipment.  No person shall
operate a power lawn mower, power hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden
tiller, edger, drill, or other similar domestic power maintenance equipment
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday. 
Snow removal equipment is exempt from this provision.



         (b)   Refuse hauling.  No person shall collect or
remove garbage or refuse in any residential district except between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.



         (c)   Construction activities.  No person shall engage
in or permit construction activities involving the use of any kind of
electric-, diesel-, or gas-powered machine or other power equipment except
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.



      (3)   Noise impact statements.  The Council may require any
person applying for a change in zoning classification or a permit or license
for any structure, operation, process, installation, or alteration or project
that may be considered a potential noise source to submit a noise impact
statement on a form prescribed by the Council.  It shall evaluate each such
statement and take its evaluation into account in approving or disapproving
the license or permit applied for or the zoning change requested.



   (W)   Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting
exceeding 0.5 footcandles as measured on the property line of the property
where the lighting is located when abutting any residential parcel, and one
footcandle when abutting any commercial or industrial parcel; and



   (X)   Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting
exceeding 0.5 footcandles as measured on the property line of the property
where the lighting is located when abutting any residential parcel and one
footcandle when abutting any commercial or industrial parcel.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.19  NUISANCE PARKING AND STORAGE.



   (A)   Declaration of nuisance.  The outside parking and storage on
residentially-zoned property of large numbers of vehicles and vehicles,
materials, supplies, or equipment not customarily used for residential
purposes in violation of the requirements set forth below is declared to be a
public nuisance because it:



      (1)   Obstructs views on streets and private property;



      (2)   Creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas;



      (3)   Prevents the full use of residential streets for
residential parking;



      (4)   Introduces commercial advertising signs into areas where
commercial advertising signs are otherwise prohibited;



      (5)   Decreases adjoining landowners’ and occupants’
enjoyment of their property and neighborhood; and



      (6)   Otherwise adversely affects property values and
neighborhood patterns.



   (B)   Unlawful parking and storage.



      (1)   A person must not place, store, or allow the placement
or storage of ice fish houses, skateboard ramps, playhouses, or other similar
nonpermanent structures outside continuously for longer than 24 hours in the
front-yard area of residential property unless more than 100 feet back from
the front property line.



      (2)   A person must not place, store, or allow the placement
or storage of pipe, lumber, forms, steel, machinery, or similar materials,
including all materials used in connection with a business, outside on
residential property, unless shielded from public view by an opaque cover or
fence.



      (3)   A person must not cause, undertake, permit, or allow the
outside parking and storage of vehicles on residential property unless it
complies with the following requirements.



         (a)   No more than four vehicles per lawful dwelling
unit may be parked or stored anywhere outside on residential property, except
as otherwise permitted or required by the city because of nonresidential
characteristics of the property.  This maximum number does not include
vehicles of occasional guests who do not reside on the property.



         (b)   Vehicles that are parked or stored outside in the
front-yard area must be on a paved or graveled parking or driveway area.



         (c)   Vehicles, watercraft, and other articles stored
outside on residential property must be owned by a person who resides on that
property.  Students who are away at school for periods of time but still
claim the property as their legal residence will be considered residents on
the property.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.20  INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store, or abandon any
motor vehicle which is not in operating condition, partially dismantled, used
for repair of parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other
vehicles, kept for scrapping, dismantling, or salvage of any kind, or which
is not properly licensed for operation with the state, pursuant to M.S. §
168B.011, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in a
building and/or kept out of view from any street, road, or alley, and which
does not foster complaint from a resident of the city.  A privacy fence is
permissible.



   (C)   Any motor vehicles described in this section constitute a
hazard to the health and welfare of the residents of the community in that
the vehicles can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter and breeding
place for vermin and present physical danger to the safety and well-being of
children and citizens; and vehicles containing fluids which, if released into
the environment, can and do cause significant health risks to the community.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.21  BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND APPEARANCE.



   (A)   Declaration of nuisance.  Buildings, fences, and other
structures that have been so poorly maintained that their physical condition
and appearance detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be
public nuisances because they:



      (1)   Are unsightly;



      (2)   Decrease adjoining landowners’ and occupants’
enjoyment of their property and neighborhood; and



      (3)   Adversely affect property values and neighborhood
patterns.



   (B)   Standards.  A building, fence, or other structure is a public
nuisance if it does not comply with the following requirements.



      (1)   No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration,
holes, breaks, gaps, loose or rotting boards or timbers.



      (2)   Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish
such as paint applied must be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of
the finish.  No wall or other exterior surface may have peeling, cracked,
chipped, or otherwise deteriorated surface finish on more than 20% of:



         (a)   Any one wall or other flat surface; or



         (b)   All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters, and
similar projections on any one side or surface.



      (3)   No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures,
may be broken or cracked, and no screens may be torn or separated from
moldings.



      (4)   Exterior doors and shutters must be hung properly and
have an operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place.



      (5)   Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer
windows, and similar projections must be kept in good repair and free from
cracks and defects that make them hazardous or unsightly.



      (6)   Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that
admit water.  All roof drainage systems must be secured and hung properly.



      (7)   Chimneys, antennas, air vents, and other similar
projections must be structurally sound and in good repair.  These
projections must be secured properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall
or exterior roof.



      (8)   Foundations must be structurally sound and in good
repair.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.22  DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.



   For purposes of §§ 95.22 and 95.23, the Police Department, or Sheriff
or person designated by the City Council under § 10.20, if the city has at
the time no Police Department, may enforce the provisions relating to
nuisances.  Any peace officer or designated person shall have the power to
inspect private premises and take all reasonable precautions to prevent the
commission and maintenance of public nuisances.  Except in emergency
situations of imminent danger to human life and safety, no police officer or
designated person shall enter private property for the purpose of inspecting
or preventing public nuisances without the permission of the owner, resident,
or other person in control of the property, unless the officer or person
designated has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent
jurisdiction authorizing the entry, as provided in § 10.20.



§ 95.23  ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Notice.  Written notice of violation; notice of the time,
date, place, and subject of any hearing before the City Council; notice of
City Council order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing
shall be given as set forth in this section.



      (1)   Notice of violation.  Written notice of violation shall
be served by a peace officer or designated person on the owner of record or
occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered
mail.  If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or
the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice
of violation shall be served by posting it on the premises.



      (2)   Notice of City Council hearing.  Written notice of any
City Council hearing to determine or abate a nuisance shall be served on the
owner of record and occupant of the premises either in person or by certified
or registered mail.  If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is
unknown, or the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the
City Council hearing, notice of City Council hearing shall be served by
posting it on the premises.



      (3)   Notice of City Council order.  Except for those cases
determined by the city to require summary enforcement, written notice of any
City Council order shall be made as provided in M.S. § 463.17, as it may be
amended from time to time.



      (4)   Notice of motion for summary enforcement.  Written
notice of any motion for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in
M.S. § 463.17, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Procedure.  Whenever a peace officer or designated person
determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on the
premises in the city, the officer or person designated shall notify in
writing the owner of record or occupant of the premises of the fact and order
that the nuisance be terminated or abated.  The notice of violation shall
specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and the time within which
the nuisance is to be abated.  If the notice of violation is not complied
with within the time specified, the officer or designated person shall report
that fact forthwith to the City Council.  Thereafter, the City Council may,
after notice to the owner or occupant and an opportunity to be heard,
determine that the condition identified in the notice of violation is a
nuisance and further order that if the nuisance is not abated within the time
prescribed by the City Council, the city may seek injunctive relief by
serving a copy of the City Council order and notice of motion for summary
enforcement or obtain an administrative search and seizure warrant and abate
the nuisance.



   (C)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement.  In cases of
emergency, where delay in abatement required to complete the notice and
procedure requirements set forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this section
will permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health
safety or welfare, the City Council may order summary enforcement and abate
the nuisance.  To proceed with summary enforcement, the officer or
designated person shall determine that a public nuisance exists or is being
maintained on premises in the city and that delay in abatement of the
nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety, or welfare.  The
officer or designated person shall notify in writing the occupant or owner of
the premises of the nature of the nuisance and of the city’s intention to
seek summary enforcement and the time and place of the City Council meeting
to consider the question of summary enforcement.  The City Council shall
determine whether or not the condition identified in the notice to the owner
or occupant is a nuisance, whether public health, safety, or welfare will be
unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement required to complete the
procedure set forth in division (A) of this section, and may order that the
nuisance be immediately terminated or abated.  If the nuisance is not
immediately terminated or abated, the City Council may order summary
enforcement and abate the nuisance.



   (D)   Immediate abatement.  Nothing in this section shall prevent
the city, without notice or other process, from immediately abating any
condition which poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.24  RECOVERY OF COST.



   (A)   Personal liability.  The owner of premises on which a
nuisance has been abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost
to the city of the abatement, including administrative costs.  As soon as
the work has been completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk/Treasurer
or other official shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the
owner.  Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the
office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.



   (B)   Assessment.  After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. §
429.061, as it may be amended from time to time, if the nuisance is a public
health or safety hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice
on public sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the
traveled portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City
Clerk/Treasurer shall, on or before October 1 next following abatement of the
nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other charges as well
as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101,
as it may be amended from time to time, against each separate lot or parcel
to which the charges are attributable.  The City Council may then spread the
charges against the property under that statute and other pertinent statutes
for certification to the County Auditor and collection along with current
taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding 10, as the
City Council may determine in each case.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.25  OUTSIDE STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT OTHER THAN MOTOR
VEHICLES.



   (A)   No more than two of the following may be stored outside of a
house or garage constructed on any lot in the residential districts of the
city:



      (1)   Boat (must be on a trailer);



      (2)   Camper;



      (3)   Motor home;



      (4)   Snowmobile (up to two are allowed and count as one if
both are stored on one personal trailer);



      (5)   Personal watercraft (up to two are allowed and count as
one if both are stored on one trailer);



      (6)   Motorcycle; and



      (7)   Trailer.



   (B)   By way of example, it is not permissible to store outside of
the house or garage a camper and a boat and two snowmobiles on a trailer, but
it is permissible to store a camper and a boat. Storage means leaving the
object outside of the house or garage for more than 24 continuous hours. Such
storage, to the extent permitted under this section must occur on a
bituminous, concrete, or a gravel driveway.



(Ord. 125C, passed 3-18-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.26  OUTSIDE STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES.



   No more than two motor vehicles (as that term is defined by M.S. §
169.01, as it may be amended from time to time) may be stored outside of a
structure on any lot in any residential district of the city. Storage means
leaving the motor vehicle outside of a structure for more than 24 continuous
hours. Storage, to the extent it is permitted under this section, must occur
on bituminous, concrete, or a gravel driveway.



(Ord. 125C, passed 3-18-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



WEEDS



§ 95.35  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be cited as the Weed Ordinance.



§ 95.36  JURISDICTION.



   This subchapter shall be in addition to any state statute or county
ordinance presently in effect, subsequently added, amended, or repealed.



§ 95.37  DEFINITIONS; EXCLUSIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DESTRUCTION ORDER.  The notice served by the City Council or
designated city official, in cases of appeal, on the property owner of the
ordinance violation.



      PROPERTY OWNER.  The person occupying the property, the holder
of legal title or a person having control over the property of another, such
as a right-of-way, easement, license, or lease.



      WEEDS, GRASSES, and RANK VEGETATION.  Includes, but is not
limited to, the following:



         (1)   Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include,
but not be limited to:  alum (allium), Buckthorn, Bur Cucumber, Canada
Thistle, Corncockle, Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly Dock, Dodder, Field Bindweed,
French Weed, Hairy Whitetop, Hedge Bindweed, Hoary Cress, Horsenettle,
Johnsongrass, Leafy Spurge, Mile-A-Minute Weed, Musk Thistle, Oxeye Daisy,
Perennial Sowthistle, Poison Hemlock, Purple Loosestrife, Quackgrass, Russian
Knapweed, Russian Thistle, Serrated Tussock, Shatter Cane, Sorghum, Wild
Carrot, Wild Garlic, Wild Mustard, Wild Onion, Wild Parsnip;



         (2)   Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more
and not pruned, sprayed, cultivated, or otherwise maintained for two
consecutive years;



         (3)   Bushes of the species of tall, common, or European
barberry, further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;



         (4)   Any weeds, grass, or plants, other than trees,
bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12
inches;



         (5)   Rank vegetation includes the uncontrolled,
uncultivated growth of annuals and perennial plants; and



         (6)   The term WEEDS does not include shrubs, trees,
cultivated plants, or crops.



   (B)   In no event shall cultivated plants or crops include plants
which have been defined by state statute or administrative rule as being
noxious or detrimental plants.



§ 95.38  OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRIMMING, REMOVAL, AND THE LIKE.



   All property owners shall be responsible for the removal, cutting, or
disposal and elimination of weeds, grasses, and rank vegetation or other
uncontrolled plant growth on their property, which at the time of notice is
in excess of 12 inches in height.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.39  FILING COMPLAINT.



   Any person, including the city, who believes there is property located
within the corporate limits of the city which has growing plant matter in
violation of this subchapter shall make a written complaint signed, dated,
and filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer.  If the city makes the complaint,
an employee, officer, or Council Member of the city shall file the complaint
in all respects as set out above.



§ 95.40  NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Upon receiving notice of the probable existence of weeds in
violation of this subchapter, a person designated by the City Council shall
make an inspection and prepare a written report to the City Council regarding
the condition.  The City Council, upon concluding that there is a probable
belief that this subchapter has been violated, shall forward written
notification in the form of a Destruction Order to the property owner or the
person occupying the property as that information is contained within the
records of the City Clerk/Treasurer or any other city agency.  The notice
shall be served in writing by certified mail.  The notice shall provide that
within seven regular business days after the receipt of the notice that the
designated violation shall be removed by the property owner or person
occupying the property.



   (B)   (1)   All notices are to be in writing and all filings are
to be with the City Clerk/Treasurer.



      (2)   Certified mailing to the City Clerk/Treasurer or others
is deemed filed on the date of posting to the United States Postal Service.



§ 95.41  APPEALS.



   (A)   The property owner may appeal by filing written notice of
objections with the City Council within 48 hours of the notice, excluding
weekends and holidays, if the property owner contests the finding of the City
Council.  It is the property owner’s responsibility to demonstrate that
the matter in question is shrubs, trees, cultivated plants, or crops or is
not otherwise in violation of this subchapter, and should not be subject to
destruction under the subchapter.



   (B)   An appeal by the property owner shall be brought before the
City Council and shall be decided by a majority vote of the Council Members
in attendance and being at a regularly scheduled or special meeting of the
City Council.



§ 95.42  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   In the event that the property owner shall fail to comply with the
Destruction Order within seven regular business days and has not filed a
notice within 48 hours to the City Clerk/Treasurer of an intent to appeal,
the City Council may employ the services of city employees or outside
contractors and remove the weeds to conform to this subchapter by all lawful
means.  No person shall enter the property to abate the nuisance, except
with the permission of the owner, resident, or other person in control of the
property.



§ 95.43  LIABILITY.



   (A)   The property owner is liable for all costs of removal,
cutting, or destruction of weeds as defined by this subchapter.



   (B)   The property owner is responsible for all collection costs
associated with weed destruction, including, but not limited to, court costs,
attorney’s fees, and interest on any unpaid amounts incurred by the city. 
If the city uses municipal employees, it shall set and assign an appropriate
per hour rate for employees, equipment, supplies, and chemicals which may be
used.



   (C)   All sums payable by the property owner are to be paid to the
City Clerk/Treasurer and to be deposited in a general fund as compensation
for expenses and costs incurred by the city.



   (D)   All sums payable by the property owner may be collected as a
special assessment as provided by M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from
time to time.



OPEN BURNING



§ 95.55  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL, and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS.  The Fire
Chief, Fire Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which
provides fire protection services to the city.



   OPEN BURNING.  The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion
products are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a
stack, duct, or chimney, except a RECREATIONAL FIRE as defined herein. 
Mobile cooking devices such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood
smokers, and propane or natural gas devices are not defined as open burning.



   RECREATIONAL FIRE.  A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than
three feet in height, contained within the border of a RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE
using dry, clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor, or soot
beyond the property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all
times; for recreational, ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes;
extinguished completely before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather
conditions, neighbors, burning bans, and air quality so that nuisance,
health, or safety hazards will not be created.  No more than one
recreational fire is allowed on any property at one time.



   RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE.  An area of no more than a three-foot diameter
circle (measured from the inside of the fire ring or border); completely
surrounded by noncombustible and nonsmoke or odor producing material, either
of natural rock, cement, brick, tile, or blocks or ferrous metal only an
which area is depressed below ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed. 
Included are permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces.  Burning barrels are
not a RECREATION FIRE SITE as defined herein.  RECREATIONAL FIRE SITES shall
not be located closer than 25 feet to any structure.



   STARTER FUELS.  Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches,
cardboard, or charcoal fire starter.  Paraffin candles and alcohols are
permitted as starter fuels and as aids to ignition only.  Propane gas
torches or other clean gas burning devices causing minimal pollution must be
used to start an open burn.



   WOOD.  Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, presto
logs, charcoal, cord wood, or untreated dimensional lumber.  The term does
not include wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil
soaked, or treated with paint, glue, or preservatives.  Clean pallets may be
used for recreational fires when cut into three-foot lengths.



§ 95.56  PROHIBITED MATERIALS.



   (A)   No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning oils,
petro fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other
materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad
ties, treated, painted, or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper,
insulation, composition board, sheet rock, wiring, paint, or paint fillers.



   (B)   No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning of
hazardous waste or salvage operations, open burning of solid waste generated
from an industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial
establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or
institutional structures.



   (C)   No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning of
discarded material resulting from the handling, processing, storage,
preparation, serving, or consumption of food.



   (D)   No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning of any
leaves or grass clippings.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.57  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNING.



   No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the
city without first having obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit
is not required for any fire which is a recreational fire as defined in §
95.60.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.58  PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   Open burn permits may be issued only for the following
purposes:



      (1)   Elimination of fire of health hazard that cannot be
abated by other practical means;



      (2)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction;



      (3)   Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest,
prairie, or wildlife habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land
and rights-of-way where chipping, composting, landspreading, or other
alternative methods are not practical;



      (4)   Disposal of diseased trees generated on-site, diseased
or infected nursery stock, diseased bee hives; and



      (5)   Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber, and
wood shakes generated from construction, where recycling, reuse, removal, or
other alternative disposal methods are not practical.



   (B)   Fire training permits can only issued by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.59  PERMIT APPLICATION FOR OPEN BURNING; PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application
on a form prescribed the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by
the Fire Department.  The permit application shall be presented to the Fire
Chief, Fire Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals for reviewing and processing
those applications.



   (B)   An open burning permit shall require the payment of a fee. 
Permit fees shall be in the amount established by City Council from time to
time.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.60  PERMIT PROCESS FOR OPEN BURNING.



   Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and
permit fee, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals shall
schedule a preliminary site inspection to locate the proposed burn site, note
special conditions, and set dates and time of permitted burn and review fire
safety considerations.



§ 95.61  PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be
responsible for confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in
effect.  Every open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit
holder or his or her competent representative.  The open burning site shall
have available appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment as
set out in the fire safety plan.



   (B)   The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the
permit holder or his or her representative leaves the site.  No fire may be
allowed to smolder with no person present.  It is the responsibility of the
permit holder to have a valid permit, as required by this subchapter,
available for inspection on the site by the Police Department, Fire
Department, MPCA representative, or DNR forest officer.



   (C)   The permit holder is responsible for compliance and
implementation of all general conditions, special conditions, and the burn
event safety plan as established in the permit issued.  The permit holder
shall be responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the burn,
including, but not limited to, fire suppression and administrative fees.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.62  REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.



   The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of
DNR forest officer, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire
Marshals.  Reasons for revocation include, but are not limited to, a fire
hazard existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the
conditions of the permit being violated during the course of the burn,
pollution or nuisance conditions developing during the course of the burn, or
a fire smoldering with no flame present.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.63  DENIAL OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.



   If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are
not met during review of the application, it is determined that a practical
alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a pollution or
nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be
drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant
Fire Marshals, these officers may deny the application for the open burn
permit.



§ 95.64  BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.



   No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or
DNR has officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire
conditions or when the MPCA has declared an Air Quality Alert.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.65  RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 through 88.22, as they may be amended
from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.



CHAPTER 96: LAWN SPRINKLING AND IRRIGATION



Section



   96.01   Purpose



   96.02   Sprinkling to be limited by address



   96.03   Hours when sprinkling is prohibited



   96.04   Natural rain events



   96.05   Exemption



   96.06   Notice of violation



   96.07   Effective date



 



   96.98   Violations



§ 96.01  PURPOSE.



   The City of Cologne declares in the public interest to limit the use of
the city water supply for lawn sprinkling or lawn arrogation (hereinafter
sprinkling) in order to conserve and efficiently use the city’s water
resources.  No owner, occupier, or manager of any property within the city
shall knowingly conduct sprinkling operations contrary to the provisions of
this subchapter.



(Ord. 156, passed 6-3-2002)



§ 96.02  SPRINKLING TO BE LIMITED BY ADDRESS.



   Sprinkling within the city shall be limited by property address with
all properties assigned an odd address number permitted to sprinkle on
odd-numbered dates and properties being assigned an even-numbered address
being permitted to sprinkle on even-numbered dates.



(Ord. 156, passed 6-3-2002)



§ 96.03  HOURS WHEN SPRINKLING IS PROHIBITED.



   At no time shall any sprinkling operations be conducted between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any day.



(Ord. 156, passed 6-3-2002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.04  NATURAL RAIN EVENTS.



   No sprinkling operations shall be knowingly conducted at any time
during a natural rain event.  All commercial, industrial, and institutional
sprinkling systems shall be installed with rain sensors designed to prevent
sprinkling during rain events.  Existing commercial, industrial, and
institutional sprinkling systems shall require that rain sensors be installed
to monitor the system no later than 8-1-2003.



(Ord. 156, passed 6-3-2002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.05  EXEMPTION.



   Lawn sprinkling which is conducted by exclusive use of water drawn from
private wells are exempted from the provision of this subchapter, except that
the city requires provisions relating to odd- and even-day watering to be
complied with to provide for uniform application and monitoring of sprinkling
within the city.



(Ord. 156, passed 6-3-2002)



§ 96.06 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Upon discovery of the first violation of this subchapter, the City
Clerk/Treasurer shall issue by personal service or mail a warning letter
setting forth the date of the violation and providing the violator with a
copy of this code section.



(Ord. 156, passed 6-3-2002)



§ 96.07  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall take force and be in effect from and after its
passage and publication.



(Ord. 156, passed 6-3-2002)



§ 96.98  VIOLATIONS.



   Subsequent violations of this subchapter shall be subject to the
following civil and criminal penalties, which shall be nonexclusive:



   (A)   The city may levy a civil penalty of $75 per day for each
violation.  The civil penalty shall be added to the monthly water bill and
collected in the manner of a water bill, including the right to certify the
same over to the County Auditor for collection with taxes, if unpaid.



   (B)   Each violation shall constitute a petty misdemeanor and be
subject to the fines as may be imposed by a petty misdemeanor according to
state statute as amended from time to time.



(Ord. 156, passed 6-3-2002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 97: SUMP PUMPS



Section




Sump Pumps and Discharge of Water




   97.01   Sump pump regulations



   97.02   Sanitary sewer discharge is prohibited



   97.03   Cross-connections prohibited



   97.04   Mandatory external discharge of sumps



   97.05   Inspection



   97.06   Cooperation



   97.07   Noncompliance



   97.08   Effective date



 



   97.98   Violations



SUMP PUMPS AND DISCHARGE OF SUMP WATER



§ 97.01  SUMP PUMP REGULATIONS.



   Any and all buildings or dwellings constructed after the date of this
subchapter within the City of Cologne other than slab on grade structures
must contain drainage water sumps and sump pumps.  All the drainage water
sumps and sum pumps must be installed in accordance with applicable
requirements of the State Building and Plumping Codes as enacted by the City
of Cologne.



(Ord. 130A, passed 7-2-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.02  SANITARY SEWER DISCHARGE IS PROHIBITED.



   No property owner may cause or permit an occupant of the property to
cause any storm water runoff or other drainage, including, but not limited
to, water collecting in a sump basin, to discharge into the city’s sanitary
sewer lines.



(Ord. 130A, passed 7-2-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.03  CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.



   No sump pump may be constructed or plumbed so that the discharge from
the pump is directly connected or in any manner flows into sanitary sewer
lines maintained by the City of Cologne.



(Ord. 130A, passed 7-2-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.04  MANDATORY EXTERNAL DISCHARGE OF SUMPS.



   All sump pumps must be hard plumbed to a pipe which discharges the
water from the sump basin to the front of the building across and/or onto
residential yard and towards the city street in such a manner that the water
discharges into the street and daylighted into the front yard, curb, and
gutter.  If the building is constructed in such a manner that it walks out
to the rear of the property away from the street or the topography of the
property is such that front discharge is not practical, the sump pump shall
be hard plumbed through pipe into the rear of the lot.  Regardless of
whether the sump pump is hard plumbed into the front or rear of the lot, the
property owner shall be solely responsible for maintaining and controlling
the flow of the water from the sump so that it does not disrupt neighboring
property.



(Ord. 130A, passed 7-2-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.05  INSPECTION.



   The City Building Inspector or his or her designee has a right to
inspect any and all property and buildings within the City of Cologne to
ensure compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 130A, passed 7-2-2001)



§ 97.06  COOPERATION.



   All property owners are obligated to cooperate with the building
official and permit the inspections.



(Ord. 130A, passed 7-2-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.07  NONCOMPLIANCE.



   Any property owner who fails to permit an inspection as required by §
97.05 or who violates §§ 97.01, 97.02, 97.03, or 97.04 shall be subject to
a $25 per month surcharge on their water bill which surcharge shall continue
until the violation is cured.



(Ord. 130A, passed 7-2-2001)



§ 97.08  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall be effective following publication in the
official newspaper of the City of Cologne.



(Ord. 130A, passed 7-2-2001)



§ 97.98  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   In the event it is determined that any property owner has a
sump pump which either directly or indirectly discharges water from the sump
into the city sanitary sewer lines and/or causes a disruption of neighboring
property, the violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor and each day the
violation continues shall be deemed an additional misdemeanor.



   (B)   In addition to any criminal penalties, in order to compensate
the city for the substantial burden the sump water pumped or otherwise
discharged into the city’s sanitary sewer treatment facility causes and/or
disruption of neighboring property, the property owner shall be liable to the
city in the amount of $5 per day for each day in which the sump pump remains
connected or otherwise discharges water collected in the sump into the
city’s sanitary sewer lines.



(Ord. 130A, passed 7-2-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 98: SOLID WASTE



Section



   98.01   County law to be followed



   98.02   Contract with licensed hauler required



   98.03   Recyclable materials to be separated



   98.04   Containers



   98.05   Licensed haulers



 



   98.98   Violations



§ 98.01  COUNTY LAW TO BE FOLLOWED.



   No person may dispose of solid waste in a manner inconsistent with
Carver County Ordinance #4C Solid Waste Management.



(Ord. 158, passed 3-3-2003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.02  CONTRACT WITH LICENSED HAULER REQUIRED.



   All residences, businesses, government entities, schools, churches,
nonprofit organizations, and other entities generating solid waste must
contract with a licensed hauler for the collection and disposal of solid
waste and the collection of recyclable materials.



(Ord. 158, passed 3-3-2003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.03  RECYCLABLE MATERIALS TO BE SEPARATED.



   All residences, businesses, government entities, schools, churches,
nonprofit organizations, and other entities generating solid waste must
separate recyclable materials from other waste for collection and reuse. 
Recyclable materials shall include those identified in Carver County
Ordinance #4C Solid Waste Management.



(Ord. 158, passed 3-3-2003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.04  CONTAINERS.



   Solid waste and recyclable materials shall be kept in containers
designed for solid waste and recyclable materials and shall be kept indoors,
or in enclosed areas designed for the use, until the day of collection. 
Solid waste and recyclable materials containers may not be placed
out-of-doors for more than 24 hours prior to or after scheduled collection.



(Ord. 158, passed 3-3-2003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.05  LICENSED HAULERS.



   (A)   Generally.  Solid waste and recyclable materials haulers must
be licensed by the City of Cologne according to the following provisions.



   (B)   Specifically.



      (1)   No more than 3 haulers may be licensed or may operate in
the City of Cologne at any given time.



      (2)   Licensed haulers must meet all provisions of Carver
County Ordinance #4C Solid Waste Management.



      (3)   Haulers must provide customers with a weight- or
volume-based fee structure that offers the lowest rates for the lowest
generators, and haulers may not charge more to customers that recycle than to
those who do not recycle.



      (4)   Licensed haulers must provide customers with recyclable
materials collection service on the same day as the solid waste collection.



      (5)   Solid waste collection must occur at a minimum frequency
of once per week.  Recyclable materials collection may occur at a minimum
frequency of bi-weekly when a container of no less than 32 gallons is
provided by the hauler.



      (6)   Solid waste collection licenses shall be issued for a
maximum period of 1 year and shall be renewable on April 1 of each year. 
Licenses shall not be assignable to third parties.



      (7)   License fees shall be $100 per vehicle used in Cologne
by licensee per year.



      (8)   Licensees must pick up solid waste and recyclable
materials where any containers have been spilled.



      (9)   Licensees must operate vehicles in a safe manner and
maintain all vehicles and equipment in a clean and safe manner.  All
equipment and vehicles shall bear the name or logo of the licensee.



      (10)   Solid waste and recyclable materials may be collected
only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and on Monday through
Friday, except that when a legal holiday falls on a Friday, collection may
occur on the immediately following Saturday between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m.



      (11)   Licensees must offer customers collection opportunities
for yard waste in the spring, fall, and after Christmas.  Collection may be
at curbside or at a drop-off location within the city and must be approved in
writing by the City Clerk/Treasurer.  Collection opportunities must include
a 2-week period of time in the spring, fall, and after Christmas.  Drop-off
locations approved by the City Clerk/Treasurer may be operated on weekend but
must include on-site supervision by personnel of the licensee(s).



      (12)   Licensees must carry insurance for all vehicles,
equipment, and personnel consistent with the requirements of Carver County
Ordinance #4C Solid Waste Management.



      (13)   Failure of the licensee to meet the requirements of
this chapter shall result in the revocation of the licensee or may result in
the city’s denial to renew the license.



(Ord. 158, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 158A, passed 12-6-2004)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 98.98  VIOLATIONS.



   All violations of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor and
shall be punishable to the maximum extent of the law.



(Ord. 158, passed 3-3-2003)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES





         111.   LIQUOR REGULATIONS





         112.   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES





         113.   REGULATING LAWFUL GAMBLING





         114.   COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENTS





         115.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS





         116.   RENTAL HOUSING




CHAPTER 110:  SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



   110.01   Purpose and findings



   110.02   Definitions



   110.03   Classification



   110.04   License required



   110.05   Issuance of license



   110.06   Fees



   110.07   Inspections



   110.08   Expiration of license



   110.09   Suspension



   110.10   Revocation



   110.11   Transfer of license



   110.12   Location of sexually-oriented businesses



   110.13   Additional regulations for adult motels



   110.14   Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit
films, videos, or live entertainment in viewing rooms



   110.15   Additional regulations for escort agencies



   110.16   Additional regulations for nude model studios



   110.17   Additional regulations concerning public nudity



   110.18   Prohibition against children in a sexually-oriented business



   110.19   Hours of operation



   110.20   Exemptions



   110.21   Injunction



§ 110.01  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   Purpose.  It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate
sexually-oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals,
and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration
of sexually-oriented businesses within the city.  The provisions of this
chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including
sexually-oriented materials.  Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of
this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented
materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented entertainment to their
intended market.  Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.



   (B)   Findings.  Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary
effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports
made available to the City Council, and on findings incorporated in the cases
of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v.
American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Northend Cinema, Inc. v.
Seattle, 585 P. 2d 1153 (Wash. 1978), and on studies in other communities,
including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota;
Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Los Angeles,
California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; and
Beaumont, Texas; and also on findings found in the Report of Attorney
General’s Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually-Oriented Businesses,
(June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the Council finds:



      (1)   Sexually-oriented businesses in the city lend themselves
to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently
uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments.  Further, there is
presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible
for the activities that occur on their premises;



      (2)   Certain employees of sexually-oriented businesses
defined in this chapter as adult theatres and cabarets engage in higher
incidence of certain types of sexually-oriented behavior at these businesses
than employees of other establishments;



      (3)   Sexual acts, including masturbation and oral and anal
sex, occur at sexually-oriented businesses, especially those which provide
private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live
sex shows, as defined under this chapter as adult bookstores, adult novelty
shops, adult video stores, adult motion picture theatres, or adult arcades;



      (4)   Offering and providing the space encourages the
activities, which create unhealthy conditions;



      (5)   Persons frequent certain adult theatres, adult arcades,
and other sexually-oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex
within the premises of the sexually-oriented businesses;



      (6)   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by
activities occurring in sexually-oriented businesses, including, but not
limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection
(AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella
infections, and shigella infections;



      (7)   Since 1981 and to the present there has been an
increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States:  600 in 1982, 2,200 in
1983, 4,600 n 1984, 8,555 in 1985, and 253,448 through 12-31-1992;



      (8)   The number of cases of early (less than one year)
syphilis in the United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases
reported in 1982 and 45,200 through November of 1990;



      (9)   The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States
reported annually remains at a high level, with over 1/2 million cases being
reported in 1990;



      (10)   The Surgeon General of the United States in his or her
report of 10-22-1986 has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV
infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse,
exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother
to her newborn;



      (11)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV
infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by
sexual acts;



      (12)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually-oriented
businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are
unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities
and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to
self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities;



      (13)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen
is found in the areas of sexually-oriented businesses where persons view
adult-oriented films;



      (14)   The findings noted in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(13)
above raise substantial governmental concerns;



      (15)   Sexually-oriented businesses have operational
characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect
those substantial governmental concerns;



      (16)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate
mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
the operators of the sexually-oriented businesses.  Further, such a
licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the
operators to see that the sexually-oriented business is run in a manner
consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and employees,
as well as the citizens of the city.  It is appropriate to require
reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the
sexually-oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises
and activities occurring therein;



      (17)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring
sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial
government interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity
occurring in adult theatres;



      (18)   Requiring licensees of sexually-oriented businesses to
keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will
help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by
facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by
preventing minors from working in the establishments;



      (19)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons
ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the
sexually-oriented businesses, where the information is substantially related
to the significant governmental interest in the operation of the uses, will
aid in preventing the spread of sexually-transmitted diseases;



      (20)   It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of
communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is
designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to the activity;



      (21)   The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has
been convicted of a sexually-related crime leads to the rational assumption
that the applicant is likely to engage in that conduct in contravention of
this chapter;



      (22)   The barring of the individuals from the management of
adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents
conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually-transmitted diseases; and



      (23)   The general welfare, health, and safety of the citizens
of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 110.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, or
electronically-, electrically-, or mechanically-controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, OR ADULT VIDEO STORE.



      (1)   A commercial establishment which, as one of its
principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration
any one or more of the following:



         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion picture, videocassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas; or



         (b)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are
designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities.



      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other principal
business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of
material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be categorized as ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY
STORE, OR ADULT VIDEO STORE.  The other business purposes will not serve to
exempt the commercial establishments from being categorized as an ADULT
BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, OR ADULT VIDEO STORE so long as one of its
principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for
consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



   ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:



      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude;



      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or



      (3)   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and
has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions.



   ADULT MOTEL.  A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment
which:



      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of
this adult type of photographic reproductions;



      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
that is less than ten hours; or



      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A commercial establishment where, for
any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT THEATER.  A theater, concern, hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a
state of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances which are characterized by
the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual
activities.”



   EMPLOYEE.  A person who performs any service on the premises of a
sexually-oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis,
whether or not the person is designated an employee, independent contractor,
agent, or otherwise and whether or not the person is paid a salary, wage, or
other compensation by the operator of the business.  EMPLOYEE does not
include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the
premises.



   ESCORT.  A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.



   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  Includes any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually-oriented
business as a new business;



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually-oriented business, to any sexually-oriented business;



      (3)   The additions of any sexually-oriented business to any
other existing sexually-oriented business; or



      (4)   The relocation of any sexually-oriented business.



   LICENSEE.  A person in whose name a license to operate a
sexually-oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed
as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an
employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing
employment in a sexually-oriented business.



   NUDE MODEL STUDIO.  Any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in
a state of nudity, or who displays “specified anatomical areas” and is
provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed,
or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration.  NUDE MODEL STUDIO shall not include a proprietary school
licensed by the State of Minnesota or a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private
college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in
which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:



      (1)   That has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person
is available for viewing;



      (2)   Where in order to participate in a class a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and



      (3)   Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the
premises at any one time.



   NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY.  The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.



   PERSON.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.



   SEMI-NUDE or in a SEMI-NUDE CONDITION.  The showing of the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest
point or the showing of the male or female rear of the body which lies
between two imaginary lines running parallel to the ground when a person is
standing, the first or top of the line drawn at the top of the cleavage of
the nates and second or bottom line drawn at the lowest visible point of the
cleavage or the lowest point for the curvature of the fleshy protuberance,
whichever is lower, and between two imaginary lines on each side of the body,
which lines are perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines
described above, and which perpendicular lines are drawn through the point at
which each nate meets the outer side of each leg.  This definition shall
include the entire lower portion of the human female breast; but shall not
include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by
a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel,
provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.  A business or commercial enterprise that, as
one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:



      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex; or



      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or
persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of
nudity or semi-nude.



   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS.  An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual
encounter center.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Means:



      (1)   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered; or



      (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola.



   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.  Any of the following offenses:



      (1)   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination
of obscenity; sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor;
sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child;
engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a
child; gambling; distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar
offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of other
states or countries;



      (2)   For which:



         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;



         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date
of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or



         (c)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date
of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or
more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any 24-month period.



      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with
the applicant.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Any of the following:



      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;



      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or



      (3)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the activities set forth in divisions (1) and (2) above.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.  Of a sexually-oriented business,
means and includes any of the following:



      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar
means; or



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 110.03  CLASSIFICATION.



   Sexually-oriented businesses are classified as follows:



   (A)   Adult arcades;



   (B)   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;



   (C)   Adult cabarets;



   (D)   Adult motels;



   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters;



   (F)   Adult theaters;



   (G)   Escort agencies;



   (H)   Nude model studios; and



   (I)   Sexual encounter centers.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 110.04  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful:



      (1)   For any person to operate a sexually-oriented business
without a valid sexually-oriented business license issued by the city
pursuant to this chapter;



      (2)   For any person to operate a sexually-oriented business
who is not licensed as a sexually-oriented business employee by the city
pursuant to this chapter; and/or



      (3)   For any person to obtain employment with a
sexually-oriented business without having secured a sexually-oriented
business employee license pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided
by the city.



   (C)   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions
of this chapter.  The application may request and the applicant shall
provide the information (including fingerprints) as to enable the city to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this
chapter.



   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business
is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as
applicant.  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business
is other than an individual, who has a 20% or greater interest in the
business, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant. 
Each applicant must be qualified under the following section and each
applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.



   (E)   The completed application for a sexually-oriented business
license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by
the following documents:



      (1)   If the applicant is:



         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state his or
her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he or she is 18 years of
age;



         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its
complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; or



         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its
complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation
is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names
and capacity of all officers, directors, and principal stockholders, and the
name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered
office for service of process.



      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the
sexually-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he
or she must state:



         (a)   The sexually-oriented business’s fictitious
name; and



         (b)   Submit the required registration documents.



      (3)   Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the
applicant, has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in
this chapter, and if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date,
place, and jurisdiction of each;



      (4)   Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the
applicant, has had a previous license under this chapter or other similar
sexually-oriented business ordinances from another city or county denied,
suspended, or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually-oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended, or
revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension, or revocation, and
whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been a
partner in a partnership or an officer, director, or principal stockholder of
a corporation that is licensed under this chapter whose license has
previously been denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name and
location of the sexually-oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended, or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension, or
revocation;



      (5)   Whether the applicant or a person residing with the
applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar
sexually-oriented business ordinance from another city or county and, if so,
the names and locations of the other licensed businesses;



      (6)   The single classification of license for which the
applicant is filing;



      (7)   The location of the proposed sexually-oriented business,
including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone
number(s), if any;



      (8)   The applicant’s mailing address and residential
address;



      (9)   A recent photograph of the applicant(s);



      (10)   The applicant’s driver’s permit number, social
security number, and/or his or her state- or federally-issued tax
identification number;



      (11)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business.  The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches;



      (12)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing
prepared within 30 days prior to application by a registered land surveyor
depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing
sexually-oriented businesses within 1,000 feet of the property to be
certified; the property lines of religious institution/synagogue, school, or
public park or recreation area within 1,000 feet of the property to be
certified.  For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing
or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted;
and



      (13)   If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually-oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in
a viewing room or booth of less than 150 square of floor space, films,
videocassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant
shall comply with the application requirements set forth in this section.



   (F)   Before any applicant may be issued a sexually-oriented
business employee license, the applicant shall submit, on a form to be
provided by the city, the following information:



      (1)   The applicant’s name or any other name (including
“stage” names) or aliases used by the individual;



      (2)   Age, date, and place of birth;



      (3)   Height, weight, and hair and eye color;



      (4)   Present residence address and telephone number;



      (5)   Present business address and telephone number;



      (6)   Date, issuing state, and number of driver’s permit or
other identification card information;



      (7)   Social security number; and



      (8)   Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.



   (G)   Attached to the application form for a sexually-oriented
business employee license as provided above, there shall be the following:



      (1)   A color photograph of the applicant, clearly showing the
applicant’s face, and the applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by
the Police Department.  Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall
be paid by the applicant;



      (2)   A statement detailing the license history of the
applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of
the application, including whether the applicant previously operated or is
seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or country, has
ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked,
or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied,
revoked or suspended.  In the event of any such denial, revocation, or
suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction,
and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. 
A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to
the application; and



      (3)   A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of
a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved, and the date, place, and jurisdiction
of each.



   (H)   No alcoholic beverages may be served or allowed on the
premises of a sexually-oriented business.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.05  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon the filing of the application for a sexually-oriented
business employee license, the city shall issue a temporary license to the
applicant.  The application shall then be referred to the appropriate city
staff for an investigation to be made on the information as is contained on
the application.  The application process shall be completed within 30 days
from the date the completed application is filed.  After the investigation,
the city shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of
the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:



      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;



      (2)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;



      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a “specified
criminal activity” as defined in this chapter;



      (4)   The sexually-oriented business employee license is to be
used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute,
rule, or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter;
and/or



      (5)   The applicant has had a sexually-oriented business
employee license revoked by the city within two years of the date of the
current application.  If the sexually-oriented business employee license is
denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null
and void.  Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to
this division (A) shall be subject to appeal as set forth in § 110.10.



   (B)   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to
annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by
the city that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal
activity as defined in this chapter or committed any act during the existence
of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license
application.  The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of
the fee as set forth in § 110.06.



   (C)   Within 30 days after receipt of a completed sexually-oriented
business application, the city shall approve or deny the issuance of a
license to an applicant.  The city shall approve the issuance of a license
to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence
that one or more of the following findings is true:



      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;



      (2)   An applicant, or a person with whom applicant is
residing, is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or
penalties assessed against or imposed upon him or her in relation to any
business;



      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;



      (4)   An applicant, or a person with whom the applicant is
residing, has been denied a license by the city to operate a
sexually-oriented business within the preceding 12 months or whose license to
operate a sexually-oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12
months;



      (5)   An applicant, or a person with whom the applicant is
residing, has been convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this
chapter;



      (6)   The premises to be used for the sexually-oriented
business have not been approved by the Health Department, Fire Department,
and the Building Official as being in compliance with applicable laws and
ordinances;



      (7)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been
paid; and/or



      (8)   An applicant of the proposed establishment is in
violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this
chapter.



   (D)   The license, if granted shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address
of the sexually-oriented business, and the classification for which the
license is issued pursuant to § 110.03.  All licenses shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually-oriented business
so that they may be easily read at any time.



   (E)   The Health Department, Fire Department, and the Building
Official shall complete their certification that the premises is in
compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of receipt of the application
by the city.



   (F)   A sexually-oriented business license shall be issued for only
one classification as found in § 110.03.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 110.06  FEES.



   (A)   Every application for a sexually-oriented business license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application and investigation fee.



   (B)   In addition to the application and investigation fee required
above, every sexually-oriented business that is granted a license (new or
renewal) shall pay to the city an annual nonrefundable license fee within 30
days of license issuance or renewal.



   (C)   Every application for a sexually-oriented business employee
license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license)
shall be accompanied by an annual nonrefundable application, investigation,
and license fee.



   (D)   All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the
Clerk/Treasurer of the city.



   (E)   All fees are established by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 110.07  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the
Police Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Zoning Department, or
other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a
sexually-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the
law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.



   (B)   A person who operates a sexually-oriented business or his or
her agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he or she refuses to permit
the lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for
business.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.08  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance
and may be renewed only by making application as provided in § 110.04. 
Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration
date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the license will not be affected.



   (B)   When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall
not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial.  If,
subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal
license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license
if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 110.09  SUSPENSION.



   The city shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if
it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:



   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this
chapter;



   (B)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually-oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter; or



   (C)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the
sexually-oriented business premises.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 110.10  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The city shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in §
110.09 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months.



   (B)   The city shall revoke a license if it determines that:



      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process;



      (2)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances on the premises;



      (3)   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;



      (4)   A licensee knowingly operated the sexually-oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;



      (5)   Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has
knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises; or



      (6)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county,
or state for any taxes or fees past due.



   (C)   When the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue
for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually-oriented
license for one year from the date the revocation became effective.  If,
subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the revocation
has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at
least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.



   (D)   After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an
application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or
licensee may seek prompt judicial review of the administrative action in any
court of competent jurisdiction.  The administrative action shall be
promptly reviewed by the court.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 110.11  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall
a licensee operate a sexually-oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the application.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.12  LOCATION OF SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   (A)   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates or
causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business in any zoning district
other than I-1 Industrial Park, as defined and described in the Cologne
Zoning Ordinance.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes
to be operated a sexually-oriented business within 300 feet of:



      (1)   A church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building which
is uses primarily for religious worship and related religious activities;



      (2)   A public or private educational facility, including, but
not limited to, child day-care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges, and universities; school includes the school grounds, but does not
include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only
incidentally as a school;



      (3)   A boundary of a residential district as defined in the
Cologne Zoning Ordinance; a public park or recreational area which has been
designated for park or recreational activities, including, but not limited
to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic
field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness
areas, or other similar public land within the city which is under the
control, operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities;



      (4)   The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use
as defined in the Cologne Zoning Ordinance;



      (5)   An entertainment business which is oriented primarily
towards children or family entertainment; or



      (6)   A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic
beverage control regulations of the State of Minnesota.



   (C)   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or
permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of
ownership or control of a sexually-oriented business within 1,000 feet of
another sexually-oriented business.



   (D)   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or
permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one
sexually-oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion
thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually-oriented business in
any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another
sexually-oriented business.



   (E)   For the purpose of division (B) above, measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the
part of the premises where a sexually-oriented business is conducted, to the
nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in division (B)
above.  Presence of a city, county, or other political subdivision boundary
shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance
requirements of this section.



   (F)   For purposes of division (C) above, the distance between any
two sexually-oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political
boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each
business is located.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.13  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS.



   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than ten hours creates a refutable presumption
that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this
chapter.



   (B)   A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of
a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that
does not have a sexually-oriented license, he or she rents or subrents a
sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is
rented, he or she rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.



   (C)   For purposes of division (B) above, the terms RENT or SUBRENT
mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.14  REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS,
VIDEOS, OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT IN VIEWING ROOMS.



   (A)   A person, who operates or causes to be operated a
sexually-oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the
premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space a
film, videocassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which
depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall
comply with the following requirements.



      (1)   Upon application for a sexually-oriented license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted.  A manager’s station may
not exceed 32 square feet of floor area.  The diagram shall also designate
the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted.  A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or
architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should
be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be
drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the
various internal dimensions of all areas of interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches.  The city may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.



      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by
the applicant.



      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager’s station may be made without the prior approval of the city.



      (4)   It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure
that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each
manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.



      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose excluding restores.  Restrooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment.  If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated,
then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager’s stations.  The view required in this division (A)(5) must be by
direct line of sight from the manager’s station.



      (6)   It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the
view area specified in division (A)(5) above remains unobstructed by any
doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other
materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to
any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which
patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to division
(A)(1) above.



      (7)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person
at any time.



      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles as
measured at the floor level.



      (9)   It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.



      (10)   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist
between viewing rooms or booths.



      (11)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of
any kind between viewing booths or rooms.



      (12)   The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly
inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.



      (13)   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing
booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.



      (14)   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling
surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by,
nonporous, easily cleanable material.  No wood, plywood, composition board,
or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor.



   (B)   A person having a duty under division (A) above commits a
misdemeanor if he or she or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.15  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES.



   (A)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of
18 years.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or
agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.16  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR NUDE MODEL STUDIOS.



   (A)   A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age
of 18 years.



   (B)   A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if the
person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a
nude model studio.  It is a defense to prosecution under this division (B)
if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or
visible to any other person.



   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state
of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity, in an
area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public
right-of-way.



   (D)   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or
mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.17  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING PUBLIC NUDITY.



   (A)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and
intentionally, in a sexually-oriented business, appears in a state of nudity
or depicts specified sexual activities.



   (B)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or
intentionally, in a sexually-oriented business, appears in a semi-nude
condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at
least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet
from the floor.



   (C)   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude in
a sexually-oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron
or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any
employee, while the employee is semi-nude in a sexually-oriented business.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.18  PROHIBITION AGAINST CHILDREN IN A SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS.



   A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person
under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually-oriented business.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.19  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No sexually-oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain
open at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sundays.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.20  EXEMPTIONS.



   It is a defense to prosecution under § 110.16 that a person appearing
in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:



   (A)   By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Minnesota; a
college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;



   (B)   By a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or



   (C)   In a structure:



      (1)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing;



      (2)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student
must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and



      (3)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at
any one time.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)



§ 110.21  INJUNCTION.



   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented
business without a valid license or in violation of § 110.12 is subject to a
suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations.  The
violations shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.  Each day a
sexually-oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation.



(Ord. 135, passed 12-5-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 111:  LIQUOR REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   111.01   Adoption of state law by reference



   111.02   City may be more restrictive than state law



   111.03   Definitions



   111.04   Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited



   111.05   Consumption in public places




Licensing




   111.20   Number of licenses which may be issued



   111.21   Term and expiration of licenses



   111.22   Kinds of liquor licenses



   111.23   License fees; pro rata



   111.24   Council discretion to grant or deny a license



   111.25   Application for license



   111.26   Description of premises



   111.27   Applications for renewal



   111.28   Transfer of license



   111.29   Investigation



   111.30   Hearing and issuance



   111.31   Restrictions on issuance



   111.32   Conditions of license



   111.33   Hours and days of sale



   111.34   Minors on premises



   111.35   Restrictions on purchase and consumption



   111.36   Suspension and revocation



 



   111.99   Penalties



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 111.01  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.



   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 340A, as they may be amended from time
to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and
consumption of intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor are hereby adopted by
reference and are made a part of this Chapter as if set out in full. It is
the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Chapter
340A are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in
existence at the time this Chapter is adopted.



§ 111.02  CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.



   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it
may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time.



§ 111.03  DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may
be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of
this chapter:



   LIQUOR.  As used in this chapter, without modification by the words
intoxicating or 3.2% malt, includes both intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt
liquor.



   RESTAURANT.  An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control
of a single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a
customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is
served and consumed while seated at a single location.  To be a restaurant
as defined by this section, an establishment shall have a license from the
state as required by M.S. § 157.16, as it may be amended from time to time,
and meet the definition of either a small establishment, medium establishment
or large establishment as defined in M.S. § 157.16, Subd. 3d, as it may be
amended from time to time. An establishment which serves prepackaged food
that receives heat treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza
that is heated and served, shall not be considered to be a restaurant for
purposes of this chapter unless it meets the definitions of small
establishment, medium establishment or large establishment.



§ 111.04  NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that
nudity is prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any
establishment licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the
owners, operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and
the public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely
to lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including
prostitution, sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds
that the prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed
under this chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing
community standards of the city.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person
or persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent
material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when
the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals
covered with a non-transparent material.



   (C)   A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as
provided by law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any
liquor, wine, or 3.2% malt liquor license or the imposition of a civil
penalty under the provisions of § 111.99(B).



Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.05  CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in a
public park, on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any
public place other than on the premises of an establishment licensed under
this chapter, in a municipal liquor dispensary if one exists in the city, or
where the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted.



Penalty, see § 111.99



LICENSING



§ 111.20  NUMBER OF LICENSES WHICH MAY BE ISSUED.



   State law establishes the number of liquor licenses that a city may
issue. However, the number of licenses which may be granted under this
chapter is limited to the number of license which were issued as of the
effective date of this chapter, even if a larger number of licenses are
authorized by law or election. The Council in its sound discretion may
provide by ordinance that a larger number of licenses may be issued up to the
number of licenses authorized by M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from
time to time. If a larger number of licenses in a particular category has
been authorized by a referendum held under the provisions of M.S. §
340A.413, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time, but not all of
them have been issued, the larger number of licenses is no longer in effect
until the Council by ordinance determines that any or all of the licenses may
be issued. The Council is not required to issue the full number of licenses
that it has available.



§ 111.21  TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.



   Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All
licenses, except temporary licenses, shall expire on June 30 of each year
unless another date is provided by ordinance. All licenses shall expire on
the same date. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms.
Consumption and display permits issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety,
and the accompanying city consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of
each year.



§ 111.22  KINDS OF LIQUOR LICENSES.



   The Council of a city that does not have a municipal liquor store is
authorized to issue the following licenses and permits, up to the number
specified in § 111.20.



   (A)   3.2% malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued only to
golf courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and establishments
used exclusively for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor with the incidental sale of
tobacco and soft drinks.



   (B)   3.2% malt liquor off-sale license.



   (C)   Temporary 3.2% malt liquor licenses which may be issued only
to a club, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization.



   (D)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued
only to exclusive liquor stores or drug stores that have an off-sale license
which was first issued on or before May 1, 1994. The fee for an off-sale
intoxicating liquor license established by the Council under § 111.23 shall
not exceed $100 or a greater amount which may be permitted by M.S. §
340A.408, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (E)   On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to
the following establishments as defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, and this chapter: hotels, restaurants, bowling
centers, theaters, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations,
and exclusive liquor stores. Club licenses may be issued only with the
approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety. The fee for club licenses
established by the Council under § 111.23 shall not exceed the amounts
provided for in M.S. § 340A.408, Subd. 2b, as it may be amended from time to
time. The Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale
licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at a
community festival held within the city under the provisions of M.S. §
340A.404, Subd. 4b, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may
in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense
intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any convention, banquet,
conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the premises of a sports,
convention, or cultural facility owned by the city, under the provisions of
M.S. § 340A.404, Subd. 4a, as it may be amended from time to time; however,
the licensee is prohibited from dispensing intoxicating liquor to any person
attending or participating in an amateur athletic event being held on the
premises.



   (F)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, only after
authorization to do so by voter approval at a general or special election as
provided by M.S. § 340A.504, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time. Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to a
restaurant as defined in § 111.03, club, bowling center, or hotel which has
a seating capacity of at least 30 persons, which holds an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license, and which serves liquor only in conjunction with
the service of food. The maximum fee for this license, which shall be
established by the Council under the provisions of § 111.23, shall not
exceed $200, or the maximum amount provided by M.S. § 340A.504, Subd. 3c, as
it may be amended from time to time.



   (G)   Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses if
the city has a population less than 10,000.



   (H)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the
approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, which may be issued only in
connection with a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious, or
other nonprofit corporation that has existed for at least three years. No
license shall be for longer than four consecutive days, and the city shall
issue no more than 12-days’ worth of temporary licenses to any one
organization in one calendar year.



   (I)   On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner
of Public Safety to: theaters, restaurants that have facilities for seating
at least 25 guests at one time and meet the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404,
Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time, and which meet the
definition of restaurant in § 111.03; and to licensed bed and breakfast
facilities which meet the criteria in M.S. § 340A.401, Subd. 1, as it may be
amended from time to time. The fee for an on-sale wine license established by
the Council under the provisions of § 111.23 shall not exceed 1/2 of the
license fee charged for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license. The holder of
an on-sale wine license who also holds an on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license is
authorized to sell malt liquor with a content over 3.2% (strong beer) without
an additional license.



   (J)   One day consumption and display permits with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety to a nonprofit organization in conjunction
with a social activity in the city sponsored by the organization.



   (K)   Approval of the issuance of a consumption and display permit
by the Commissioner of Public Safety. The maximum amount of the additional
fee which may be imposed by the Council on a person who has been issued a
consumption and display permit under the provisions of § 111.23 shall not
exceed $300, or the maximum amount permitted by M.S. § 340A.14, Subd. 6, as
it may be amended from time to time. Consumption and display permits shall
expire on March 31 of each year.



§ 111.23  LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.



   (A)   No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed
any limit established by M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to
time, for a liquor license.



   (B)   The Council may establish from time to time the fee for any of
the liquor licenses it is authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed
the cost of issuing the license and other costs directly related to the
enforcement of the liquor laws and this chapter. No liquor license fee shall
be increased without providing mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed
increase to all affected licensees at least 30 days before the hearing.



   (C)   The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted
after the commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a quarterly
basis.



   (D)   All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the
application is filed with the city. If the application is denied, the license
fee shall be returned to the applicant.



   (E)   A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may
occur only if authorized by M.S. § 340A.408, Subd. 5, as it may be amended
from time to time.



§ 111.24  COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.



   The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the
application for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No
applicant has a right to a license under this chapter.



§ 111.25  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Form.  Every application for a license issued under this
chapter shall be on a form provided by the city. Every application shall
state the name of the applicant, the applicant's age, representations as to
the applicant's character, with references as the Council may require, the
type of license applied for, the business in connection with which the
proposed license will operate and its location, a description of the
premises, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how
long the applicant has been in that business at that place, and other
information as the Council may require from time to time. An application for
an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be in the form prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety and shall also contain the information required
in this section. The form shall be verified and filed with the city. No
person shall make a false statement in an application.



   (B)   Financial responsibility.  Prior to the issuance of any
license under this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of
financial responsibility as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended
from time to time, with regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may
be amended from time to time. This proof will be filed with the city and the
Commissioner of Public Safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof
of financial responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. §
340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. Operation of a business
which is required to be licensed by this chapter without having on file with
the city at all times effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause
for revocation of the license.



Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.26  DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.



   The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous
premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The description
may not include any parking lot or sidewalk.



§ 111.27  APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.



   At least 60 days before a license issued under this chapter is to be
renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the city. The
decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion
of the Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.



§ 111.28  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the
approval of the Council.  Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is
deemed to be a transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior
Council approval is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to
transfer a license shall be treated the same as an application for a new
license, and all of the provisions of this code applying to applications for
a license shall apply.



Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.29  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation.  On an
initial application for a license, on an application for transfer of a
license and, in the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public
interest to do so, on an application for renewal of a license, the city may
conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant
or it may contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the
investigation. The applicant shall pay with the application an investigation
fee of $500 which shall be in addition to any license fee. If the cost of the
preliminary investigation is less than $500, the unused balance shall be
returned to the applicant. The results of the preliminary investigation shall
be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an
on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license.



   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation.  If the
results of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of
the Council, a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the
Council may either conduct the investigation itself or contract with the
Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee
for this comprehensive background and financial investigation to be paid by
the applicant shall be $500, less any amount paid for the initial
investigation if the investigation is to be conducted within the state, and
$10,000, less any amount paid for the initial investigation, if the
investigation is required outside the state. The unused balance of the fee
shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the application is denied.
The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation and the amount actually
expended on the investigation shall not be refundable in the event the
application is denied. The results of the comprehensive investigation shall
be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an
on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license.



§ 111.30  HEARING AND ISSUANCE.



   The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and
not investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial
investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the
Council shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No
license shall become effective until the proof of financial security has been
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.



§ 111.31  RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the
premises described in the application.



   (B)   Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly
issued within the city to any one person.



   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any
premises on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or
other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.



   (D)   No license shall be issued for any place or any business
ineligible for a license under state law.



   (E)   No license shall be issued to any person who is not a resident
of the state. If the applicant is a corporation, all of the shareholders
shall be residents of the state. The provisions of this division (E) shall
not apply to any license existing on the effective date of this chapter or to
the renewal of an existing license.



(Am. Ord. 150-Q, passed 10-5-2009) Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.32  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the
license specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the
condition is met.



   (A)   Within 90 days after employment, every person selling or
serving liquor in an establishment which has an on-sale license shall receive
training regarding the selling or serving of liquor to customers. The
training shall be provided by an organization approved by the Council. Proof
of training  shall be provided by the licensee.



   (B)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of
business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any
employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well,
and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter
and the law equally with the employee.



   (C)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer,
city employee,  or any other person designated by the Council to conduct
compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of
the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the time
when customers remain on the premises without a warrant.



   (D)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public
during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.



   (E)   Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state
law and of this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.



Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.33  HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.



   (A)   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by
M.S. § 340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the
City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for more restrictive
hours than state law allows.



   (B)   No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit
any consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in an on-sale
licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally
occur.



   (C)   No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other
container containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor to remain upon
any table, bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more than
30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.



   (D)   No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall
remain on the on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time
when a sale can legally occur.



   (E)   Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds
for revocation or suspension of the license.



Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.34  MINORS ON PREMISES.



   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any
rooms constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt
liquor are sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the age of 18
may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person or
dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other
multi-purpose building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors or
3.2% malt liquor are sold at retail on sale.



   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed
establishment except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a
restaurant, or attend social functions that are held in a portion of the
premises where liquor is not sold.



Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.35  RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.



   No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public
place of business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from
the Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.414,
as it may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the
Council, and no person shall consume liquor in any such place.



Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.36  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60
days or revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee has failed
to comply with any applicable statute, regulation, or provision of this
chapter relating to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial
responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take effect until the
licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the
Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended
from time to time. The Council may act as the hearing body under that act, or
it may contract with the Office of Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.



   (B)   The following are the minimum periods of suspension or
revocation which shall be imposed by the Council for violations of the
provisions of this chapter or M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from
time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be
amended from time to time:



      (1)   For commission of a felony related to the licensed
activity, sale of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension,
sale of intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2% malt liquor,
or violation of § 111.04, the license shall be revoked.



      (2)   The license shall be suspended by the Council after a
finding under division (A) that the licensee has failed to comply with any
applicable statute, rule, or provision of this chapter for at least the
minimum periods as follows:



         (a)   For the first violation within any three-year
period, at least one-day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed.



         (b)   For a second violation within any three-year
period, at least three consecutive days’ suspension in addition to any
criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.



         (c)   For the third violation within any three-year
period, at least seven consecutive days’ suspension in addition to any
criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.



         (d)   For a fourth violation within any three-year
period, the license shall be revoked.



      (3)   The Council shall select the day or days during which
the license will be suspended.



   (C)   Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall
effect an immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter
or state law without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or
lapse of a current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to
the licensee of the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a
license who has received notice of lapse of required insurance or of
suspension or revocation of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a
request is made in writing to the Clerk, a hearing before the Council shall
be granted within ten days. Any suspension under this division (B) shall
continue until the Council determines that the financial responsibility
requirements of state law and this chapter have again been met.



   (D)   The provisions of § 111.99 pertaining to administrative
penalty may be imposed in addition to or in lieu of any suspension or
revocation under this chapter.



Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.99  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or M.S.
Chapter 340A as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated
under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law.



   (B)   The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for
each violation of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time,
and of this chapter.  Conviction of a violation in a court of law is not
required in order for the Council to impose the civil penalty.  A hearing
under the Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may
be amended from time to time, is not required before the penalty is imposed,
but the Council shall hold a hearing on the proposed violation and the
proposed penalty and hear any person who wishes to speak.  Non-payment of
the penalty is grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. The
following is the minimum schedule of presumptive civil penalties which must
be imposed in addition to any suspension unless the licenses is revoked:



      (1)   For the first violation within any three-year period,
$500.



      (2)   For the second violation within any three-year period,
$1,000.



      (3)   For the third and subsequent violations within any
three-year period, $2,000.



   (C)   The term violation as used in this section includes any and
all violations of the provisions of this chapter, or of M.S. Chapter 340A, as
it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that
chapter as they may be amended from time to time. The number of violations
shall be determined on the basis of the history of violations for the
preceding three-year period. Revocation shall occur within 60 days following
a violation for which revocation is imposed.



CHAPTER 112:  WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Purpose and intent



   112.03   Existing towers and antennas



   112.04   Commercial telecommunication antennas/towers; general
provisions



   112.05   Conditional use permit requirements



   112.06   Conditional use permits; not required



   112.07   Fees



   112.08   Standards for the issuance and continuation of a
conditional use permit



   112.09   Tower setbacks



   112.10   Lights and other attachments



   112.11   Towers supporting amateur radio antennas/towers



   112.12   Violations



   112.13   Effective date



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  Any structure subordinate to and serving the
principal use on the same lot, attached or detached and clearly and
customarily incidental thereto.



   ANTENNA.  Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting,
receiving, transmitting, or radiating electromagnetic waves, including, but
not limited to, directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes,
satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas.



   COMMERCIAL RECEIVING OR TRANSMITTING ANTENNA.  Any antenna erected for
the commercial use of information.



   COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES.  Licensed commercial
wireless telecommunication services, including cellular, personal
communications services (pcs), specialized mobilized radio (smr), enhanced
specialized mobilized radio (esmr), paging, and similar services that are
marketed to the general public.



   PRIVATE RECEIVING AND/OR TRANSMITTING ANTENNA.  Any antenna erected
for the noncommercial use of information.



   PUBLIC UTILITY.  Persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas,
electric, transportation, water, sewer, or land line telephone service to the
general public.  For the purpose of this chapter, commercial wireless
telecommunication services shall not be considered public utility uses, and
are defined separately.



   TOWER.  Any ground- or roof-mounted pole, spire, structure, or
combination thereof taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables,
wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an
antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade (except
amateur radio antennas).  TOWERS or ANTENNA TOWERS shall be considered
antennas by definition.



   TOWER, MULTI-USER.  A tower to which is attached the antennas of more
than one commercial wireless telecommunication service provider or
governmental entity.



(Ord. 155, passed 2-20-2001)



§ 112.02  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish balanced
regulations for the construction and maintenance of wireless communication
equipment in order to accommodate the growth of wireless communication
systems within the City of Cologne while protecting the public against
adverse impacts on the city’s aesthetic resources and the public welfare.



   (B)   In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents
and businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the community, the city finds that these regulations are necessary
in order to:



      (1)   Facilitate provision of wireless communications services
to the residents and businesses of the city;



      (2)   Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through
careful design, siting, and vegetative screening;



      (3)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures; and



      (4)   Maximize use of any new or existing communication tower
to reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community.



(Ord. 155, passed 2-20-2001)



§ 112.03  EXISTING TOWERS AND ANTENNAS.



   (A)   Generally.  Antennas, towers, and accessory structures in
existence as of 1-1-2001, which do not conform to or comply with this
section, are subject to the following provisions.



   (B)   Specifically.



      (1)   Towers may continue in use for the purpose now used and
as now existing but may not be replaced or structurally altered without
complying in all respects with this chapter.



      (2)   If the towers are damaged due to any reason or cause
whatsoever, the tower may be repaired and restored to its former use,
location, and physical dimension upon obtaining a building permit, except if
it is destroyed to the extent of more than 50% of the assessed market value,
then it shall not be restored unless the use of the structure shall
thereafter conform to this section.



(Ord. 155, passed 2-20-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.04  COMMERCIAL TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNAS/TOWERS; GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Towers and antennas less than 200 feet in height above ground
level (AGL) for wireless communications facilities are permitted upon the
issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   Antennas/towers shall be located on municipally owned
land/structures or land within an industrial district, if the land is
available, provided a lease agreement is entered into between the city and
the proposed user.



   (C)   Antennas attached to existing structures shall not exceed 20
feet above the highest point of the structure.



(Ord. 155, passed 2-20-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.05  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Generally.  Construction and maintenance of a wireless
communication service requires a conditional use permit issued by the City
Council.



   (B)   Specifically.



      (1)   In reviewing an application for a conditional use permit
for the construction and maintenance of wireless communication services and
supporting towers and accessory structures, the City Council shall consider
the advice and recommendations of the Planning Commission and the effect of
the proposed use upon the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of
occupants of surrounding lands, the effect on property values of property in
surrounding areas, and the effect of the proposed use on the comprehensive
plan.



      (2)   In applying for a conditional use permit, the applicant
shall provide the following information:



         (a)   Documentation illustrating compliance or pending
compliance with FAA and FCC authorization procedures;



         (b)   Sufficient information to indicate that
construction, installation, and maintenance of the antenna and tower will not
create a safety hazard or damage to the property of other persons;



         (c)   Documentation of the area to be served, including
a search area for the antenna location.  A narrative describing a search
area (with not less than 1–1/2-mile radius) clearly explaining why the site
was selected, an environmental review including a summary of relevant
conclusions, and what existing structures were available and why they are not
suitable as locations or co-locations;



         (d)   Documentation that the communications equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building within the search area due to one or more of the
following reasons:



            1.   The planned equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building, as
documented by a qualified professional engineer, and the existing or approved
tower cannot be reinforced or modified to accommodate planned equipment at a
reasonable cost;



            2.   The planned equipment would cause
interference with other existing or planned equipment at the tower or
building as documented by a qualified professional radio frequency (RF)
engineer, and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;



            3.   No existing or approved tower industrial
sites within a 1–1/2-mile radius meet the radio frequency (RF) design
criteria;



            4.   Existing or approved tower and
commercial/industrial sites within a 1–1/2-mile radius cannot accommodate
the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as
documented by a qualified professional radio frequency (RF) engineer; and/or



            5.   A good faith effort to co-locate on existing
towers and structures within a 1–1/2-mile radius was made, but an agreement
could not be reached.



         (e)   A certified survey showing the location of the
proposed tower/antenna;



         (f)   A detailed screening plan;



         (g)   A report from a qualified and licensed
professional engineer, which:



            1.   Describes the tower height and design with
cross-section and elevation;



            2.   Documents the height above grade for all
potential mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum
separation between antennas;



            3.   Describe the number and type of antennas that
can be accommodated;



            4.   Documents the steps the applicant will take
to avoid interference with pubic safety telecommunications; and



            5.   Includes the engineer’s stamp and
registration number.



         (h)   A letter of intent committing all commercial
wireless telecommunications service towers to allow the shared use of the
tower if an additional user agrees, in writing, to meet reasonable terms and
conditions for structures.



(Ord. 155, passed 2-20-2001)



§ 112.06  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS; NOT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Antennas and towers used by the city for city purposes;



   (B)   Adjustment or replacement of the elements of an antenna array
affixed to a tower or antenna, provided that replacement does not reduce the
safety factor;



   (C)   Antennas and/or towers erected temporarily for test purposes
or for emergency communications.  Temporary antennas shall be removed within
72 hours following installation; and



   (D)   Antennas mounted on water towers, public structures, or on the
roofs of existing public buildings not exceeding 20 feet above the principal
structure.



(Ord. 155, passed 2-20-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.07  FEES.



   Fees issued for a conditional use permit pursuant to this chapter shall
be set from time to time by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 155, passed 2-20-2001)



§ 112.08  STANDARDS FOR THE ISSUANCE AND CONTINUATION OF A CONDITIONAL USE
PERMIT.



   (A)   Generally.  All antennas/towers constructed, and all wiring
therefor, shall comply with the following requirements.



   (B)   Specifically.



      (1)   Towers shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer under the laws of the State of Minnesota and shall conform to the
latest structural standards and wind loading requirements of the Minnesota
State Building Code and the Electronics Industry Association.



      (2)   An agreement providing for co-location and prompt
removal of unused and/or obsolete towers shall be attached and become part of
the permit.



      (3)   With the exception of necessary electric and telephone
service and connection lines approved by the issuing authority on part of any
antenna or tower, no lines, cable, equipment, or wires or braces in
connection with either shall at any time extend across or over any part of
the right-of-way of a public street or highway, sidewalk, or property line.



      (4)   Any ground mounted tower/antenna design shall be such
that the antenna will withstand high velocity wind and seasonal storms.  The
tower/antenna shall be maintained by the applicant so as to assure that it
remains upright.



      (5)   Applicant must obtain Federal Aviation Administration
approval or provide documentation that Federal Aviation Administration
approval is not needed.



      (6)   Applicant must obtain Federal Communications Commission
licensure and approval as required for various communications applications. 
Applicant shall follow Federal Communications Commission regulations
regarding the correction and/or prevention of any radio frequency
interference problems.



      (7)   Complete screening shall be provided surrounding all
towers in excess of 15 feet in height from ground level.  The applicant
shall also fence off the tower/antenna, with a minimum of a 6-foot high fence
or barrier with a locked gate to prevent public access.



      (8)   Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the
surrounding environment through the use of a natural color, except in
instances where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as
the Federal Aviation Administration.



      (9)   Commercial wireless telecommunication service towers
shall be of a monopole design unless the City Council determines that an
alternative design would better blend in to the surrounding environment.



      (10)   No advertising or identification of any kind intended
to be visible form the ground or other structures is permitted, except
applicable warning and equipment information signage required by the
manufacturer or by federal, state, or local authorities.



      (11)   Applicant must submit proof of liability and worker’s
compensation insurance.  All communication towers, their antennas, and
associated equipment shall be adequately insured for injury or property
damage caused by structural failure of the tower or associated equipment.



      (12)   The permit will be subject to annual administrative
review.



(Ord. 155, passed 2-20-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.09  TOWER SETBACKS.



   (A)   Generally.  Towers shall conform to each of the following
minimum setback requirements.



   (B)   Specifically.



      (1)   Towers shall be set back from the lot line as shown on a
registered land survey by a minimum distance equal to 1/2 of the height of
the tower, including all antennas and attachments.  In industrial zoning
districts, towers may encroach into the rear setback area, provided that the
rear property line abuts another industrially zoned property and the tower
does not encroach upon any easements.



      (2)   A tower’s setback may be reduced or its location in
relation to a public street varied, at the sole discretion of the City
Council, to allow the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed
structure such as a church steeple, light standard, power line support
device, or similar structure.



(Ord. 155, passed 2-20-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.10  LIGHTS AND OTHER ATTACHMENTS.



   No antenna or tower shall have affixed or attached to it in any way,
except during time of repair or installation, any lights, reflectors,
flashers, or other illuminating device, except as required by the Federal
Aviation Administration or the Federal Communications Commission, nor shall
any tower have constructed thereon, or attached thereto, in any way, any
platform, catwalk, crow’s nest, or like structure, except during periods of
construction or repair.



(Ord. 155, passed 2-20-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.11  TOWERS SUPPORTING AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNAS/TOWERS.



   (A)   Generally.  In residential, commercial, and agriculture
districts, private towers supporting amateur radio antennas/towers may be
constructed subject to the following.



   (B)   Specifically.



      (1)   The structures are incidental to the principal use of
the premises.



      (2)   The structures shall not exceed 30 feet in height as
measured from ground level.  Any proposed structure in excess of 30 feet
shall be by conditional use permit.



      (3)   Metal structures shall be constructed of or treated with
corrosive resistant material.  Wood poles shall be impregnated with
rot-resistant, nonflammable substances.



      (4)   Every tower affixed to the ground shall be protected to
discourage climbing of the tower.



      (5)   The structures shall be screened to the greatest extent
practicable to minimize visual impact on surrounding properties.  Screening
shall include landscape materials for ground-mounted tower/antenna
structures.  The Planning Commission shall approve screening plans.



      (6)   No tower/antenna shall have affixed or attached to it in
any way lights, signs, flashers, or reflectors unless required by the Federal
Aviation Administration or Federal Communications Commission.



      (7)   A building permit shall be obtained prior to
construction of the tower/antenna.  All towers may be inspected at least
once a year by the City Building Inspector to determine compliance with
original construction standards.



(Ord. 155, passed 2-20-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.12  VIOLATIONS.



   Notice of violations will be sent by registered mail to the owner and
the owner shall have 30 days from the date the notification is issued to
correct the violation.  The owner shall notify the Building Official that
the corrections have been made, and as soon as possible thereafter, another
inspection will be made and the owner notified of the results.



(Ord. 155, passed 2-20-2001)



§ 112.13  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall be in force and effect from and after its passage
and publication according to law.



(Ord. 155, passed 2-20-2001)



CHAPTER 113: REGULATING LAWFUL GAMBLING



Section



   113.01   Adoption of state law by reference



   113.02   City may be more restrictive than state law



   113.03   Purpose



   113.04   Definitions



   113.05   Applicability



   113.06   Lawful gambling permitted



   113.07   Council approval



   113.08   Application and local approval of premises permits



   113.09   License and permit display



   113.10   Notification of material changes to application



   113.11   Contribution of net profits to fund administered by city



   113.12   Designated trade area



   113.13   Records and reporting



   113.14   Hours of operation



   113.15   Severability



 



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.



   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 349, as they may be amended from time to
time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
provisions relating to sales, and all other matters pertaining to lawful
gambling, are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this chapter
as if set out in full.  It is the intention of the Council that all future
amendments of M.S. Chapter 349 are hereby adopted by reference or referenced
as if they had been in existence at the time this chapter was adopted.



§ 113.02  CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.



   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 349.213, as it
may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on gambling within its limits beyond those contained
in M.S. Chapter 349, as it may be amended from time to time.



§ 113.03  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate lawful gambling within the
city, to prevent its commercialization, to ensure the integrity of
operations, and to provide for the use of net profits only for lawful
purposes.



§ 113.04  DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 349.12, as it may
be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of
this chapter:



   BOARD.  The State of Minnesota Gambling Control Board.



   LICENSED ORGANIZATION. An organization licensed by the Board.



   LOCAL PERMIT.  A permit issued by the city.



   TRADE AREA.  This city and each city and township in Carver County.



§ 113.05  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall be construed to regulate all forms of lawful
gambling within the city except:



   (A)   Bingo conducted within a nursing home or a senior citizen
housing project or by a senior citizen organization if: the prizes for a
single bingo game do not exceed $10; total prizes awarded at a single bingo
occasion do not exceed $200; no more than two bingo occasions are held by the
organization or at the facility each week; only members of the organization
or residents of the nursing home or housing project are allowed to play in a
bingo game; no compensation is paid for any persons who conduct the bingo;
and a manager is appointed to supervise the bingo.



   (B)   Raffles, if the value of all prizes awarded by the
organization in a calendar year does not exceed $750.



§ 113.06  LAWFUL GAMBLING PERMITTED.



   Lawful gambling is permitted within the city if the Council, by
resolution adopted by a majority of its members authorizes lawful gambling to
occur, provided it is conducted in accordance with M.S. §§ 609.75 to
609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; M.S. §§
349.11 to 349.23, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time, and
this chapter.



§ 113.07  COUNCIL APPROVAL.



   Lawful gambling authorized by M.S. §§ 349.11 to 349.23, inclusive, as
they may be amended from time to time, shall not be conducted unless approved
by the Council, subject to the provisions of this chapter and state law.



Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.08  APPLICATION AND LOCAL APPROVAL OF PREMISES PERMITS.



   (A)   Any organization seeking to obtain a premises permit or bingo
hall license or renewal of a premises permit or bingo hall license from the
Board shall file with the City Clerk an executed, complete duplicate
application together with all exhibits and documents accompanying the
application as filed with the Board.  The application and accompanying
exhibits and documents shall be filed not later than three days after they
have been filed with the Board.



   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for issuance or renewal of a
premises permit or bingo hall license, the City Clerk shall transmit the
application to the Chief of Police, or the Sheriff of the county in which
this city is located, for review and recommendation.



   (C)   The Chief of Police or Sheriff shall investigate the matter
and make a review and recommendation to the City Council as soon as possible,
but in no event later than 45 days following receipt of the notification by
the city.



   (D)   Organizations or bingo halls applying for a state-issued
premises permit or bingo hall license shall pay the city a $100 investigation
fee. This fee shall be refunded if the application is withdrawn before the
investigation is commenced.



   (E)   The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on
which the Council will consider the recommendation.



   (F)   The Council shall receive the Police Chief's or Sheriff's
report and consider the application within 45 days of the date the
application was submitted to the City Clerk.



   (G)   The Council shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove the
application within 60 days of receipt of the application.



   (H)   The Council shall disapprove an application for issuance or
renewal of a premises permit for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Violation by the gambling organization of any state
statute, state rule or city ordinance relating to gambling within the last
three years.



      (2)   Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization
leasing its premises for gambling of any state statute, state rule or city
ordinance relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not
limited to, laws relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled
substances, suppression of vice, and protection of public safety within the
last three years.



      (3)   Lawful gambling would be conducted at premises other
than those for which an on-sale liquor license has been issued.



      (4)   More than one licensed organization would be permitted
to conduct lawful gambling activities at one premises.



      (5)   Failure of the applicant to pay any investigation fee
provided by division (D) of this section within the prescribed time limit.



      (6)   Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental
to health, safety, and welfare of the community. Otherwise the Council shall
pass a resolution approving the application.



§ 113.09  LICENSE AND PERMIT DISPLAY.



   All permits issued under state law or this chapter shall be prominently
displayed during the permit year at the premises where gambling is conducted.



Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.10  NOTIFICATION OF MATERIAL CHANGES TO APPLICATION.



   An organization holding a state-issued premises permit shall notify the
city in writing whenever any material change in the information submitted in
the application occurs within ten days of the change.



Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.11  CONTRIBUTION OF NET PROFITS TO FUND ADMINISTERED BY CITY.



   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within
the city pursuant to M.S. § 349.16, as it may be amended from time to time,
shall contribute 10% of its net profits derived from lawful gambling in the
city to a fund administered and regulated by the city without cost to the
fund. The city shall disburse the funds for lawful purposes as defined by
M.S. § 349.12, Subd. 25, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Payment under this section shall be made on the last day of
each month.



   (C)   The city's use of these funds shall be determined at the time
of adoption of the city's annual budget or when the budget is amended.



Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.12  DESIGNATED TRADE AREA.



   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct gambling within the city
shall expend 100% of its lawful purpose expenditures on lawful purposes
conducted within the city's trade area.



   (B)   This section applies only to lawful purpose expenditures of
gross profits derived from gambling conducted at a premises within the city's
jurisdiction.



Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.13  RECORDS AND REPORTING.



   (A)   Organizations conducting lawful gambling shall file with the
City Clerk one copy of all records and reports required to be filed with the
Board, pursuant to M.S. Chapter 349, as it may be amended from time to time,
and rules adopted pursuant thereto, as they may be amended from time to time.
The records and reports shall be filed on or before the day they are required
to be filed with the Board.



   (B)   Organizations licensed by the Board shall file a report with
the city proving compliance with the trade area spending requirements imposed
by § 113.12.  Such report shall be made on a form prescribed by the city
and shall be submitted annually and in advance of application for renewal.



Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.14  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Lawful gambling shall not be conducted between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
on any day of the week.



Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.15  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this chapter is found to be invalid for any reason
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity of the remaining
provisions shall not be affected.



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates:



   (A)   Any provision of this chapter;



   (B)   M.S. §§ 609.75 to 609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended
from time to time; or



   (C)   M.S. §§ 349.11 to 349.21, as they may be amended from time
to time, or any rules promulgated under those sections, as they may be
amended from time to time; shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished as provided in § 10.99



CHAPTER 114:  COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENTS



Section



   114.01   Circuses, carnivals, shows and other entertainment



   114.02   Deposit required



   114.03   License fee for public entertainment or exhibition



§ 114.01  CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, SHOWS AND OTHER ENTERTAINMENT.



   (A)   (1)   Each person, desiring to conduct, stage or give a
circus, carnival, theatrical exhibition, public show, athletic game or other
entertainment, for which there is a charge for admission, shall first obtain
a license and pay the license fee or fees as established by the City Council
from time to time.



      (2)   Local school entertainment, charitable organizations,
lecture courses, and lectures on historic, literary or scientific subjects
are not subject to the provisions of this section; provided, that the
entertainment is not for profit.



   (B)   In addition to any other requirements, the applicant for a
license shall give at least one week's notice in writing to the City Clerk or
other authorized official, stating the dates of the performances and the
location at which the performances are to be presented.  The City Clerk
shall give his or her consent to the issuance of the license if he or she
deems that the location is suitable for the purpose; that it will properly
accommodate the patrons; that the nature of the performance or exhibition
does not pose a threat to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public; and that the use of the location will not create too great a burden
upon the Police Department or the Fire Department.



   (C)   No circus, carnival, theatrical exhibition, public show,
athletic game or other entertainment shall be given for more than two
consecutive days, except in cases where the City Council by resolution 
allows a longer period, or where the exhibition is to be conducted on
municipal property and the use thereof for a longer period shall have been
approved by the City Council.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.02  DEPOSIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   At the time application for a license is made, where use of
municipal grounds is contemplated, the applicant shall deposit with the City
Clerk or other designated municipal official a cash bond in an amount to be
determined by the City Council, conditioned upon the restoration and cleaning
up of the grounds in a manner satisfactory to the Mayor.  In the event the
grounds are restored and cleaned up properly following the exhibition, the
deposit shall be returned; otherwise the same shall be forfeited to the city
to the extent of actual costs to the city for restoration and cleaning up of
the grounds.



   (B)   No licensee shall fail to restore or clean up the grounds upon
which the circus, carnival or other entertainment has taken place.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.03  LICENSE FEE FOR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT OR EXHIBITION.



   The fee for the license shall be in an amount as established by the
City Council from time to time.



CHAPTER 115:  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   Exceptions to definitions



   115.03   Licensing; exemptions



   115.04   License ineligibility



   115.05   License suspension and revocation



   115.06   License transferability



   115.07   Registration



   115.08   Prohibited activities



   115.09   Exclusion by placard



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all
terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.  For the purpose
of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER.  A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place,
for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale,
selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the
goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personnel property that the
person is carrying or otherwise transporting.  The term PEDDLER shall mean
the same as the term HAWKER.



   PERSON.  Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership, or association.  As applied to groups, organizations,
corporations, partnerships, and associations, the term shall include each
member, officer, partner, associate, agent, or employee.



   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY.  Any day during which the City Hall is normally
open for the purpose of conducting public business.  Holidays defined by
state law shall not be counted as regular business days.



   SOLICITOR.  A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place,
for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a
catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur
at a later time.  The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a
person from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the
person’s activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed
above.  The term shall mean the same as the term CANVASSER.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  A person who temporarily sets up business out of
a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store
front for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise, or
other personal property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any
one location for more than 14 consecutive days.



§ 115.02  EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person
selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products,
merchandise, or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold
by the wholesaler.  The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes
initial contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying
to establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable
food and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to
any person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the
customers on his or her established regular delivery route.



   (B)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly
known as garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those
persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market,
shall be exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS, as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed
auctioneer, or any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. 
Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse
any person from complying with any other applicable statutory provision or
local ordinance.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or
restrict door-to-door advocacy. Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy
shall not be required to register as solicitors under § 115.07. The term
DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as
vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political, and other ideas.



§ 115.03  LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   County license required.  No person shall conduct business as
a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant within the city limits without
first having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by
M.S. Chapter 329, as it may be amended from time to time, if the county
issues a license for the activity.



   (B)   City license required.  Except as otherwise provided for by
this chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a
transient merchant without first having obtained a license from the city. 
Solicitors need not be licensed, but are still required to register pursuant
to § 115.07.



   (C)   Application.  Application for a city license to conduct
business as a peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least five
regular business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting
business.  Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the
City Council and available from the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.  All
applications shall be signed by the applicant.  All applications shall
include the following information:



      (1)   Applicant’s full legal name;



      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts
business or to which applicant officially answers;



      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye
color, height, weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like);



      (4)   Full address of applicant’s permanent residence;



      (5)   Telephone number of applicant’s permanent residence;



      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations
owned, managed, or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an
employee or agent;



      (7)   Full address of applicant’s regular place of business
(if any);



      (8)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the
applicant;



      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying
for a license;



      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or
daily license;



      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct
business, and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of
days he or she will be conducting business in the city (maximum 14
consecutive days);



      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the
applicant can be reached while conducting business within the city, including
the location where a transient merchant intends to set up business;



      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or
misdemeanor for violation of any state or federal statute or any local
ordinance, other than traffic offenses;



      (14)   A list of the three most recent locations where the
applicant has conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant;



      (15)   Proof of any requested county license;



      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the
property owner’s agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant;



      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or
services to be provided;



      (18)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City
Council;



      (19)   The applicant’s driver’s license number or other
acceptable form of identification; and



      (20)   The license plate number, registration information and
vehicle identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with
the licensed business and a description of the vehicle.



   (D)   Fee.  All applications for a license under this chapter shall
be accompanied by the fee established by City Council.



   (E)   Procedure.  Upon receipt of the completed application and
payment of the license fee, the City Clerk/Treasurer, within two regular
business days, must determine if the application is complete.  An
application is determined to be complete only if all required information is
provided.  If the City Clerk/Treasurer determines that the application is
incomplete, the City Clerk/Treasurer must inform the applicant of the
required necessary information that is missing.  If the application is
complete, the City Clerk/Treasurer must order any investigation, including
background checks, necessary to verify the information provided with the
application.  Within ten regular business days of receiving a complete
application, the City Clerk/Treasurer must issue the license unless there
exist grounds for denying the license under § 115.04, in which case the
Clerk/Treasurer must deny the license.  If the City Clerk/Treasurer denies
the license, the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision, the
reason for denial, and of the applicant’s right to appeal the denial by
requesting, within 20 days of receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing
before the City Council.  The City Council shall hear the appeal within 20
days of the date of the request.  The decision of the City Council following
the public hearing can be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota Court of
Appeals for a writ of certiorari.



   (F)   Duration.  Licenses granted under this chapter shall be valid
only during the time period indicated on the license.



   (G)   License exemptions.



      (1)   No license shall be required for any person to sell or
attempt to sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown,
produced, cultivated, or raised on any farm.



      (2)   No license shall be required of any person going from
house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or
other type of place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of
exercising that person’s state or federal constitutional rights such as the
freedom of speech, press, religion, and the like, except that this exemption
may be lost if the person’s exercise of constitutional rights is merely
incidental to a commercial activity.



      (3)   Professional fund raisers working on behalf of an
otherwise exempt person or group shall not be exempt from the licensing
requirements of this chapter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.04  LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.



   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:



   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of
having obtained any required county license;



   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the
failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at
the time of application;



   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five years
from the date of application for any violation of any federal or state
statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on
the person’s ability to conduct the business for which the license is being
sought in an honest and legal manner.  Those violations shall include, but
not be limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful
business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm
against another person;



   (D)   The revocation within the past five years of any license
issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler,
solicitor, or transient merchant; and/or



   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. 
Evidence of a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to,
the existence of more than three complaints against the applicant with the
Better Business Bureau, the Attorney General’s Office, or other similar
business or consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding 12 months,
or three complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding five
years.



§ 115.05  LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Generally.  Any license issued under this section may be
suspended or revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of
any of the following:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements on the
application form;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made
during the course of the licensed activity;



      (3)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a
license could have been denied under § 115.04; and/or



      (4)   Violation of any provision of this chapter.



   (B)   Multiple persons under one license.  The suspension or
revocation of any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple
persons to conduct business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of
the licensee shall serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized
person’s authority to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant
on behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or revoked.



   (C)   Notice.  Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued
under this chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written
notice of the alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right
to a hearing on the alleged violation.  Notice shall be delivered in person
or by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the license
application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business address
provided on the license application.



   (D)   Public hearing.  Upon receiving the notice provided in
division (C) of this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a
public hearing.  If no request for a hearing is received by the City
Clerk/Treasurer within ten regular business days following the service of the
notice, the city may proceed with the suspension or revocation.  For the
purpose of mailed notices, service shall be considered complete as of the
date the notice is placed in the mail.  If a public hearing is requested
within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days
from the date of the request.  Within three regular business days of the
hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its decision.



   (E)   Emergency.  If, in the discretion of the City Council,
imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the
actions of a peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the
City Council may immediately suspend the person’s license and provide
notice of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in
division (C) of this section.



   (F)   Appeals.  Any person whose license is suspended or revoked
under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.06  LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.



   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.07  REGISTRATION.



   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements
of this chapter under § 115.03, shall be required to register with the
city.  Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to
register. The term DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and
pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political, and
other ideas.  Registration shall be made on the same form required for a
license application, but no fee shall be required.  Immediately upon
completion of the registration form, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall issue to
the registrant a certificate of registration as proof of the registration. 
Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.08  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall conduct business in
any of the following manners:



   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold
by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by
any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed
structure;



   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian
traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way;



   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the
health, safety, and welfare of any individual or the general public;



   (D)   Conducting business before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.;



   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of
another person;



   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or
service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement.  No peddler,
solicitor, or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the
city solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate of
registration to that person; and/or



   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave,
or to otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find
obscene, threatening, intimidating, or abusive.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.09  EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.



   No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant, unless invited to do so
by the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the
purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant
when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long
and four inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating “No
Peddlers, Solicitors, or Transient Merchants,” or “Peddlers, Solicitors,
and Transient Merchants Prohibited,” or other comparable statement.  No
person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface, or
otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 116: RENTAL HOUSING



Section




General Provisions




   116.001   Purpose and scope



   116.002   Definitions




Rental Housing License




   116.015   Application



   116.016   Issuance



   116.017   Renewals



   116.018   Revocation



   116.019   Fees



   116.020   Additional fees



   116.021   Transfer of rental property



   116.022   Complaint inspections



   116.023   License posting



   116.024   Licensing period deadline




Space and Occupancy Standards




   116.035   Room dimensions



   116.036   Kitchen



   116.037   Lighting



   116.038   Ventilation



   116.039   Sanitation



   116.040   Bathroom accessibility



   116.041   Room separations



   116.042   Floor coverings




Structural Requirements




   116.055   Structural requirements




Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing Requirements




   116.065   Heating



   116.066   Electrical



   116.067   Plumbing




Means of Egress




   116.080   General



   116.081   Means of egress system



   116.082   Obstruction of egress



   116.083   Escape windows




Life Safety




   116.095   General



   116.096   Smoke detectors



   116.097   Fire extinguishes



   116.098   Fire sprinkler systems and fire alarm systems



   116.099   Inadequate fire protection or fire-fighters’ equipment




General Building Requirements




   116.110   Building identification



   116.111   Handrails



   116.112   Guardrails



   116.113   Refuse



   116.114   Unused or discarded items



   116.115   Storage of items



   116.116   Fuel storage



   116.117   Barbecues and open flames



   116.118   Excessive clutter




Exterior Building Requirements




   116.130   General



   116.131   Sanitation



   116.132   Sidewalks and driveways



   116.133   Weeds



   116.134   Rodent harborage



   116.135   Accessory structures



   116.136   Motor vehicles



   116.137   Defacement of property



   116.138   Faulty weather protection



   116.139   Fire hazard



   116.140   Faulty materials of construction




Notices and Orders of the Code Official




   116.150   Compliance order



   116.151   Substandard occupancy



   116.152   Notice to Vacate




Appeal




   116.165   Appeal



   116.166   Time allotted for appeal



   116.167   Scheduling and noticing appeal for hearing




Enforcement




   116.180   Authority



   116.181   Right of entry



   116.182   Responsibilities defined



   116.183   Substandard building



   116.184   Substandard property condition



   116.185   Appeals



   116.186   Prohibited acts



 



   116.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 116.001  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum
standards to safeguard life or limb, health, and public welfare by regulating
and controlling the use and occupancy, maintenance and repair of all
buildings and structures within the city used for the purpose of rental
housing. The purpose of this chapter is not to create or otherwise establish
or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be
especially protected or benefitted by the terms of this chapter.



   (B)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
buildings or portions thereof used, or designed or intended to be rented,
leased, or let for human habitation. All provisions of this chapter shall
apply to dwellings in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter. Rest
homes, convalescent homes, nursing homes, hotels, motels, and units rented,
let or leased to direct family members of the property owner are exempt from
the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Application to existing buildings. Additions, alterations or
repairs, shall be done in compliance with the Building, Fire, Plumbing and
Mechanical Codes. Applicable permits shall apply as required by these codes.



   (D)   Certification. Properties not existing as rental property at
the time of adoption of this chapter and afterward becoming rental property
shall, before being certified, comply with all terms of this chapter.
Properties pre-existing as rental property at the adoption of this chapter
shall be allowed a reasonable time to comply. Reasonable time being defined
on a case by case basis subject to the discretion of the code official, or
the designate thereof.



§ 116.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language,
Unabridged, copyright 1986, shall be considered as providing ordinary
accepted meanings. Words in the singular include the plural and the plural
the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the
feminine the masculine.



   APARTMENT BUILDING. A building or portion of a building that contains
three or more dwelling units.



   BUILDING CODE.BUILDING CODE is the Minnesota State Building Code.



   CODE OFFICIAL.CODE OFFICIAL is the official who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this chapter, or any duly authorized
representative.



   CONDEMN.CONDEMN shall mean to adjudge unfit for occupancy.



   CONGREGATE RESIDENCE.CONGREGATE RESIDENCE is any building or portion
thereof that contains facilities for living, sleeping and sanitation, as
required by this chapter, and may include facilities for eating and cooking
and for occupancy by other than a family. A CONGREGATE RESIDENCE may be a
shelter, convent, monastery, dormitory, and fraternity or sorority house but
does not include jails, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels or lodging houses.



   DWELLING.DWELLING is a building wholly or partly used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes by human occupants; but
not including hotels and motels.



   DWELLING UNIT.DWELLING UNIT is a room or a group of rooms located
within a dwelling forming a single habitable unit with facilities, which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating purposes.



   EFFICIENCY DWELLING UNIT.EFFICIENCY DWELLING UNIT is a dwelling unit
containing only one habitable room and meeting the requirements of §§
116.035 and 116.036.



   EGRESS.EGRESS is an arrangement of exit facilities to assure a safe
means of exit from a building.



   ELECTRICAL CODE.ELECTRICAL CODE is the Minnesota State Electrical Code.



   EXTERMINATION.EXTERMINATION is the control and elimination of insects,
rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning,
spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest
elimination method approved by the code official; and to remove all signs of
extermination thereafter.



   FIRE CODE.FIRE CODE is the Minnesota State Fire Code.



   FLOOR AREA.FLOOR AREA is the net floor area within the enclosed walls
of a room in which the ceiling height is not less than five feet, excluding
areas used for closets and built-in equipment, such as cabinets, kitchen
units, fixtures and appliances.



   HABITABLE ROOM.HABITABLE ROOM is a room or enclosed floor space, used
or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes,
excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers
or communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.



   HEALTH OFFICER.HEALTH OFFICER is the legally designated health officer
or official of the state, county and/or city.



   HOT WATER.HOT WATER is water supplied to plumbing fixtures at a
temperature of not less than 120 degrees F (49 degrees C.)



   INFESTATION.INFESTATION is the presence of insects, rodents, or other
pests within or around the dwelling on the premises.



   KITCHEN.KITCHEN is a room or an area equipped for preparing and cooking
food.



   LET.LET is to give the use of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit
by an owner or manager to a tenant in return for rent.



   MANAGER.MANAGER is a person or firm who has charge, care or control of
a building or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



   MECHANICAL CODE.MECHANICAL CODE is the Minnesota State Mechanical Code.



   NUISANCE. The following shall be defined as NUISANCES:



      (1)   Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity
jurisprudence.



      (2)   Any attractive nuisance that may prove detrimental to
children whether in a building, on the premises of a building or on an
unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or
excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; any structurally
unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or
vegetation that may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.



      (3)   Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to
health, as determined by the code official or health officer.



      (4)   Overcrowding a room with occupants.



      (5)   Insufficient ventilation or illumination.



      (6)   Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.



      (7)   Un-cleanliness, as determined by the health officer.



      (8)   Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or
detrimental to the health of human beings, as determined by the health
officer.



   OCCUPANCY.OCCUPANCY is the purpose for which a building or portion
thereof is utilized or occupied.



   OCCUPANT.OCCUPANT is a person living alone, or two or more persons all
related by blood, marriage or adoption, including foster children, occupying
and maintaining a common household in a single dwelling unit, or a group of
not more than five persons, any two of whom are not related by blood,
marriage or adoption, including foster children, occupying and maintaining a
common household in a single dwelling unit.



   OWNER.OWNER is a person, firm or corporation who, alone, jointly or
severally with others, owns or has an ownership interest in a dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit within the city.



   PLUMBING CODE.PLUMBING CODE is the State of Minnesota Plumbing Code.



   PLUMBING SYSTEM.PLUMBING SYSTEM is all potable water supplies and
distribution pipes, all plumbing fixtures and traps and all drainage and vent
pipes.



   PREMISES.PREMISES are the dwelling and its land and all buildings
thereon and areas thereof.



   REFUSE.REFUSE is all putrescible and non-putrescible waste solids
including garbage and rubbish. REFUSE is liable to undergo bacterial
decomposition when in contact with air and moisture at normal temperatures.



   RENT.RENT is a stated return or payment for the temporary possession of
a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit. The return or payment may be money
or service or property.



   ROOMING HOUSE.ROOMING HOUSE is a building arranged or occupied for
lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one-
or two-family dwelling.



   ROOMING UNIT.ROOMING UNIT is a room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not
for cooking purposes, along with a private or shared sanitation facilities.



   SAFETY.SAFETY is the condition of being reasonably free from danger and
hazards, which may cause injury or illness.



   SUBSTANDARD BUILDING.SUBSTANDARD BUILDING is any building where any
condition exists that endangers the life, limb, health, safety or welfare of
the public or the occupants thereof.



   SUBSTANDARD PROPERTY CONDITION CITATION.SUBSTANDARD PROPERTY CONDITION
CITATION shall be issued in the event of a substandard building and shall,
upon posting of the citation, prohibit the occupancy of the building until
such time as corrections are made and verified by inspection.



   TENANT.TENANT can be a person, corporation, partnership or group,
whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion
thereof as a unit.



   VARIANCE.VARIANCE is a difference between that which is required or
specified and that, which is permitted.



RENTAL HOUSING LICENSE



§ 116.015  APPLICATION.



   The owner or manager of a structure, in which one or more dwelling
units or rooming units are let or intended to be let, shall make application
for a rental housing license prior to letting the unit, unless such unit is
currently certified. An owner or manager of such structure shall not allow
occupancy of such unit until the certification-inspection fee has been paid
and a rental housing license has been issued. The code official or housing
inspector may issue a temporary rental housing license not exceeding three
months in duration in order to bring the unit into compliance with this
chapter.



§ 116.016  ISSUANCE.



   The code official or housing inspector shall issue a rental housing
license for each dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, when upon
inspection finds such unit meets or exceeds the minimum requirements set
forth by this chapter; also a rental housing license shall be issued for each
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, when a variance has been granted by
the Board of Appeals; provided, however, it is found that no condition
exists, in a shared or public area of the building or in any other part of
the unit, which could endanger the health or safety of the occupants of such
unit or of the public. Such license shall show the number of occupants for
which the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit is approved for and once
issued shall remain valid until it expires or such time as the code official
or housing inspector determines that the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit does not meet the minimum requirements set by this chapter.



§ 116.017  RENEWALS.



   A rental housing license shall expire two years after the date of
issuance. Re-inspection of all dwellings, dwelling units or rooming units
shall be required prior to issuance of a new certificate. Applications for
licenses shall be made in writing on forms provided by the city and
accompanied by the fee amounts as established by the City Council. Such
application shall be submitted at least 60 days prior to the expiration date
of the license.



§ 116.018  REVOCATION.



   A rental housing license may be suspended or revoked as prescribed in
this chapter.



   (A)   Every license or permit issued under this chapter is subject
to the right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to suspend or revoke the
same should the license holder or their agents, employees, representatives,
or lessees directly or indirectly operate or maintain rental dwellings
contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any other city code provisions,
or any permit issued by the city or the laws of the State of Minnesota.



   (B)   The license may be suspended or revoked by the City Council
after written notice is sent the license holder specifying the ordinance or
law violations with which they are charged. This notice shall also specify
the date for hearing before the City Council, which shall not be less than
ten  days from the date of the notice.



   (C)   At such hearing before the City Council, the license holder or
their attorneys may submit and present witnesses on their behalf.



   (D)   After a hearing, the City Council may suspend or revoke the
license if the Council deems it necessary to protect public health, safety or
general welfare.



§ 116.019  FEES.



   A rental housing license-inspection fee as established by the City
Council.



§ 116.020  ADDITIONAL FEES.



   The city shall have the right, and just cause, to bill or to assess the
responsible party for additional costs associated with:



   (A)   Required additional follow up rental inspections, beyond the
prescribed number allowed, for a single rental inspection cycle.



   (B)   Failure of the responsible party to appear for a scheduled
inspection without prior notification of the inspector.



   (C)   After hour, weekend or holiday inspections.



§ 116.021  TRANSFER OF RENTAL PROPERTY.



   Upon the sale and transfer of title of housing rental property, a
re-inspection of the property shall automatically be required for the
issuance of a rental property permit to the new owner for the stated
property. It shall be the responsibility of the purchasing party to notify
the city within 30 days of the closing of the transaction and to request an
inspection.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.022  COMPLAINT INSPECTIONS.



   The code official or housing inspector shall inspect a unit upon
receiving a legitimate complaint. Complainant's name shall be kept
confidential pursuant to the Minnesota Data Privacy Act. Upon inspection and
finding a violation the inspector shall notify the owner, manager or tenant
in writing to correct the violation. The owner or manager may request an
advisory inspection of a unit.



§ 116.023  LICENSE POSTING.



   Every registrant of a rental dwelling shall post the annual license
issued by the City Manager. The annual license shall be conspicuously posted
(in a frame with a glass covering) by the registrant, in a public corridor,
hallway, or lobby of the rental dwelling for which they are issued.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.024 LICENSING PERIOD DEADLINE.



   The licensing period deadline shall be December 31. All properties
required to be licensed by this chapter shall have applied for licensing with
the city office, shall have paid the required fee or fees, and shall have
satisfactorily completed the required rental housing inspection by the
deadline date. Failure to comply with this chapter could result in fines
and/or denial of a rental housing license for the property in violation.



Penalty, see § 116.999



SPACE AND OCCUPANCY STANDARDS



§ 116.035  ROOM DIMENSIONS.



   Room dimensions shall comply with the following requirements:



   (A)   Ceiling heights. Habitable space shall have a ceiling height
of not less than seven feet measured to the lowest projection from the
ceiling. Where exposed beam ceiling members are spaced al less than 48 inches
on center, ceiling height shall be measured to the bottom of these members.
If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling
height for the room measuring less than five feet from the finished floor to
the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum area
thereof



   (B)   Floor area. Dwelling units and congregate residences shall
have at least one room for common living area that shall have not less than
120 square feet of floor area. Rooms used for sleeping purposes by one person
shall have an area of not less than 70 square feet. Where more than one
person occupies a room used for sleeping purposes, the required floor area
shall be 50 square feet for each occupant.



   (C)   Width. No habitable room other than a kitchen shall be less
than seven feet in any dimension.



§ 116.036  KITCHEN.



   Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in which
food may be prepared and/or cooked, which shall have adequate circulation
area, and which shall be equipped with the following:



   (A)   A kitchen sink that is in good working condition and properly
connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate
authority and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and
unheated running water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer
system approved by the city. Sinks shall be of nonabsorbent materials.



   (B)   A stove, or similar device, for cooking food, and a
refrigerator, or similar device, for the safe storage of food at temperatures
less than 45 degrees Fahrenheit but more than 32 degrees Fahrenheit under
ordinary maximum summer conditions, which are properly installed with all
necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation; provided
that such stove, refrigerator, and/or similar devices need not be installed
when a dwelling unit is not occupied and when the occupant is expected to
provide same on occupancy, and that sufficient space and adequate connections
for the safe and efficient installation and operation of said stove,
refrigerator and/or similar devices are provided.



   (C)   Cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or
dormitory unit, and a cooking facility of appliance shall not be permitted to
be present in a rooming unit or dormitory unit.



§ 116.037  LIGHTING.



   (A)   All enclosed portions of the dwelling unit customarily
occupied by human beings shall be provided with natural light by means of
exterior glazed openings with an area not less than 1/8 of the total floor
area, or shall be provided with artificial light. Such openings shall open
directly onto a public way or a yard or court.



   (B)   Public hallways, corridors, stairways and other exit
facilities shall be adequately lighted.



§ 116.038  VENTILATION.



   Guestrooms and habitable rooms within a dwelling unit shall be provided
with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area
of not less than 4% of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of four
square feet. Exterior openings for natural ventilation shall be provided with
tight fitting insect screens. Bathrooms, water closet compartments and
similar rooms shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable
exterior openings with an area not less than 4% of the floor area of such
rooms with a minimum of 1-1/2 square feet. In lieu of required exterior
openings for natural ventilation in bathrooms containing a bathtub, shower or
combination thereof; and similar rooms, a working mechanical ventilation
system connected directly to the outside.



§ 116.039  SANITATION.



   All sanitary facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe and
sanitary condition and in accordance with applicable requirements of the
Plumbing Code.



   (A)   Dwelling unit. Dwelling units shall be provided with a
bathroom equipped with facilities consisting of a water closet, lavatory, and
either a bathtub or shower.



   (B)   Rooming units. Where private water closets are not provided,
there shall be provided at least one bathroom accessible from a public
hallway.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.040  BATHROOM ACCESSIBILITY.



   Where bathrooms are shared by rooming units by occupants of a dwelling
unit, the bathroom shall be located so that no occupant has to pass through
another occupant's room to use the facility.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.041  ROOM SEPARATIONS.



   Every water closet, bathtub or shower required by this chapter shall be
installed in a room that will afford privacy to the occupant. Bathrooms shall
be separated from food-preparation areas by a tight fitting door.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.042  FLOOR COVERINGS.



   Bathroom floors shall have a smooth, hard nonabsorbent surface such as
vinyl tile, vinyl sheet goods, ceramic tile or concrete. Floor surfaces shall
be maintained in good condition so the floor can be maintained in a sanitary
condition.



Penalty, see § 116.999



STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS



§ 116.055 STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All existing structural components in roofs, floors, walls and
foundations are deemed acceptable provided that in the opinion of the code
official such components have been properly maintained and do not make the
building hazardous as defined by M.S. § 463.15, Subd. 3, as it may be
amended from time to time.



MECHANICAL, ELECTRICAL AND PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS



§ 116.065  HEATING.



   (A)   Dwelling units and guestrooms shall be provided with heating
appliances capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit
at a point three feet above the floor in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
water closet compartments. Owners shall turn on the heating appliances when
the outside temperature fills to 64 degrees Fahrenheit or below. Such
facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in
accordance with their listings. Un-vented fuel-burning appliances are not
permitted.



   (B)   All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type.



      (1)   Chimneys and vents. Every fuel-burning appliance shall
discharge the products of combustion to a vent, factory-built chimney,
masonry chimney or a chimney or vent that is approved by the appliance
manufacturer. Chimneys or vents shall be designed for the type of appliance
being vented.



      (2)   Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers
shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or
other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public
or private property or that of another tenant.



      (3)   Hazardous mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment
that was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of
installation or mechanical equipment not installed in accordance with
generally accepted construction practices in areas where no codes were in
effect or that has not been maintained in good and safe condition shall be
considered substandard.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.066  ELECTRICAL.



   The electrical service, lines, switches, outlets, fixtures and fixture
coverings, and support in every building or structure shall be in good
repair. Broken, loose, frayed, inoperative, defective or missing portions
shall be repaired or replaced. All unsafe conditions shall be corrected.



   (A)   Electrical equipment.



      (1)   All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be
properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner. All
electrical equipment shall be of an approved type.



      (2)   Extension cords shall be used only with portable
appliances and shall not be used as a substitute for permanent wiring.
Extension cords shall be plugged directly into an approved outlet, power tap
or multi-plug adapter and shall, except for approved multi-plug extension
cords, serve only one portable appliance. The amp capacity of the extension
cord shall not be less than the rated capacity of the portable appliance
supplied by the cord and shall be grounded when serving a grounded appliance.
Extension cords shall be maintained in good condition without splices,
deterioration or damage. Extension cords and flexible cords shall not be
attached to the structure, extend through walls, ceilings, and floors or
under doors or floor coverings, or be subject to environmental or physical
damage.



   (B)   Switches and outlets. Every habitable room shall be provided
with at least one switched ceiling or wall light and one dual outlet.



      (1)   Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room
and furnace room shall contain at least one electrical light fixture and one
convenience outlet.



      (2)   Outlets within six feet of a sink or bathtub shall be
ground fault interrupted (GFI) outlets.



   (C)   Hazardous electrical wiring. Electrical wiring that was
installed in violation of ordinance requirements in effect at the time of
installation or electrical wiring not installed in accordance with generally
accepted construction practices in areas where no codes were in effect or
that has been maintained in good condition or that is not being used in a
safe manner shall be considered substandard.



§ 116.067  PLUMBING.



   All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in
working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects
and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures
are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary
and functional condition.



   (A)   Fixtures. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a
sanitary sewer or to an approved private sewage disposal system. All plumbing
fixtures shall be connected to an approved system of water supply and
provided with hot and cold running water necessary for its normal operation.
All plumbing fixtures shall be of an approved glazed earthenware type or of a
similarly nonabsorbent material.



   (B)   Plumbing system leaks. Leaking drain or supply lines shall be
repaired or replaced. All unsafe conditions shall be corrected.



   (C)   Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing
system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or to the
structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, improper
installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the code
official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.



   (D)   Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located
above the flood-level rim of the fixture as required by the Minnesota State
Plumbing Code. Hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in
place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or
an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.



   (E)   Hazardous plumbing. Plumbing that was installed in violation
of code requirements in effect at the time of installation or plumbing not
installed in accordance with generally accepted construction practices in
areas where no codes were in effect or that has not been maintained in good
condition or that is not free of cross-connections or siphonage between
fixtures shall be considered substandard.



MEANS OF EGRESS



§ 116.080  GENERAL.



   Dwelling units or rooming units shall have access directly to the
outside or to a common hallway or public corridor with egress to the outside.
An exit shall not pass through a hazardous area such as a furnace room,
boiler room, storage room, garage or similar areas.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.081  MEANS OF EGRESS SYSTEM.



   Means of egress system shall be deemed as meeting the intent of this
chapter, provided that the means of egress system or systems is evaluated by
the code official and judged to be equivalent to the exit means of egress
system that was required by the Code under which the building was constructed
or equivalent provisions of the currently adopted Fire Code. This includes,
but not limited to, number of exits, separation of exits, egress
illumination, emergency egress illumination, emergency exit signage and
illumination, corridors, corridor doors, and egress travel distance.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.082  OBSTRUCTION OF EGRESS.



   Means of egress shall not be obstructed in any manner and shall remain
free of any material or matter where its presence would obstruct or render
the means of egress hazardous. All egress routes shall be properly maintained
in a safe manner. A clear and unobstructed means of access with a minimum
width of 30 inches and a minimum height of 78 inches shall be maintained from
the operating face of an electrical service panel, meter or switchboard.
Tenants shall al all times have free access to the service panel for their
dwelling unit.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.083  ESCAPE WINDOWS.



   Sleeping rooms below the fourth story shall have at lest one operable
window or exterior door approved for emergency escape or rescue. The units
shall be operable from the inside to provide a full clear opening without the
use of separate tools or special knowledge and shall open directly onto a
public way or a yard or court located on the same lot as the building.



   (A)   Escape window requirements. An escape window from a sleeping
room shall have a minimum net clear opening of five square feet. The minimum
net clear opening height shall be 24 inches and the minimum net clear opening
width shall be 20 inches. The finished sill shall not be more than 48 inches
above the floor. If necessary to add a window, the new window shall meet the
requirements of the Building Code for a new escape window.



   (B)   Replacement escape windows. When replacing an existing escape
window, the replacement window shall meet the minimum requirements of an
escape window as defined in this chapter.



   (C)   Security locks. When an exit door from a dwelling unit is
required to provide security from unlawful entry, the door shall be provided
with a dead-bolt lock or approved device, which is operable from the inside
without the use of a key, special knowledge, or extraordinary effort.



   (D)   Inadequate exits.



      (1)   Except for those buildings or portions thereof that have
been provided with adequate exit facilities conforming to the provisions of
this chapter, buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities were
installed in violation of ordinance requirements in effect at the time of
their construction or whose exit facilities have not been increased in number
of width in relation to any increase in occupant load due to alterations,
additions or change in use or occupancy subsequent to the time of
construction shall be considered substandard.



      (2)   Notwithstanding compliance with code requirements in
effect at the time of their construction, buildings or portions thereof shall
be considered substandard when the code official finds that an unsafe
condition exists through an improper location of exists, a lack of an
adequate number or width of exists, or when other conditions exist that are
dangerous to human life.



Penalty, see § 116.999



LIFE SAFETY



§ 116.095  GENERAL.



   All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with the degree of
fire resistive construction, fire warning devices and fire extinguishing
devices as provided by this chapter and the Fire Code.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.096  SMOKE DETECTORS.



   (A)   Installation and location. Single station smoke detectors
shall be installed on each floor and basement. A detector shall also be
located in each bedroom. The inspector may require additional smoke detectors
where additional protection may be required.



   (B)   Power supply. The power supply can be either by battery
operation or by the building wiring with battery backup.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.097  FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.



   (A)   All rental units shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher
with a minimum rating of 2A 10BC. The extinguisher shall be located within
the individual dwelling unit or in a common hallway or corridor within 50
feet of the dwelling unit door.



   (B)   Fire extinguishers shall be serviced at least annually or as
required by the code official. A tag with the name of the servicing company
and the service date shall be affixed to the extinguisher and shall remain
affixed until the next servicing.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.098  FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.



   All existing fire sprinkler systems and fire alarm systems shall be
maintained in accordance to the current Fire Code.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.099  INADEQUATE FIRE-PROTECTION OR FIRE-FIGHTERS’ EQUIPMENT.



   Buildings or portions thereof shall be considered substandard when they
are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing
systems or equipment required by this chapter, except those buildings or
portions thereof that conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their
construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing
systems or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved in relation
to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in
occupancy.



Penalty, see § 116.999



GENERAL BUILDING REQUIREMENTS



§ 116.110  BUILDING IDENTIFICATION.



   Every building shall have the assigned street numbers displayed on the
building in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the
street or road fronting the property. Said numbers shall be no less than four
inches in height and shall contrast with the background on which they are
displayed.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.111  HANDRAILS.



   (A)   Stairways having four or more risers shall have a continuous
full-length handrail on at least one side. The handrail shall be mounted no
less than 34 inches nor more than 38 inches above the nosing of the stair
treas.



   (B)   The handgrip potion of the handrail shall not be less than
1-1/2 inch and no more than two inches in cross-sectional dimension. The ends
of the handrails shall be returned to the walls.



   (C)   Stairways that are 66 inches in width or more require
handrails on both sides.



   (D)   Existing handrails that are not deemed to be hazardous by the
code official or housing inspector are allowed to remain as they are.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.112  GUARDRAILS.



   (A)   Unenclosed floor and roof openings, open sides of stairways,
landings, decks, balconies, porches or occupied roofs which are more than 30
inches above the grade or floor below shall be protected by a guardrail.



   (B)   Guardrails shall be a minimum of 36 inches high.



   (C)   Open railings shall have intermediate rails, spindles or an
ornamental pattern such that a four-inch sphere cannot pass through. When
approved by the code official, the spacing between intermediate railings or
openings in existing ornamental patterns may be accepted.



   (D)   Existing guardrails that are not deemed to be hazardous by the
code official or code official are allowed to remain as they are.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.113  REFUSE.



   The property owner or property manager shall provide an adequate number
of refuse containers to contain the amount of refuse produced on the property
or as required by a local sanitation ordinance. Containers shall be rodent
and animal proof plastic, fiberglass or rust resistant metal with a
tight-fitting cover. Containers shall have a maximum capacity of 35 gallons
with two handles or a container of any size supplied by the waste removal
company that can be mechanically lifted. It shall be the tenant's
responsibility to place their garbage and refuse in the approved refuse
containers provided by the owner. The owner or manager shall be responsible
for ensuring that the garbage and refuse is removed from the property at
least once every seven days. Refuse containers shall not be stored in a front
yard. Containers with a capacity of 1.5 cubic yards or more shall not be
stored in a building or within five feet of combustible walls, opening or
combustible roof eaves.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.114 UNUSED OR DISCARDED ITEMS.



   Discarded, unused and junk appliances, furniture, mattresses and other
items shall be removed from the property.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.115 STORAGE OF ITEMS.



   Large amounts of combustible items and materials shall not be stored in
attics or basements. Storage shall be maintained two feet or more below
ceilings and floor joists. Combustible materials and items shall not be
stored within one foot of any fuel burning appliances. Storage of items shall
be orderly and shall not block or obstruct exits. A minimum three-foot aisle
shall be maintained to all exits, furnaces, water heaters, water meters, gas
meters or other building service equipment.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.116  FUEL STORAGE.



   LP tanks, gasoline containers and fueled equipment, including but not
limited to motorcycles, mopeds, lawn-care equipment and portable cooking
equipment, shall not be stored or repaired in an apartment building or
dwelling unit.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.117  BARBECUES AND OPEN FLAMES.



   In any structure containing two or more dwelling units, no person shall
kindle, maintain, or cause any fire or open flame on any balcony above ground
level, on any roof, or on any ground floor patio within 15 feet of any
structure. No person shall store or use any fuel, barbecue, torch, or similar
heating or lighting chemicals or device in such locations.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.118  EXCESSIVE CLUTTER.



   Buildings, occupancies or rooms where the state of order or clutter is
such that a health, safety, fire or egress issue exists, shall be deemed
substandard as defined by this chapter.



Penalty, see § 116.999



EXTERIOR BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.



§ 116.130  GENERAL.



   (A)   Any building or portion thereof that is determined to be an
unsafe building in accordance with this chapter, or any building or portion
thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room or suite of rooms, or the
premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the
conditions referenced in this section to an extent that endangers the life,
limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants
thereof, shall be deemed and hereby are declared to be substandard buildings.



   (B)   The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to public
health, safety or welfare.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.131  SANITATION.



   All exterior property and premises shall be maintained and clean, safe
and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior
property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary
condition.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.132  SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS.



   All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar
areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from
hazardous conditions.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.133  WEEDS.



   All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds
or plant growth in excess of eight inches. All noxious weeds shall be
prohibited. WEEDS shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.134  RODENT HARBORAGE.



   All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent
harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate
rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.135  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls,
shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.136  MOTOR VEHICLES.



   Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or
unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and
no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major assembly, disrepair, or
in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is
prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.137  DEFACEMENT OF PROPERTY.



   No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any
exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public
property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the
responsibility of the building owner to restore the surface to an approved
state of maintenance and repair.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.138  FAULTY WEATHER PROTECTION.



   Buildings or portions thereof shall be considered substandard when they
have faulty weather protection which shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:



   (A)   Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster.



   (B)   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls,
roof, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors.



   (C)   Defective or lace of weather protection for exterior wall
coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or
other approved protective covering.



   (D)   Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or
roof coverings.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.139  FIRE HAZARD.



   Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment,
combustible waste, or vegetation that, in the opinion of the chief of the
fire department, is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion or
provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion
arising from any cause shall be considered substandard.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.140  FAULTY MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The use of materials of construction, except those that are
specifically allowed or approved by this code and the Building Code, and that
have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition, shall cause a
building to be substandard.



Penalty, see § 116.999



NOTICES AND ORDERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL



§ 116.150  COMPLIANCE ORDER.



   (A)   General. The code official shall prepare a compliance order,
listing all violations and the date or dates when such violations shall be
corrected. The property owner shall have the responsibility to correct all
violations within the time limit set forth by the code official. Any
questions regarding the compliance of said violations, the property owner may
contact the code official.



   (B)   Sequence of enforcement and penalty criteria. Upon completion
of an initial rental housing inspection and subsequent reinspection, with
appropriate and documented notification of the property owner or agent, a
property is found to remain in a state of non-compliance, the property owner
or agent shall be given written notification of the remaining infraction(s)
and shall be informed of the following:



      (1)   The exact date and time of the second follow up
inspection not to exceed 14 days from the first inspection.



      (2)   Upon completion of the second follow up inspection:



         (a)   If the infraction(s) have been satisfactorily
addressed or corrected the city will, at their discretion, levy a
reinspection fee to cover the cost of the second follow up inspection. The
fee will be set by resolution of the City Council.



         (b)   If the infractions remain §§ 116.999(B)(3)(a)
shall be imposed including:



            1.   A $50 fine.



            2.   The assessment of $5 per day that the alleged
violations remain.



            3.   The $5 per day will be enforced through the
day that a satisfactory follow up inspection is conducted.



         (c)   The $50 fine and subsequent $5 per day assessment
must be paid in full to the city within 14 days of the satisfactory follow up
inspection or, pursuant to §§ 116.015et seq. the city shall have the right
and just cause to revoke or deny licensing the property as rental housing
property.



         (d)   The property owner or agent shall be notified in
writing of §§ 116.165et seq. indicating his or her right of appeal.



§ 116.151  SUBSTANDARD OCCUPANCY.



   No occupancy shall be permitted for any dwelling or rental unit when,
in the opinion of the code official, there exists inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, physical damage, unsanitary condition or abandonment which
constitutes a fire hazard or a hazard to public safety or health.



§ 116.152  NOTICE TO VACATE.



   The code official shall have the authority to issue a NOTICE TO VACATE
order on any building that is, in the opinion of the code official and as
defined in this chapter, deemed substandard.



APPEAL



§ 116.165 APPEAL.



   Any person may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the
code official under this chapter by filing an appeal to the city. A written
appeal to the city a brief statement in ordinary and concise language of that
specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed
to support the contentions of the appellant.



§ 116.166  TIME ALLOTTED FOR APPEAL.



   The appeal shall be filed within ten days or within the time of
correction as allowed by the code official, whichever is shorter, from the
date of the service of such order or action of the code official.



§ 116.167  SCHEDULING AND NOTICING APPEAL FOR HEARING.



   The City Council shall establish an Appeals Board. The Appeals Board
shall establish policies and procedures as to when and where, and how appeals
will be heard. The Appeals Board shall not have the authority to override any
section or provision of this chapter.



ENFORCEMENT



§ 116.180  AUTHORITY.



   The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce or
cause the enforcement of all of the provisions of this chapter. For such
purposes, the building official or his or her designated representative shall
have the posers of a code official. The code official shall have the power to
render interpretations of this chapter. Such interpretations shall be in
conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter.



§ 116.181  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, or when the code official or housing inspector has reasonable
cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a
condition that is contrary to or in violation of this chapter, the code
official or housing inspector may enter the building or premises at
reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this chapter,
provided that if such building or premises are occupied that credentials be
presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises
is unoccupied, the code official shall first make a reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or
premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the code official or housing
inspector shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.



§ 116.182  RESPONSIBILITIES DEFINED.



   Owners remain liable for violations of duties imposed by this chapter
even though an obligation is also imposed on the occupants of the building,
and even though the owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant the duty
of furnishing required equipment or of complying with this chapter.



   (A)   Buildings and structures and parts thereof shall be maintained
in a safe and sanitary condition. The owner or the owner's designated agent
shall be responsible for such maintenance. To determine compliance with this
division, the building may be re-inspected.



   (B)   Owners, in addition to being responsible for maintaining
buildings in a sound structural condition, shall be responsible for keeping
that part of the building or premises which the owner occupies or controls in
a clean, sanitary and safe condition, including the shared or public areas in
a building containing two or more dwelling units.



   (C)   Owners shall, when required by this chapter, health laws or
the health officer, furnish and maintain such approved sanitary facilities as
required, and shall furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or
facilities for the prevention of insect and rodent infestation, and when
infestation has taken place, shall be responsible for any insects, rodents or
other pests when such extermination is not specifically made the
responsibility of the occupant by law or ruling.



   (D)   Occupants of a dwelling unit, in addition to being responsible
for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling
of dwelling unit or premises which they occupy and control, shall properly
dispose of their recyclables, rubbish, garbage and other organic waste.



   (E)   Occupants shall, when required by this chapter or city
ordinance furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities
necessary to keep their premises safe and sanitary.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.183  SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS.



   Buildings or portions thereof that are determined to be substandard as
defined in this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall
be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.



§ 116.184  SUBSTANDARD PROPERTY CONDITION.



   (A)   When, during the course of a rental housing inspection or
complaint investigation, the inspector encounters or observes a condition or
conditions that are considered dangerous to life, safety, health, or the
welfare of the occupants, the inspector shall, if the situation warrants,
issue a substandard property condition citation.



   (B)   Prior to, or immediately after, the issuance of the
substandard property condition citation, the inspector will be required to
notify the city of the posting and the reason for the posting.



   (C)   The inspector shall have the authority to require immediate
evacuation of the premises in the event of immediate danger to life or safety.



   (D)   The removal or defacing of, or tampering with, a substandard
property condition citation posting shall be punishable as a criminal offense
and subject to the provisions of state statutes regulating misdemeanors and
as outlined in this chapter.



   (E)   The property shall remain unoccupied until such time as the
condition is, or conditions are, corrected and satisfactorily reinspected.



§ 116.185  APPEALS.



   Any person aggrieved by an order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the code official or housing inspector pursuant to this
chapter may, within ten days of the decision, appeal to the Board of Appeals
in accordance with §§ 116.165et seq.



§ 116.186  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   At the discretion of the city, property owners and/or tenants found to
be in violation of any of the following provisions may be subject to both
civil and/or misdemeanor criminal charges.



   (A)   No license. Allowing the occupancy of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit prior to the issuance of a rental housing license and payment of
the license inspection fee.



   (B)   Over occupancy. Permitting a dwelling unit or rooming unit
that is occupied by more persons than the dwelling unit or rooming unit is
certified for.



   (C)   Improper occupancy. All buildings or portions thereof occupied
for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes that were not designed or
intended to be used for such occupancies shall be considered substandard.



   (D)   Occupying vacated unit. Occupies or allows occupancy of a unit
that was posted and ordered vacated.



   (E)   Occupying uncertified bedrooms. Occupies or allows occupancy
of a room as a bedroom that is not certified as a bedroom and does not
qualify as a bedroom.



   (F)   Tampering or non-functioning smoke detector.



      (1)   Disabling smoke detector. Any occupant, owner or manager
of a dwelling or rooming unit who willfully disables a smoke detector or
causes it to be non-functioning is guilty of a misdemeanor. If the unit is
occupied by more than one tenant, each tenant shall be held accountable.



      (2)   Notification. The occupant of a dwelling or rooming unit
must notify the owner or manager of the unit within 24 hours of discovering
that a detector is not functioning. The owner or manager shall take immediate
action to render the detector operational or replace it.



Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Criminal. A violation of any provision of this chapter is a
misdemeanor. The maximum penalty is 90 days jail and/or $1,000 fine. Each day
the property is in violation is a separate violation.



   (B)   Civil. Whenever it is determined by the code official that any
property upon inspection there is found alleged violations, a correction
notice shall be issued to the owner or designated representative. Such
alleged violations must be corrected, reinspected and verified by the code
official for compliance with this chapter within the time period as set forth:



      (1)   Smoke detector violations. Corrections must be completed
immediately and reinspected within three working days.



      (2)   All other violations. Preparations for the actual work
for correcting the alleged violations shall be commenced immediately and work
re-inspected within 25 working days or within the time period as specified by
the code official.



      (3)   (a)   Penalties. The following penalties shall be
imposed upon the property owner(s) if the alleged violations are not
corrected and verified by the code official within the time period allowed by
this chapter:



         (b)   Fine.  Fifty dollar fine. An additional charge of
$50 per day commencing on the day that the alleged violation or violations
continue after the expiration of the specified reasonable consideration
period as established by this chapter and extending thereafter until the
violation or violations are verified by the code official.



      (4)   Extensions. Extensions may be granted by the code
official. The request shall be made in writing and justifiable cause is
demonstrated for the requested extension. All requests shall be made and
delivered to the code official prior to the expiration date of the violation
or violations.



      (5)   Orders after an appeal. After any order of the code
official or the housing appeals board made pursuant to this ordinance becomes
final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or
refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any
such order is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to fines as stated in
this code or as specified by the Appeals Board.



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   GENERAL OFFENSES




CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Disorderly conduct and vagrancy



   130.02   Firearms



   130.03   Curfew for minors



§ 130.01  DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND VAGRANCY.



   (A)   Disorderly conduct.  The performance of any of the following
acts without authority of law by any person or persons is hereby declared to
be disorderly conduct:



      (1)   Willfully disturbing any assembly or meeting not
unlawful in its character, or the peace and quiet of any family or
neighborhood;



      (2)   Using or exhibiting profane, threatening, vulgar,
indecent, or abusive or insulting language, conduct, or behavior in or about
any public building, store, or place of business or upon the streets, alleys,
or sidewalks of the city so as to be audible or offensive;



      (3)   Frequent or loiter about any place soliciting any person
for the purpose of committing a crime against nature or other lewdness or
himself or herself lewdly exposing his or her person or any open and gross
lewdness or lascivious behavior, or any act of public indecency; and/or



      (4)   To congregate with others on a public street or highway
or other public places and to obstruct access to or from any building or
place, or to obstruct a free passage of others and refuse to move on or make
way when ordered to do so by any law enforcement officer.



   (B)   Loitering.



      (1)   A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or
prowls in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding
individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons
or property in the vicinity.  Among the circumstances which may be
considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the
person takes flight upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify
himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or
any object.  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it
impractical, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under
this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which
would otherwise be warranted, by requesting the person to identify himself or
herself and to explain his or her presence or conduct.  No person shall be
convicted of an offense under this section if the police officer did not
comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the
explanation given by the person was true and, if it had been believed by the
police officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.  Any police
officer may arrest any person suspected of being a loiterer or prowler
without a warrant if it reasonably appears that the delay in arresting the
suspect caused by obtaining a warrant would result in the suspect's escape.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being
warned by a police officer, or where a “no loitering” sign or signs have
been posted, to loiter, stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public or quasi-
public sidewalk, street, curb, cross-walk, walkway area, mall or that portion
of private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct
unreasonably the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon.  It shall
be unlawful for any person to block, obstruct, or prevent free access to the
entrance to any building open to the public.



      (3)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACEhas the
following definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:  an area generally visible to public view, including
streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots,
automobiles (whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general
public, including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment,
and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds
enclosing them.



   (C)   Disorderly conduct and loitering prohibited.  Disorderly
conduct or vagrancy, as hereinbefore described, is hereby prohibited and any
performance of the above described acts shall constitute a misdemeanor.



   (D)   Effective date.  This section shall be in effect from and
after its adoption and publication according to law.



(Ord. 83, passed 8-3-1974)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.02  FIREARMS.



   (A)   Discharge of firearms prohibited. No person shall discharge a
firearm on public or private property, a lawn, park, playground, orchard, or
other ground appurtenant to a school, church, or an inhabited dwelling, the
property of another, or a charitable institution.



   (B)   Exceptions.  This section shall not prohibit the firing of a
military salute or the firing of weapons by persons of the nation's armed
forces acting under military authority, and shall not apply to law
enforcement officials in the proper enforcement of the law, or to any person
in the proper exercise of the right of self defense, or to any person
otherwise lawfully permitted by proper federal, state or local authorities to
discharge a firearm in a manner contrary to the provisions of this section.



   (C)   If any of the above provisions are found to be in conflict
with M.S. § 624.717, as it may be amended from time to time, the provisions
of that statute shall prevail.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.03  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The curfew for minors established by this section
is maintained for four  primary reasons:



      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors
committed during the curfew hours;



      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail
during the curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;



      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs
during the curfew hours; and



      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EMERGENCY ERRAND.  A task that if not completed promptly
threatens the health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the
minor’s household.  The term shall include, but shall not be limited to,
seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law
enforcement or fire department personnel, and seeking shelter from the
elements or urgent assistance from a utility company due to a natural or
human-made calamity.



      OFFICIAL CITY TIME.  The time of day as determined by reference
to the master clock used by the Police Department.



      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT, OR REFRESHMENT.  Those
places that include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades,
shopping malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.



      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY.  The person who is responsible
for providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the
minor.  The person providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not
be another minor.



      SCHOOL ACTIVITY.  An event which has been placed on a school
calendar by public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned
event.



   (C)   Hours.



      (1)   Minors under the age of 16 years.  No minor under the
age of 16 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in
or upon places of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment; nor in or upon
any vacant lot, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following
day, official city time.



      (2)   Minors ages 16 years to 18 years.  No minor of the ages
of 16 or 17 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in
or upon places of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment; nor in or upon
any vacant lot, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following
day, official city time.



   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor.  Nothing in
this section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until
the curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody
of the minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the
control of the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.



   (E)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this section shall not apply
in the following situations:



      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian,
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;



      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the
direction of his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;



      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this
section if in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a
lawful business, trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling
directly to or from the location of the business, trade, profession, or
occupation and the minor’s residence.  Minors who fall within the scope of
this exception shall carry written proof of employment and proof of the hours
the employer requires the minor’s presence at work;



      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an event which has been officially designated as a school activity
by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or
traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, school, religious institution,
or similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor and with the
permission of the minor’s parent, guardian, or other adult person having
the primary care and custody of the minor;



      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course
of interstate travel during the hours of curfew;



      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or
from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free
speech, freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion;



      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence
or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not
complain to the city’s designated law enforcement provider about the
minor’s presence; and/or



      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is
otherwise legally emancipated.



   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor.  No parent,
guardian, or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor
shall permit any violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.



   (G)   Duties of other persons.  No person operating or in charge of
any place of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor
to enter or remain in his or her place of business during the hours
prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian, or other adult person having primary care or custody of the
minor, or unless one of the exceptions to this section applies.



   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this
section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was
present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused
to leave.



   (I)   Affirmative defense.  A law enforcement officer must look
into whether a minor has an affirmative defense before making an arrest.



Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS





         151.   SWIMMING POOLS





         152.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS





         153.   ZONING CODE




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section




Adoption of State Building Code




   150.01   Application, administration, and enforcement



   150.02   Permits and fees



   150.03   Code adoption



   150.04   Effective date



 



   150.98   Violations




ADOPTION OF STATE BUILDING CODE




§ 150.01  APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION, AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   This application, administration, and enforcement of the code
shall be in accordance with Minn. Rules, Chapter 1300, as it may be amended
from time to time.  The code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial
limits permitted by M.S. § 16B.62, Subd. 1, as it may be amended from time
to time, when so established by this subchapter.



   (B)   The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the
City of Cologne Building Department.



   (C)   This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified
Building Official designated by this municipality to administer the code
(M.S. § 16B.65, Subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time).  This
municipality shall require any personnel enforcing building codes within this
jurisdiction to be certified by the State of Minnesota Building Codes and
Standards, Commissioner of Administration.



(Ord. 123A, passed 4-7-2003)



§ 150.02  PERMITS AND FEES.



   (A)   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in M.S. § 16B.62, Subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code
in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the municipality.  In
addition, a state surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for
work governed by this code in accordance with M.S. § 16B.70, as it may be
amended from time to time.



(Ord. 123A, passed 4-7-2003)



§ 150.03  CODE ADOPTION.



   (A)   The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to
M.S. §§ 16B.59 through 16B.75, as they may be amended from time to time, is
hereby adopted as the building code for this municipality.  The code is
hereby incorporated in this subchapter as if fully set out herein.



   (B)   The Minnesota State Building Code includes the following
chapters of Minnesota Rules, as they may be amended from time to time:



      (1)   1300, Administration of the Minnesota State Building
Code;



      (2)   1301, Building Official Certification;



      (3)   1302, State Building Code Construction Approvals;



      (4)   1303, Minnesota Provisions;



      (5)   1305, Adoption of the 2000 International Building Code;



      (6)   1306, Special Fire Protection Systems;



      (7)   1307, Elevators and Related Devices;



      (8)   1309, Adoption of the 2000 International Residential
Code;



      (9)   1311, Adoption of the 2000 Guidelines for the
Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings;



      (10)   1315, Adoption of the 2002 National Electric Code;



      (11)   1325, Solar Energy Systems;



      (12)   1330, Fallout Shelters;



      (13)   1335, Floodproofing Regulations;



      (14)   1341, Minnesota Accessibility Code;



      (15)   1346, Adoption of the Minnesota State Mechanical Code;



      (16)   1350, Manufactured Homes;



      (17)   1360, Prefabricated Structures;



      (18)   1361, Industrialized/Modular Buildings;



      (19)   1370, Storm Shelters (Manufactured Home Parks);



      (20)   4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code; and



      (21)   7670, 7672, 7674, 7676, and 7678 Minnesota Energy Code.



   (C)   This municipality may adopt by reference any or all of the
following optional chapters of Minnesota Rules, as they may be amended from
time to time:  chapter 1306, Special Fire Protection Systems, and chapter
1335, Floodproofing Regulations, parts 1335.0600 through 1335.1200.



   (D)   This municipality may adopt by reference Appendix Chapter K
(Grading) of the 2001 Supplements to the International Building Code.



   (E)   The following optional provisions are hereby adopted and
incorporated as part of the building code for this municipality:  chapter
1306, Special Fire Protection Systems.



(Ord. 123A, passed 4-7-2003)



§ 150.04  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall become effective upon approval and publication.



(Ord. 123A, passed 4-7-2003)



§ 150.98  VIOLATIONS.



   A violation of the code is a misdemeanor (M.S. § 16B.69 and Minn.
Rules, Chapter 1300, as they may be amended from time to time).



(Ord. 123A, passed 4-7-2003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 151:  SWIMMING POOLS



Section



   151.01   General provisions



   151.02   Permit required



   151.03   Application for permit



   151.04   Construction setback requirement



   151.05   Safety fence required



   151.06   Miscellaneous requirements



   151.07   Retroactivity



   151.08   Violations



   151.09   Effective date



§ 151.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   Private swimming pools are regulated by this chapter and are defined as
follows:  Any enclosure, designed or intended or used for the containment of
water, whether constructed below ground level or above ground level, having a
surface area exceeding 100 square feet and depth exceeding 18 inches which is
designed, intended, or used for swimming, wading, or other recreational use
by the owner or tenant of the property upon which the pool is constructed or
by their family or invited guests without payment of a fee.



(Ord. 122, passed 4-2-1990)



§ 151.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No swimming pool shall be constructed or established and no pool
construction shall be commenced in the City of Cologne without first
obtaining a building permit and swimming pool permit.



(Ord. 122, passed 4-2-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Application for a swimming pool permit shall be made to the
Zoning Administrator upon forms provided by the Building Inspector.  The fee
will be determined annually by the City Council.



   (B)   The application for the permit shall include, without
limitation, the following information:



      (1)   Complete plans and specifications for the construction
of the pool;



      (2)   A site plan showing the location of all structures on
the lot, including the house, garage, fences, trees, overhead or underground
wiring, utility easements, and other significant improvements or natural
features;



      (3)   The proposed location of pumps, filters, electrical
power source (it applicable), flushing and drainage outlets, and other
operational features; and



      (4)   Location and specifications of protective fencing.



(Ord. 122, passed 4-2-1990)



§ 151.04  CONSTRUCTION SETBACK REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Generally.  Private swimming pools shall be constructed so as
to avoid hazard or damage to the occupants of the subject property or the
occupants of adjacent property and shall meet the following minimum
requirements.



   (B)   Specifically.



      (1)   Setback.  No pool shall be located within 18 feet
(measured horizontally) from any underground or overhead utility line of any
kind.



      (2)   Easements.  No pool shall be located within any public
or private utility easement, ingress, or egress easement, drainage way,
marsh, or other location in which it will represent a threat to the natural
environment.



      (3)   Accessory structures.  Swimming pools are accessory
structures in all residential districts.



      (4)   Electrical.  All electrical installations shall comply
with current building, electrical, and other applicable state and local codes.



(Ord. 122, passed 4-2-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.05  SAFETY FENCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Fence required.  A fence, so as to inhibit climbing, six feet
in height shall completely enclose the pool.  All openings or points of
entry into the pool area shall be equipped with gates or doors.  All gates
and doors shall have a latch which shall be so constructed and so placed as
to be inaccessible to small children.  All gates and doors shall be latched
when the pool is not in use.  Any opening between the bottom of the fence
and the ground shall not exceed three inches.  All fencing shall not have a
distance of more than three inches between slats or sections.



   (B)   Walls.  The wall of any pool constructed above ground level,
regardless of the height thereof, shall not qualify as a safety fence.



(Ord. 122, passed 4-2-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.06  MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Nuisance.  The conduct of persons and the operation of pools
shall be the responsibility of the owner and the tenant thereof and the
conduct of persons and operation of the pool shall be done in a manner so as
to avoid any nuisance or breach of the peace, and it shall be unlawful to
allow loud noises to go beyond the boundaries of the property upon which the
pool is located to adjacent property.



   (B)   Drainage.  All back flushing water or pool drainage water
shall be directed onto the property of the owner, or onto approved drainage
ways.  Drainage onto public streets or other public drainage ways shall
require a permit from the Building Inspector.



   (C)   Lighting.  Any outdoor lighting of the pool shall not be
permitted to spill or shine upon adjacent properties.



   (D)   Filling.  The filling of pools from fire hydrants or other
public facilities is prohibited without prior approval of the Director of
Public Works.



(Ord. 122, passed 4-2-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.07  RETROACTIVITY.



   All residential swimming pools existing on 4-2-1990 shall comply with
§ 151.05.



(Ord. 122, passed 4-2-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.08  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor by state law and subject to the penalties thereof.



(Ord. 122, passed 4-2-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.09  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall take effect and be in force upon and publication as
required by law.



(Ord. 122, passed 4-2-1990)



CHAPTER 152:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   152.001   Name



   152.002   Purpose



   152.003   Definitions



   152.004   Subdivision approval required



   152.005   Applicability



   152.006   Conformance with comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance



   152.007   Platting required



   152.008   Exceptions to platting



   152.009   Deadline for action



   152.010   Installation of public improvements



   152.011   Installation of private improvements



   152.012   Site grading



   152.013   Dedication and acceptance of public improvements



   152.014   Building permits and certificates of occupancy



   152.015   Park land dedication



   152.016   Planned unit development




Sketch Plan




   152.030   Sketch plan required



   152.031   Application and submittal requirements



   152.032   Administrative review



   152.033   Planning Commission review



   152.034   City Council action




Preliminary Plat Procedures




   152.045   Application and fee



   152.046   Distribution to other agencies



   152.047   Public hearing/Planning Commission review



   152.048   City Council approval




Final Plat Procedures




   152.060   Final submittal



   152.061   Certificate of abstract



   152.062   Review and approval



   152.063   Recording




Specifications for Plats




   152.075   Information required



   152.076   Supplemental information required



   152.077   Qualifications governing approval of a preliminary plat




Subdivision Design Standards




   152.090   Streets



   152.091   Intersections



   152.092   Alleys



   152.093   Easements



   152.094   Blocks



   152.095   Lots




Subdivision Improvements




   152.110   Required improvements



   152.111   Payment, improvement contract, financial guarantee



   152.112   Construction plans and as-builts




Administration and Enforcement




   152.125   Authority



   152.126   Building permits



   152.127   Variances



   152.128   Amendments



 



   152.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.001 NAME.



   This chapter shall be known as: Ordinance No. 141, City of Cologne
subdivision ordinance except as herein referred to as this chapter.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.002  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to:



   (A)   Protect and promote public health, safety and general welfare.



   (B)   Protect the natural resources in the city.



   (C)   Promote orderly and efficient land development patterns.



   (D)   Provide adequate land dedication through the subdivision
process for public recreation.



   (E)   Create a well planned pattern of corridors in the city for the
extension and connection of public streets, public utilities, private
utilities and pedestrian ways.



   (F)   Establish minimum standards for the construction of public
improvements.



   (G)   Establish minimum design standards for platting of land in the
city.



   (H)   Ensure that the costs of new development are borne by
benefitted properties and not the community at large.



   (I)   Protect existing and future investments and property values.



   (J)   Promote a variety of housing styles and quality living
environments in the city.



   (K)   Protect and promote the compatibility of land uses.



   (L)   Implement the Cologne comprehensive plan.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.003  DEFINITIONS



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Other
words not included in this section will have the meaning defined in the
Minnesota State Statutes. Other words not so defined shall the meaning
customarily associated with them.



   ALLEY  A right-of-way designed to serve as a secondary access to the
side or rear of lot.



   BLOCK.  The enclosed area within the perimeter of roads, property
lines or boundaries of the subdivision.



   BOULEVARD.  The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb
line and the property line.



   BUTT LOT.  A lot at the end of a block and located between two corner
lots.



   CITY.  The City of Cologne.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The governing body of the City of Cologne.



   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT.  A subdivision development planned and
constructed so as to group comprehensive plan housing units into relatively
tight patterns while providing a unified network of open spaces and wooded
areas, and meeting the overall density regulations of this chapter and the
zoning ordinance.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  A compilation of policy statements, goals,
standards and maps  indicating the general locations recommended for the
various functional classes of land use, places and structures, and for the
general physical development of the city.



   CONTOUR MAP.  A map on which irregularities of land surface are shown
by lines connecting points of equal elevations. CONTOUR INTERVAL is the
vertical height between contour lines.



   CORNER LOT.  A lot bordered on at least two sides by streets.



   COUNTY.  Carver County, Minnesota.



   COUNTY BOARD.  The Carver County Board of Commissioners.



   COVENANTS.  Restrictions, usually recorded, which govern uses and
dimensional standards of land or structures or both.



   CUL DE SAC.  A local street which has no connection to other streets
and includes a terminus designed to allow the convenient reversal of motor
vehicles in one continuous movement.



   DESIGN STANDARDS.  The requirements and specifications for the
preparation of plats,  planned unit developments, private improvements to
land and public improvements, including but not limited to streets,
pedestrian ways and utilities.



   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS.  Lots which have a front line abutting on one
street and a back or rear line abutting on another street.



   DRAINAGE COURSE.  A water course or indenture for the drainage of
surface water.



   EASEMENT  A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons
other than the owner.



   FINAL PLAT.  The final map or drawing of a subdivision meeting
requirements of this chapter and those of Carver County.



   FRONTAGE ROAD.  A local street parallel to and adjacent to a highway
or major thoroughfare, designed to provide direct access to land in lieu of
direct access to the land from highways or major thoroughfares.



   LOT.  A unit of a platted subdivision of land or registered land
survey having frontage on a public street.



   METES and BOUNDS.  A description of real property which is not
described by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by
starting at a known point and describing the bearings and distances of the
lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineates a fractional
portion of a section, lot or area by described lines or portions thereof.



   OUTLOT.  A remnant parcel created in the platting process which is
intended for public use, protected open space or future replatting, but it is
not created for private development.



   OWNER.  A person or legal entity having title or rights to the title
of land.



   PARK.  Public land in the city utilized for active or passive
recreational purposes or natural resource management.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY.  A public right-of-way or easement across or within a
block, to be used by pedestrians.



   PLAT.  A map or drawing which graphically delineates the boundary of
land parcels for the purpose of identification and record of title. The plat
is a recorded legal document and must conform to all Minnesota State Laws.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT.  The preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating
the proposed layout of a subdivision of land.



   PRIVATE STREET .  A street serving as vehicular access to two or more
parcels of land which is not dedicated to the public but is owned by one or
more private parties.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Land dedicated for public use, including but not
limited to streets, pedestrian ways and authorized utilities.



   SKETCH PLAN.  A drawing showing the conceptual subdivision of property.



   STREET.  A public way for vehicles and pedestrians.



   SUBDIVISION.  The division of any parcel of land into two or more
parcels of land.



   ZONING ORDINANCE.  The City of Cologne zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.004  SUBDIVISION APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   No land may be subdivided or resubdivided in the city without formal
approval by the city, except in certain circumstances where the waiver of
approval is specifically excepted in this chapter.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.005  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall apply to the subdivision or resubdivision of all
land in the city. No land in the city may be subdivided in a manner
inconsistent with this chapter. No permits for any improvements will be
issued on any land which has been subdivided in a manner inconsistent with
this chapter.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.006  CONFORMANCE WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ZONING ORDINANCE.



   The subdivision or resubdivision of land shall not be inconsistent with
the City of Cologne comprehensive plan or City of Cologne zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.007  PLATTING REQUIRED.



   No conveyance of land shall be permitted by metes and bounds
description or by reference to an unapproved registered land survey made
after April 21, 1961 or to any unapproved plat, except if the land described:



   (A)   Was a separate parcel of record April 1, 1945 or the date of
adoption of subdivision regulations under Laws 1945, Chapter 287, whichever
is later, or of the adoption of subdivision regulations pursuant to a home
rule charter;



   (B)   Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered into
prior to such time;



   (C)   Was a separate parcel of not less than 2-1/2 acres in area and
150 feet in width on January 1, 1966;



   (D)   Was a separate parcel of not less than five acres in area and
300 feet in width on July 1, 1980;



   (E)   Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of not
less than five acres and having a width of not less than 300 feet and its
conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more
lots or parcels, any one of which is less than five acres in area or 300 feet
in width;



   (F)   Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land of not
less than 20 acres and having a width of not less than 500 feet and its
conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more
lots or parcels, any one of which is less than 20 acres in area or 500 feet
in width.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.008  EXCEPTIONS TO PLATTING.



   A division of property, resulting in no more than two parcels, may be
allowed by metes and bounds description, provided the division is accompanied
with certificate of survey and monumentation, and further provided that the
resulting parcels and proposed uses are consistent with all other city
ordinances and requirements.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. 141-A, passed 7-17-2000; Ord. passed 4-
-2007)



§ 152.009 DEADLINE FOR ACTION.



   It is the intent of the city to comply with state requirements for
timely review and actions requiring formal approval by the city. Information
submissions and applications must be determined by the city to be complete
before a timeline for action is initiated. In the event the city cannot act
upon a request within a 60-day timeframe, the city will notify an applicant
in writing that action will be completed within 120 days of the date the
application was accepted by the city. In the event that multiple approvals
are involved in any action, such as zoning ordinance amendment, comprehensive
plan amendment, environmental review, preliminary plat and final plat, each
action shall require a separate, independent timeline for action.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.010  INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   No subdivision shall be approved prior to the approval or agreement for
the approval of plans, specifications, construction inspection and acceptance
of public improvements including but not limited to municipal water, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, streets, street lights, street signs trails and
sidewalks. All public improvements shall be designed according to standards
and specifications, approved by the city prior to installation and installed
by the subdivider.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.011  INSTALLATION OF PRIVATE UTILITIES.



   No subdivision shall be approved prior to the approval or agreement for
the approval of provisions for the installation of private utilities
including but not limited to gas, electric, telephone and cable TV. The
subdivider shall be responsible for the coordination and installation of
private utilities, subject to standards and procedures specified and approved
by the city.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.012  SITE GRADING.



   The subdivider shall prepare plans and specifications for site grading
prior to subdivision approval. Grading plans shall be consistent with city
requirements for wetland protection, woodland preservation, surface water
management and erosion and sedimentation control. The city may at its option
allow site grading prior to final plat approval, subject to grading plan
approval, preliminary plat approval and an executed development contract.
Approval of a site grading plan does not relieve the subdivider of any other
performance or commitments in seeking final plat approval.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.013  DEDICATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   Upon completion of the public improvements required in any subdivision
approval, the city shall make a final inspection of the public improvements.
Upon approval of the final inspection and recommendation of the City
Engineer, the City Council shall formally accept the public improvements for
public ownership.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.014  BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   The construction and acceptance of public improvements is required
prior to the issuance of building permits in any subdivision. The city may at
its option waive this requirement when the timing for the completion of
public improvements coincides with the timetable for construction of a
building for which a permit has been requested. This waiver is subject to a
written agreement between the permit applicant and the city. No certificate
of occupancy shall be granted for any structure, prior to the completion of
all required improvements and formal acceptance of all public improvements.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.015  PARK LAND DEDICATION.



   (A)   Required. Pursuant to M.S. § 462.358, Subd. 2(b), as it may
be amended from time to time, and except as otherwise provided in this
section, the city requires all owners, developers and subdividers, as a
prerequisite to the final approval of a plat, subdivision or development of
any land, to convey to the city, or dedicate to the public use (as determined
by the city), a reasonable portion of any such proposal for public use as
streets, roads, sewers, electric, gas and water facilities, storm water
drainage and holding areas or ponds, similar utilities or improvements,
parks, playgrounds, trails and open spaces, all to be approved and acceptable
to the city.



   (B)   Suitability of dedicated land.  Any land to be conveyed or
dedicated as a requirement of this section shall be suitable, in the city's
discretion, for its proposed use and shall be at a location convenient to the
people to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of proposed park
and recreation areas shall include size, shape, topography, geology, tree
cover, access and dedication.



   (C)   Park dedication requirements.  Except as otherwise provided
in this section, owners, developers and subdividers of land within the city
shall be required to dedicate (or convey in the discretion of the city) to
the city for park, playground and public open space purposes the following
minimum amounts of land, cash, or both, whichever the city, at its option,
shall require. The required dedication shall be made prior to the city's
release of the final plat for filing. Owners, developers and subdividers may
pay, however, the cash in lieu of park dedication at any time after the final
plat has been approved by the City Council. The City Council may, but need
not, allow any cash in lieu to be paid at the time of the issuance of
building permits provided a letter of credit in the amount of the aggregate
cash in lieu issued by a bank which can be drawn upon in the seven-county
metropolitan area or such other financial security in a form acceptable to
the City Attorney is provided by the developer or subdivider. The amount of
any required cash contribution shall be calculated in the manner set forth in
this section and shall be based on rates in effect as of the date of the
release of the final plat for filing.  For purposes of this division (C)
words such as, but not limited to, TOTAL ACREAGE, SUBDIVISION AREA, THE
PROPERTY IN THE PLAT, SUBDIVISION OR DEVELOPMENT, and THE PROPERTY BEING
PLATTED whenever such words appear in this section or any resolution or
policy adopted pursuant



thereto, shall mean the gross area of the plat, subdivision or development
except any undeveloped outlot in a final plat will be required to make
dedication pursuant to this section at such time as the outlot is developed,
subdivided or platted in the future.



      (1)   Residential dedications.



         (a)   Land shall be dedicated pursuant to the following
schedule, wherein density is calculated by considering the net developable
acreage which is the gross acreage less existing road easements or existing
road rights-of-way, surface waters, delineated wetlands, and 100-year
floodplain areas of the entire plat, subdivision or development being
considered. The dedication shall be subject to an increase over a base
required dedication of 10% of the gross acreage, calculated based on an
average density of three units per net acre consistent with the city's
comprehensive plan.



 


Dwelling Units Per Acre

 

Dedication Requirement






Less than 3.01

 

10% of subdivision gross acreage




3.01 to 4.00

 

10.25% of subdivision gross acreage




4.01 to 5.00

 

10.50% of subdivision gross acreage




5.01 to 6.00

 

10.75% of subdivision gross acreage




6.01 to 7.00

 

11% of subdivision gross acreage




7.01 to 8.00

 

11.25% of subdivision gross acreage




8.01 and up

 

11.50% of subdivision gross acreage





 



         (b)   A cash contribution in lieu of land dedication may
be required pursuant to the methodology determined in the city's park study,
which indicates a cash dedication fee of $2,311 per residential unit.



         (c)   The city may require the subdivider or developer
to make a combination cash and land dedication pursuant to the following
formula:



            1.   The city shall determine the amount of land
which would be required in accordance with this section.



            2.   From the total calculated under division
(C)(1)(c)1., above, of this section, the actual amount of land the city
determines to be needed to fulfill the purposes of this division (C)(1)(c)
shall be subtracted.



            3.   The balance arrived at under division
(C)(1)(c)2., above, of this section shall be converted into a cash
contribution in lieu of land dedication pursuant to a formula by which the
total number of residential units in the proposed development or subdivision
is prorated over the amount of land under division (C)(1)(c)1, above, and the
prorated portion of the residential units which would not be attributable to
the land excluded under division (C)(1)(c)2., above, of this section are
multiplied by the dollar amount per residential unit calculated under
division (C)(1)(b), above. In a multi-phase development, the city may revise
its calculation if the density approved in the preliminary plat is altered in
later phases. The cash dedication fee calculated in the manner set forth in
this subsection shall be revised in a multi-phase development as subsequent
final plats are approved to adjust for changes in the cash dedication fee
adopted by the city.



            4.   From the amount calculated under division
(C)(1)(c)3., above, of this section, if the city agrees that the subdivider
or developer shall install certain park improvements, the agreed upon value
of such park improvements shall be deducted.



         (d)   In the event of a court decision overturning or
reducing the cash dedication fees imposed, the city may, in the alternative,
calculate the cash dedication fee under division (C)(1)(c)3., above, by
multiplying the acreage determined in division (C)(1)(c)1., above, or
division (C)(1)(c)2., above, by the fair market value of the land at the time
of final plat approval, as determined by an appraiser retained by the city
who is licensed to practice in the State of Minnesota. If there is a limited
amount of sales data, the appraiser may consider sales in a reasonable area
outside of the city.



      (2)   Commercial and industrial dedication requirements.



         (a)   Land dedication, if required, shall be 7.5% of the
gross acreage of the plat, subdivision or development.



         (b)   If the city requires payment of fees in lieu of
land dedication, that fee shall be based upon the same percentage set forth
in division (C)(2)(a), above, multiplied by the acreage of the proposed plat,
subdivision or development, the product of which shall be multiplied by an
estimate of the fair market value of undeveloped commercial/industrial land
in the city, which estimate shall be determined by an appraiser retained by
the city who is licensed to practice in the State of Minnesota. If there is a
limited amount of sales data, the appraiser may consider sales in a
reasonable area outside of the city.



         (c)   If a combination of land and cash dedication is
made, the land dedicated will be deducted from the total park dedication land
requirement, and the balance of the required dedication acreage will be
multiplied by the current City Council estimate obtained pursuant to division
(C)(2)(b), above, to determine the amount of cash dedication.



         (d)   Any land dedicated in relation to a
commercial/industrial land development shall reduce the overall amount of
land required in the park study and any cash in lieu of park dedication for
commercial/industrial land development shall be placed in the fund described
in division (C)(4)(i), below, but shall be accounted separately and such
funds shall be used in the city's sole discretion to either:



            1.   Reduce cash dedication for park purposes for
residential development, or



            2.   Mitigate against future increases of cash
dedication for park purposes for residential development.



      (3)   Other land use dedication requirements.



         (a)   For other land use classifications, including land
use owned by a governmental subdivision, privately owned land that is
intended to be maintained or developed so as to contain at least 90% of the
gross subdivision in large park like areas opened to use by the public such
as a golf course or privately owned land that is intended to be maintained or
developed as a church and/or private school site land dedication shall be
7.5% of the gross acreage of the plat, subdivision or development, unless a
waiver is obtained pursuant to §§ 152.045et seq. herein.



         (b)   If the city requires payment of fees in lieu of
land dedication, that fee shall be based upon the same percentage set forth
in division (C)(3)(a), above, multiplied by the acreage of the proposed plat,
subdivision or development, the product of which shall be multiplied by an
estimate of the fair market value of undeveloped institutional land of the
type described in this subsection in the city, which estimate shall be
determined by an appraiser retained by the city who is licensed to practice
in the State of Minnesota. If there is a limited amount of sales data, the
appraiser may consider sales in a reasonable area outside of the city.



         (c)   If a combination of land and cash dedication is
made, the land dedicated will be deducted from the total park dedication land
requirement, and the balance of the required dedication acreage will be
multiplied by the current City Council estimate obtained pursuant to division
(C)(3)(b), above, to determine the amount of cash dedication.



         (d)   Any land dedicated in relation to an institutional
land development of the type described herein shall reduce the overall amount
of land required in the park study and any cash in lieu of park dedication
for institutional land development of the type described herein shall be
placed in the fund described in division (C)(4)(i), below, but shall be
accounted separately and such funds shall be used in the city's sole
discretion to either:



            1.   Reduce cash in lieu of dedication for park
purposes for residential development; or



            2.   Mitigate against future increases of cash in
lieu of dedication for park purposes for residential development.



      (4)   Miscellaneous requirements. The following requirements
apply to all dedications or conveyances for park, playground or public open
space purposes:



         (a)   PRD open space requirements. Any open space
included within a PRD shall not be given credit for park dedication purposes,
it being a fundamental term of the city's PRD ordinance that additional open
space within a PRD is one of the amenities provided by the owners, developers
and subdividers in exchange for increased density and variance from certain
provisions of the city's traditional residential zoning districts.



         (b)   Suitability of land. Land conveyed or dedicated
pursuant to the provisions of this section must be located outside of steep
slopes, wets or marginal soils, drainage ways, flood plains and ponding areas
after the site has been developed.



         (c)   Installation of improvements. As part of their
development contract or site plan responsibilities, owners, developers and
subdividers shall be responsible for making certain improvements to the
developments for park, playground and public open space purposes including,
but not limited to, finished grading and ground cover for all park,
playground and public open spaces within their developments.



         (d)   Sidewalks and trails. To ensure safe and efficient
pedestrian access throughout the city, a concrete sidewalk or bituminous
trail shall be constructed on at least one side of all streets within a
proposed subdivision. Sidewalks and trails shall be located and constructed
according to city specifications. The city at its sole discretion may modify
the sidewalk or trail requirements on certain streets if the city finds there
is limited public benefit or the city may exchange the requirement for the
location of certain sidewalks or trails within the development for the
construction of sidewalks or trails outside of the development that may link
the new subdivision to existing neighborhoods and existing sidewalk and trail
systems.



         (e)   Standards for location.



            1.   The Planning Commission shall develop and
recommend to the City Council for adoption standards and guidelines for
determining the geographic location of each park, playground and open space
in a development.



            2.   Such standards and guidelines may take into
consideration the zoning classification to be assigned to the land to be
developed, the particular use proposed for such land, the amenities to be
provided and the factors of density and site development as proposed by the
owner, developer or subdivider.



            3.   The Planning Commission shall further
recommend changes and amendments from time to time to such standards and
guidelines to reflect changes in the usage of the land which may occur,
changes in zoning classification and concepts, and changes in planning and
development concepts that relate to the development and usages to which the
land may be put.



         (f)   Planning Commission recommendations. The Planning
Commission shall, in each case, recommend to the City Council the total area
and location of such land the Planning Commission feels should be conveyed or
dedicated within the development for park or playground purposes.



         (g)   Acquisition of sites proposed on official map or
comprehensive plan. Where a proposed park, playground, open space or other
recreational area has been indicated on the official map and/or comprehensive
plan and is located in whole or in part within a proposed development or
subdivision, such proposed site shall be designated as such and be dedicated
(or conveyed) to the city.



         (h)   Density and open space requirements under zoning
regulations. Land area so conveyed or dedicated for park, playground and
public open space purposes may not be used by an owner, developer or
subdivider as an allowance for purposes of calculating the density
requirements of the development as set out in the city's zoning and
subdivision ordinances and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of open
space requirements for planned unit developments.



         (i)   Disposition of cash contributions. The City
Council shall establish a separate fund into which all cash contributions
received from owners, developers or subdividers in lieu of conveyance or
dedication of land for park, playground and public open space purposes shall
be deposited. The City Council shall establish separate budgeting and
accounting procedures for such fund and shall, from time to time, make
appropriation from such fund for acquisition of land for the purposes, for
developing existing parks, and for equipping new and existing parks and open
spaces. The amounts held in such fund shall not be used for maintenance of
parks, but may be used for the construction of park improvements.



      (5)   Determination of land type. The determination of whether
land is residential or commercial/industrial shall be based upon the zoning
of the particular land for which the dedication is required. If the property
is held in an open or agricultural land use, or the planning process is being
conducted while the land is outside the corporate limits of the city, the
zoning classification for the intended use shall be used for determining the
park dedication requirements.



      (6)   Waivers.  The park dedication requirement may be waived
by the City Council in connection with lands described in divisions (a), (b)
and (c), below, subject to the requirements of division (d), below, under
certain circumstances which include:



         (a)   Land owned by a government or governmental
subdivision and which land is or will be devoted to a public purpose.



         (b)   Privately owned land that is intended to be
maintained or developed so as to contain at least 90% of the gross
subdivision area in large park-like areas open to use by the public such as a
golf course.



         (c)   Privately owned land that is intended to be
maintained or developed as a church and/or private school site provided that
the owner, developer or subdivider of such site constructs, at its own cost,
on site park and open space improvements commensurate with the terms of this
section.



         (d)   Prior to approval of any such waiver, the owner,
developer or subdivider (public or private) must present to the city in
recordable form a covenant running with the land satisfactory to the city
wherein the owner, developer or subdivider agrees for itself, and its
successors and assigns, to make park dedication for the land according to
prevailing requirements at the time dedication is required in any of the
following circumstances:



            1.   Whenever public lands or uses or portions
thereof which are otherwise exempt become privately owned and do not or will
not meet the 90%  requirement set forth in this division, as measured at the
time of the covenant;



            2.   Whenever more than 10% of the gross
subdivision area of any privately owned property, as measured at the time of
the covenant, becomes developed so as to prevent the public by design or
implication from unrestricted access to the land; or



            3.   If the actual intended use of the land
changes, so as to be inconsistent with the types of public activities and
uses set forth in this subdivision.



   (D)   Trail corridor dedication and improvement.



      (1)   Required. Pursuant to M.S. § 462.358, Subd. 2(b), as it
may be amended from time to time, and except as otherwise provided in this
section, the city requires all owners, developers and subdividers, as a
prerequisite to the final approval of a plat, subdivision or development of
any land, to convey to the city, or dedicate to the public use (as determined
by the city), a reasonable portion of any such proposal for public use as
streets, roads, sewers, electric, gas and water facilities, storm water
drainage and holding areas or ponds, similar utilities or improvements,
parks, playgrounds, trails and open spaces, all to be approved and acceptable
to the city.



      (2)   Suitability of land for trail corridors. Any land for a
trail identified in the December 5, 2005, trail system fee study which is to
be conveyed or dedicated as a requirement of this section shall be suitable,
in the city's discretion, for its proposed use and shall be at a location
convenient to the people to be served. Factors used in evaluating the
adequacy of trail corridors shall include location, topography, geology, tree
cover and access. The width of the trail corridors shall be determined by the
city on a case-by-case basis.



      (3)   Trail dedication requirements. Except as otherwise
provided in this section, the owner, developer and subdivider of land within
the city shall be required to dedicate (or convey in the discretion of the
city) to the city for trail purposes certain minimum amounts of land, cash,
or both, whichever the city, at its option, shall require. If a trail
corridor identified in the December 5, 2005, trail system fee study crosses
any portion of the property to be platted, subdivided or developed, the trail
corridor must be dedicated or conveyed (in the city's discretion) for trail
purposes. The required dedication shall be made prior to the city's release
of the final plat for filing. The owner, developer and subdivider may,
however, pay the trail dedication fee at a time agreed upon with the city and
specified in a developer's agreement after the final plat has been approved
by the City Council.



         (a)   Residential dedications.



            2.   Dedication or conveyance. If any portion of a
trail corridor identified in the December 5, 2005, trail system fee study
crosses the land proposed to be platted, subdivided or developed, the city
may require that a corridor width (to be determined by the city on a
case-by-case basis) be either dedicated or conveyed (in the city's sole
discretion) to the city and may require that the owner, developer or
subdivider improve the portion of the trail corridor which is identified in
the trail system fee study. The city may require the owner, subdivider or
developer to make a combination cash and land dedication or conveyance in a
situation where a portion of the trail identified in the trail system fee
study would cross the property proposed to be platted, subdivided or
developed pursuant to the following formula:



               a.   The trail corridor does not lie within
or is not contiguous with a public right of way except a public right of way
abutting the rear yard of any residence.



               b.   The city shall determine the amount of
land which would be required in accordance with this section for trail
corridor purposes.



               c.   If the owner, developer or subdivider
conveys or dedicates a trail corridor to the city, the owner, developer or
subdivider shall be entitled to a credit, such amount being based on land
dedication values and credits established in the park dedication ordinance.



               d.   If the owner, developer or subdivider,
in addition to dedicating or conveying the trail corridor identified in the
trail system fee study, also constructs the improvements necessary for such
trail, in addition to the credit against trail fees outlined in division
(D)(3)(a)2.c., above, the owner, developer or subdivider shall be entitled to
an additional credit in an amount equal to the actual costs of trail
improvements constructed as approved by the City Engineer.



         (b)   Commercial and industrial dedication requirements.



            (1)   Cash contribution. The city may require a
cash contribution for the acquisition and improvement of trail corridors
identified in the December 5, 2005, trail system fee study pursuant to the
methodology outlined in the trail system fee study which indicates a cash
dedication fee of $.45 per foot of building floor area.



            (2)   Dedication or conveyance. If any portion of
a trail corridor identified in the December 5, 2005, trail system fee study
crosses the land proposed to be platted, subdivided or developed, the city
may require that a corridor width (to be determined by the city on a
case-by-case basis) be either dedicated or conveyed (in the city's sole
discretion) to the city and may require that the owner, developer or
subdivider improve the portion of the trail corridor which is identified in
the trail system fee study. The city may require the owner, subdivider or
developer to make a combination cash and land dedication or conveyance in a
situation where a portion of the trail identified in the trail system fee
study would cross the property proposed to be platted, subdivided or
developed pursuant to the following formula:



               a.   The trail corridor does not lie within
or is not contiguous with a public right of way except a public right of way
abutting the rear yard of any business.



               b.   The city shall determine the amount of
land which would be required in accordance with this section for trail
corridor purposes.



               c.   If the owner, developer or subdivider
conveys or dedicates a trail corridor to the city, the owner, developer or
subdivider shall be entitled to a credit, such amount being based on land
dedication values and credits established in the park dedication ordinance.



               d.   If the owner, developer or subdivider,
in addition to dedicating or conveying the trail corridor identified in the
trail system fee study, also constructs the improvements necessary for such
trail, in addition to the credit against trail fees outlined in division
(D)(3)(a)1., above, the owner, developer or subdivider shall be entitled to
an additional credit in an amount equal to the actual costs of trail
improvements constructed as approved by the City Engineer.



         (c)   Internal development trail requirements.



            1.   Nothing within this chapter shall be
construed to limit the ability of the city to require internal trails or
sidewalks within any land proposed to be platted, subdivided or developed.
Such internal trails or sidewalks shall be dedicated or conveyed to the city
(in the city's sole discretion) and all costs of such trail or sidewalk
improvements shall be borne by the owner, developer or subdivider and shall
not be subject to reimbursement from the city or credit against the trail fee
imposed herein.



            2.   The city requires a trail or sidewalk to be
constructed on at least one side of every street in each subdivision.
Exceptions to this requirement shall be at the sole discretion of the city. A
trail or sidewalk may also be required to be constructed between lots or
across private property to connect trails or sidewalks at dead end streets or
at midpoints within blocks exceeding 1,200 feet in length and to provide
access to park improvements required in the subdivision.



            3.   The owner, subdivider or developer may
construct either an eight feet wide bituminous trail or a five feet wide
concrete sidewalk (according to city specifications) as required in division
(D)(3)(c)2., above, except that the city may require bituminous trails in
those corridors identified in the trail system fee study.



         (d)   General requirements. The following requirements
apply to all dedications or conveyances for park, playground or public open
space purposes:



            1.   Standards for location.



               a.   The Park Board shall develop and
recommend to the City Council for adoption standards and guidelines for
determining the geographic location of each trail, playground and open space
in a development.



               b.   Such standards and guidelines may take
into consideration the zoning classification to be assigned to the land to be
developed, the particular use proposed for such land, the amenities to be
provided and the factors of density and site development as proposed by the
owner, developer or subdivider.



               c.   The Park Board shall further recommend
changes and amendments from time to time to such standards and guidelines to
reflect changes in the usage of the land which may occur, changes in zoning
classification and concepts, and changes in planning and development concepts
that relate to the development and usages to which the land may be put.



            2.   Park Board recommendations. The Park Board
shall, in each case, recommend to the City Council the total area and
location of such land the Park Board feels should be conveyed or dedicated
within the development for park or playground purposes.



            3.   Acquisition of sites proposed on official map
or comprehensive plan. Where a proposed trail has been indicated on the
official map and/or comprehensive plan and is located in whole or in part
within a proposed development or subdivision, such proposed site shall be
designated as such and be dedicated (or conveyed) to the city.



            4.   Disposition of cash contributions. The City
Council shall establish a separate fund into which all trail fees received
from owners, developers or subdividers shall be deposited. The City Council
shall establish separate budgeting and accounting procedures for such fund
and shall, from time to time, make appropriation from such fund for
acquisition of land for such purposes of developing trails. The amounts held
in such fund shall not be used for maintenance of parks, but may be used for
the construction of park improvements.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. 141-B, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 141-C, passed
12- -2005; Ord. passed 4- -2007)



Editor’s note:



   Original § 3.12 of the ordinance creating this chapter was repealed
and a new section was adopted on 12/20/2004 - Ordinance 141-B. Exception: The
park dedication requirements shall not apply to any subdivision, plat or
development which has received final plat approval from the city on or before
December 31, 2004. Additionally, the dedication requirements of subsection
(C) (1) of the ordinance creating this chapter shall not apply to the portion
of the Winkler Crossing subdivision for which the city has an agreement with
the developer to dedicate land and build an improved park.



   Section 3. 12D was added in December 2005 - Ordinance 141-C. Exception:
The residential dedication fee requirements of (3)(a) of the ordinance
creating this chapter shall not apply to any subdivision, plat or development
which has received final plat approval from the city on or before December
31, 2005.



§ 152.016  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Purpose.  A Planned Unit Development (PUD) is a subdivision
process established to allow variation from traditional development standards
identified in this chapter and the zoning ordinance. The process is intended
to allow flexibility in the development process in exchange for creative
design alternatives, greater variety and innovation in land uses and
structural appearances, larger expanses of parks and open spaces, more
extensive landscaping and higher protection of natural features and unique
resources. A PUD must be determined to be in the interest of and protect the
health safety and general welfare of the public. A PUD shall not be
misconstrued solely as a mechanism to waive requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Sketch plan.  The process to review and approve a PUD shall
be comparable to the platting process. A sketch plan shall be required to
initiate the formal review process.



   (C)   Concept PUD.  A Concept PUD shall illustrate the conceptual
development patterns for the entire site controlled by the subdivider. The
Concept PUD shall include details sufficient for preliminary plat review and
approval. Submitted requirements shall include the rationale for utilizing
the PUD process, identification of the ordinance requirements or standards
which may be subject to waiver, the special features of the development which
qualify it as a PUD, a written narrative of the proposed development and all
other requirements of the preliminary platting process. A public hearing,
Planning Commission recommendation and City Council approval is required for
all Concept PUDs. Approval of a Concept PUD shall constitute approval of a
preliminary plat.



   (D)   Final PUD.  A Final PUD must be prepared, received and
approved by the city. The Final PUD must include the entire site controlled
by the subdivider. The Final PUD must include final plat requirements for all
or a portion of the entire development site, consistent with the approved
Concept PUD. In addition, the Final PUD shall include:



      (1)   Zoning classifications requested.



      (2)   Site plans illustrating lot dimensions, minimum
structure setbacks, easements, parks, trails, sidewalks, common open spaces,
preservation areas, parking configurations and landscaping.



      (3)   Density and building area computations.



      (4)   Preliminary architectural styles for each building type,
including but not limited to floor plan, building elevations, unit
relationships, building materials and accessory uses.



      (5)   Development phasing and construction/occupancy schedules.



      (6)   Covenants and restrictions required for the maintenance
and operation of common areas, joint facilities and open spaces.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



SKETCH PLAN



§ 152.030  SKETCH PLAN REQUIRED.



   A division of property subject to the platting requirements of this
chapter shall require a sketch plan review.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.031  APPLICATION AND SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   Subdividers shall complete an application form provided by the city and
pay necessary fees established by resolution of the City Council to initiate
the sketch plan review process. Sketch plans shall include the following
information:



   (A)   Site location and description.



   (B)   Landowner, developer and ownership status.



   (C)   Site Acreage, natural features and easements of record.



   (D)   Current zoning and land use designation.



   (E)   Street layout and lotting concept.



   (F)   Density of proposed uses.



   (G)   Identification of proposed land uses.



   (H)   Typical lot easement and ROW dimensions.



   (I)   For PUD's, statements pertaining to the eligibility for PUD
consideration, a description of the design features of the PUD and the
identification of standards proposed to be varied.



   (J)   Identification of potential park land, open space preservation
areas and pedestrian ways.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.032 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   Three copies of a sketch plan shall be submitted to the City
Clerk's office for referral to the City Engineer and City Planner. Within ten
days of the referral, the City Engineer and City Planner shall comment on the
sketch plan's consistency with the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance and
availability of public utilities.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall notify the subdivider of the initial
findings and recommend one of the following:



      (1)   The subdivider may proceed to the preliminary plat
stage, because the sketch plan is consistent with city plans and ordinances.



      (2)   The subdivider may proceed to the preliminary plat
stage, because the subdivider accepts the recommendations of city staff to
proceed with preliminary platting.



      (3)   The subdivider must submit the sketch plan to the
Planning Commission and City Council for review and approval, because the
proposal involves a PUD or the subdivider does not accept the recommendations
of city staff in the administrative review.



      (4)   The subdivider may withdraw the request for sketch plan
approval, because of inconsistencies with city plans and ordinances.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.033  PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW.



   Ten copies of sketch plan shall be submitted to the City Clerk for
referral to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the
sketch plan and staff recommendations and determine the consistency of the
sketch plan with the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, city utility plans
and this chapter. The Planning Commission shall recommend that the City
Council approve the sketch plan, with or without revisions, or deny the
sketch plan.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.034  CITY COUNCIL ACTION.



   Five copies of the sketch plan shall be forwarded to the City Clerk for
referral to the City Council. The Council shall review the sketch plan, staff
recommendations and Planning Commission recommendations to determine the
consistency of the sketch plan with the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance,
city utility plans and this chapter. The City Council shall approve, modify
or deny the sketch plan.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURES



§ 152.045 APPLICATION AND FEE.



   The subdivider or owner shall file with the City Clerk 20 copies of the
preliminary plat and such supplementary information as may be required and an
application fee established by City Council resolution. In addition to the
application and fee, the subdivider shall be required to prepay all planning,
engineering, and legal expenses incurred by the city for the review of said
request, based on an estimate.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.046  DISTRIBUTION TO OTHER AGENCIES.



   The City Clerk shall refer copies of the preliminary plat to each of
the following agencies when appropriate: County Highway Engineer, State
Highway Engineer, School Board, City Engineer, the City Planner and the
Planning Commission, for review and report.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.047  PUBLIC HEARING/PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW.



   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary
plat after notice of the time and place thereof has been published once in
the official newspaper at least ten days before the day of the hearing, and
make recommendation on the plat to the City Council. Recommendations shall
include an approval of the plat, a denial of the plat or an approval of the
plat with revisions and conditions for final approval. Failure of the
Planning Commission to submit a recommendation to the City Council within 90
days of receipt of the completed application for preliminary plat shall
constitute approval by the Planning Commission, unless an extension of time
has been agreed upon by the city and subdivider.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.048  CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL.



   Upon recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall
act upon the preliminary plat. The City Council shall either approve, modify
or deny the plat.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



FINAL PLAT PROCEDURES



§ 152.060  FINAL SUBMITTAL.



   The owner or subdivider shall submit 20 copies of the final plat to the
city, incorporating all additions, changes or modifications required as
conditions of approval of the preliminary plat. In all other respects, it
shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved. The plat shall be complete
as to the information required under §§ 152.075et seq. and requirements of
Carver County.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.061  CERTIFICATE OF ABSTRACT.



   The owner or subdivider shall also submit an up-to-date certified
abstract of title or such other evidence as required by the City Attorney.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.062  REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   The City Clerk shall refer the final plat to the Planning Commission
for its review and recommendation. The recommendation shall be forwarded to
the City Council within 30 days of receipt of the plat. The City Council
shall act on the final plat within 60 days of its receipt provided all
improvement contract requirements have been satisfied according to §§
152.110et seq. The City Council shall either approve, modify or deny the
final plat.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.063  RECORDING.



   Upon approval of the final plat by the City Council, the subdivider
shall record the final plat with the County Recorder, as provided for by that
office, within 60 days after approval by the City Council. The subdivider
shall within 30 days of recording, furnish the City Clerk with one hard copy
of the final plat showing evidence of the recording. The city may also
require that the subdivider provide the city with plat information in digital
format.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



SPECIFICATIONS FOR PLATS



§ 152.075  INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   The plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
equals 100 feet, or larger, and shall contain the following information:



   (A)   Title of the proposed subdivision.



   (B)   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, surveyor or
engineer preparing the plat.



   (C)   Location of the subdivision by section, township, and range or
by legal description.



   (D)   Graphic scale, north arrow, date of preparation.



   (E)   The names of abutting subdivisions or landowners and boundary
or property lines of adjoining subdivided or unsubdivided lands.



   (F)   Boundary fine survey.



   (G)   Total acreage and acreage of individual lots in preliminary
plat.



   (H)   Location of existing easements, streets, utilities,
structures, section lines and corporate lines within and adjacent to the
proposed subdivision.



   (I)   If a replat, the original lot and block arrangements shown in
dotted or dashed fines.



   (J)   Streets, street names, right-of-way and roadway widths.



   (K)   Locations of all alleys, pedestrian ways and utility easements.



   (L)   Layout, numbers and dimensions of all lots and blocks.



   (M)   Areas intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use.



   (N)   Minimum front and side street setback lines as required by the
city zoning ordinance.



   (O)   High water, shoreland and floodplain boundaries where
appropriate.



   (P)   The location of all monuments.



   (Q)   Notarized certification by a registered land surveyor.



   (R)   Notarized certification by the owner or owners and by mortgage
holders.



   (S)   Certification showing that all taxes and special assessments
have been paid.



   (T)   A form for approval and for the signatures of the Planning
Commission Chairperson and Secretary and the Mayor and City Clerk.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.076 SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION REQUIRED .



   In addition to the plat, the following information shall be required
and filed with the preliminary plat.



   (A)   A topographic map at the same scale as the preliminary plat
showing proposed lot lines, existing and proposed topography, street
centerline grades, water courses, marshes, vegetation and other significant
features.



   (B)   Soil absorption tests where septic tanks are proposed, in
accord with the city sewer and water ordinance.



   (C)   A schematic utility plan for water, sanitary and storm sewers
and drainage and including the proposed location, gradient and size of such
proposed sewer and water lines.



   (D)   A map indicating plans for the development of the entire area,
if the proposed plat is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.077  QUALIFICATIONS GOVERNING APPROVAL OF A PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   The approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council shall
only constitute acceptance of the design as a basis for the preparation of
the final plat by the owners or subdividers. Subsequent approval by
appropriate officials having jurisdiction will be required of the proposals
pertaining to water supplies, storm drainage, sewage disposal, sidewalks,
grading, gradients and roadway widths and the surfacing of streets prior to
the approval of the final plat. The subdivider shall also present evidence
that the plat has been reviewed by and meets the requirements of those
responsible for the provision of gas, electric and telephone service.



   (B)   No plan will be approved for a subdivision which includes any
area subject to periodic flooding or which contains extremely poor drainage
capabilities which would make adequate drainage of the streets and lots
impossible, unless the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in
the opinion of the City Engineer, make the area completely safe for occupancy
and provide adequate street and lot drainage.



   (C)   All plats must be consistent with the comprehensive plan,
zoning ordinance and other applicable ordinances, except that certain
variations may be permitted under the planned unit development review process
or variance procedure.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 152.090  STREETS.



   (A)   Widths.  Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the
comprehensive plan and, where applicable, shall conform to county and state
standards for trunk highways. In general, minimum widths should be as follows:



      (1)   Freeways: 300 feet;



      (2)   Arterials: 150 feet;



      (3)   Collectors: 66-80 feet; and



      (4)   Local Streets: 50-60 feet.



   (B)   Horizontal alignment.  When connecting street lines deflect
from each other by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve
with a minimum radius of 300 feet for collector street and 100 feet for local
streets.



   (C)   Vertical alignment. Different connecting street gradients
shall be connected with vertical curves. Minimum sight distance shall be 200
feet for local streets an 300 feet for collector streets measured from points
five feet above the street centerline.



   (D)   Minimum and maximum grades.



 

Minimum
 
0.5%


Maximum
 
4% for collector streets


 
7% for local streets



 



   (E)   Minimum carrying capacity.  Seven-ton axle loading based on
traffic volumes for local streets and nine-ton axle loading for arterial and
collector streets.



   (F)   Local streets.  Local streets shall be laid out so that their
use by through traffic will be discouraged.



   (G)   Cul-de-sacs.  Maximum length: 700 feet. Minimum radius of
turnaround (right-of-way): 60 feet. Where certain topographic features or
other unusual circumstances dictate, special consideration may be given to
longer cul-de-sacs. Provisions must be made to loop watermains through
cul-de-sacs to avoid excessive dead end mains.



   (H)   Direct access to major thoroughfares.  In the case where a
proposed plat is adjacent to a freeway or arterial or collector street as
defined by the comprehensive plan, there shall be no direct access from
individual lots to such major thoroughfares.



   (I)   Half streets.  Half streets shall be prohibited except where
it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is subdivided, in which case the dedication of a half
street may be permitted. The probable length of time elapsing before
dedication of the remainder shall be considered in this decision.



   (J)   Private streets.  Private streets shall not be permitted,
except in areas where homeowner associations have been approved by the city,
nor shall public improvements be approved for private streets.



   (K)   Street names.  Street names shall comply with the city's
county street naming and numbering system.



   (L)   Stub streets.  Where adjoining lands are not subdivided, some
of the streets in the new subdivision shall be required to be extended to the
boundary fine of the tract to make provision for future access into adjacent
areas.



   (M)   Street continuation and extension.  The arrangement of
streets shall provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining
areas into new subdivisions where appropriate.



   (N)   Street location and dedication.  All subdivisions shall be
required to conform to the comprehensive plan. Arterials and collector
streets shown on the comprehensive clan shall be included in subdivisions,
unless waived by the city.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.091  INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   Angle of intersection.  Streets shall intersect as nearly to
90 degrees as possible. In no case shall streets intersect at less then 75
degrees.



   (B)   Number of streets.  No more than two streets shall cross at
any one intersection.



   (C)   Centerline offsets. The minimum distance between the
centerlines of offset intersections shall be 125 feet.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.092  ALLEYS.



   Alleys should have a minimum right-of-way width of 30 feet and shall
conform to the gradient requirements of local streets.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.093  EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Utilities.  Easements of at least 15 feet in width shall be
provided for utilities where necessary. Wider easements may be required,
based upon the size, number or depth of utilities. They shall have continuity
of alignment from lot to lot and block to block.



   (B)   Drainage.  Easements shall be provided along each side of any
water course to establish a storm sewer, drainage or floodway right-of-way.
Its boundaries shall conform substantially with the centerline alignment of
such water course.



   (C)   Protection. Protective or scenic easements shall be provided
to a depth of 50 feet from the high water line of all lakes, ponds, wetlands
and streams or to such logical natural/ecological boundary as can be agreed
upon by the owner and the city.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.094  BLOCKS.



   (A)   Arrangement. a block shall be so designed as to provide two
tiers of lots except where lots back onto a major street, natural feature,
railroad or subdivision boundary, in which case it may have a single tier of
lots.



   (b)   Length.  The maximum length of blocks shall be determined by
the city. Blocks greater than 1,200 feet in length may be required to provide
pedestrian ways near the center of the block.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.095  LOTS.



   (A)   Location.  All lots shall abut for their full frontage on a
publicly dedicated street.



   (B)   Size.  The lot dimensions shall be such as to comply with the
minimum lot areas specified in the zoning ordinance.



   (C)   Side lot lines.  Side lot lines shall be substantially at
right angles to straight street lines or radial to curve street lines.



   (D)   Water courses. Lots abutting upon a water course, drainageway,
channel, or stream shall have sufficient depth and width to provide a minimum
area of land not subject to flooding, consistent with equal to the minimum
lot dimensions specified in the zoning ordinance for the district in which
the lots are located.



   (E)   Drainage.  Lots shall be graded so as to provide drainage
away from building locations.



   (F)   Width related to depth.  To prevent narrow, deep lots, the
depth of a lot should not exceed 2-1/2 times the width as measured at the
building line.



   (G)   Double frontage lots.  Double frontage lots (lots with
frontage on two parallel streets) shall not be permitted except where lots
back to a major thoroughfare street. Such lots shall have an additional depth
of at least ten feet in order to allow for screen planting along the back lot
line.



   (H)   Corner lots.  Corner lots shall be platted at least 15 feet
wider than the minimum width required by the zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS



§ 152.110  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.



   Prior to final plat approval, the subdivider shall meet with the City
Engineer to discuss construction standards and specifications. In general,
all utility improvements shall meet or exceed the design standards published
by the Great Lakes Upper Mississippi River Management Board, commonly
referred to as the Ten State Standards. All street improvements shall meet or
exceed the design standards of the Minnesota Department of Transportation,
known as Standard Specifications for Construction, 1988 edition or current
for local streets. All construction activities and erosion and sedimentation
control techniques shall be consistent with the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency's Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas, commonly referred to as
best management practices. All stormwater treatment ponds shall be designed
and constructed consistent with the National Urban Runoff Program (NURP)
standards.



   (A)   Monuments.  Monuments of a permanent character shall be
placed at each corner or angle on the outside boundary of the subdivision.
Pipes or steel rods shall be placed at each corner of each lot and at each
intersection of street center lines.



   (B)   Streets and alleys.  All streets and alleys shall be graded
to their full width except in areas where tree cover and topography can and
should be preserved. All streets and alleys shall have an adequate sub-base,
and shall be improved with an all-weather permanent surface in accordance
with city design standards.



   (C)   Curb and gutter.  Permanent curb and gutter shall be
installed on both sides of each improved street dedicated in the plat.



   (D)   Water supply.  Municipal water service shall be required in
all subdivisions, according to city specifications.



   (E)   Sanitary sewer.  Municipal sanitary sewer service shall be
required in all subdivisions, according to city specifications.



   (F)   Storm drainage.  A system that will adequately take care of
the surface water runoff within the subdivision shall be provided including
storm sewers, drain inlets, manholes, culverts, etc., consistent with area
watershed and local management plans.



   (G)   Street signs.  Streets signs of a standard design approved by
the city shall be installed at each street intersection.



   (H)   Public utilities.  All utility fines for telephone,
electrical and other services shall be placed underground.



   (I)   Street lighting. Street lighting shall be required in all
subdivisions, according to city specifications.



   (J)   Pedestrian ways.  All walkways adjacent to streets or
otherwise defined by easements shall be improved to adequately accommodate
pedestrian traffic.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.111  PAYMENT, IMPROVEMENT CONTRACT, FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.



   (A)   Payment.  The required improvements, which are listed and
described above, are to be furnished and installed at the sole expense of the
subdivider and at no expense to the public. If any improvement installed
within the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to property beyond the
boundaries of the subdivision, the City Council may make provision for
causing a portion of the cost of the improvement, representing the benefit of
such lands, to be assessed against the same and in such case the subdivider
will be required only to pay for such portions of the whole cost of the
improvements which benefit the subdivision.



   (B)   Required improvement contract.  Prior to the installation of
required improvements and prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider
shall enter into a contract with the city requiring that the subdivider
furnish and construct improvements at his expense and in accordance with
plans and specifications to be approved by the city. The contract shall
stipulate the type and extent of the improvements to be constructed, the cost
of construction, the construction time schedule, the city's authority to
inspect the construction and the amount of the escrow deposit or surety to be
furnished in accordance with division (C).



   (C)   Financial guarantee.  Prior to the approval of the final
plat, the subdivider shall provide an escrow deposit, letter of credit or
other form of surety acceptable to the city, equal to the total construction
cost of the improvements as estimated by the City Engineer, and including the
cost of inspection and enforcement by the city. Any such deposit or surety
shall accrue to the city in case of default of the subdivider. The term of
any deposit or surety shall be specified by the city. Deposits shall be made
with the Treasurer of the city or with a responsible escrow agent acceptable
to the city. The city may agree to reduce the amount of any surety or deposit
for partial completion of, and payment for, the improvements for which the
surety or deposit has been made.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.112  CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND AS-BUILTS.



   (A)   Construction plans.  Construction plans for the required
improvements conforming in all respects to the standards of the city and the
applicable ordinances, shall be prepared at the subdivider's expense by a
professional engineer, registered in the State of Minnesota.



   (B)   As-builts.  Upon City Engineer's certificate of compliance,
the subdivider shall furnish the city with as-built drawings prepared by a
registered engineer showing the improvements as-built or in place.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)  Penalty, see § 152.999



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 152.125  AUTHORITY.



   The City Clerk or Building Inspector shall administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter and for the purpose of this chapter shall have the
power of a police officer.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.126  BUILDING PERMITS.



   No building permit shall be issued by any governmental official for the
construction of any building, structure or improvement on any land required
to be subdivided by this chapter until final plat approval has been granted
and required improvements have been completed and accepted by the city.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.127 VARIANCES.



   The Board of Appeals and Adjustments shall have the authority to grant
variances from the requirements of this chapter, subject to the same
procedures, conditions and findings required by the city zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.128  AMENDMENTS.



   The City Council may amend, supplement or repeal the provisions of this
chapter after a public hearing has been held by the Planning Commission. Such
amendment may be initiated by the Council, Planning Commission, or by
petition. A notice of time, place and purpose of hearing shall be posted and
published in the official newspaper of the city at least ten days prior to
the day of the hearing.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



§ 152.999  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be
punished to the maximum extent allowed by law. For each day the violation
continues, a separate offense shall be declared.



(Ord. 141, passed 7-7-1997, Ord. passed 4- -2007)



CHAPTER 153:  ZONING CODE



Section




General Provisions




   153.001   Name



   153.002   Purpose



   153.003   Definitions



   153.004   Rules of construction



   153.005   Scope and interpretation



   153.006   Lot provisions



   153.007   Nonconforming uses and structures



   153.008   Home occupations



   153.009   Single-family dwelling requirements



   153.010   Temporary dwellings



   153.011   Street access required



   153.012   Driveway and parking lot improvements



   153.013   Public utilities required



   153.014   Abandoned vehicles



   153.015   Relocated buildings or structures



   153.016   Accessory structures



   153.017   Site plan review required



   153.018   Structure setback provisions




Zoning Districts/Use Regulations




   153.030   Establishment of districts



   153.031   Zoning map



   153.032   Interpretation of the zoning map



   153.033   A Agriculture



   153.034   R-1 Single-family Detached Residential District



   153.035   R-2 Single-family Attached Residential District



   153.036   R-3 Multiple-family Residential District



   153.037   PUD Planned Unit Development



   153.038   C-1 Convenience Commercial District



   153.039   C-2 Central Business District



   153.040   C-3 General Commercial District



   153.041   I-1 Industrial Park District



   153.042   P/I Public/Industrial District



   153.043   Dimensional standards



   153.044   Parking requirements



   153.045   DO Downtown Overlay District



   153.046   SL Shoreland Overlay District



   153.047   Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings opt out




Performance Standards




   153.060   On-site sewage treatment standards



   153.061   Odors and emissions



   153.062   Dust and particulates



   153.063   Noise and vibrations



   153.064   Glare



   153.065   Waste



   153.066   Explosives



   153.067   Burning



   153.068   Bulk storage



   153.069   Outside storage



   153.070   Surface water management



   153.071   Wetland protection and management



   153.072   Woodland preservation



   153.073   Erosion and sedimentation control



   153.074   Seasonal mineral extraction



   153.075   Landscaping



   153.076   Fencing



   153.077   Sign regulations




Administration and Enforcement




   153.090   Variances



   153.091   Amendments, procedure



   153.092   Interim uses



   153.093   Fees and licensing



 



   153.999   Penalty



   Appendix A:     Privacy fence location



   Appendix B:     Decorative fences



   Appendix C:     Zoning map



   Appendix D:     Public hearing application form



   Appendix E:     The Village at Cologne PUD



   Appendix F:     Front elevation requirements



   Appendix G:     The Village Market PUD standards



Editors’ note:



   This chapter incorporates amendments from the following ordinances:
150A, 150B, 150C, 150 D, 150E, 150F, 150G, 150H, 150I, 150J, 150K, 150L,
150M, 150N, and 150O. The final update was made in March 2007.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.001  NAME.



   This chapter shall be known as Ordinance No. 150, City of Cologne
zoning ordinance, except that herein it shall be referred to as this chapter.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.002  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to:



   (A)   Protect and promote public health, safety and general welfare.



   (B)   Protect the natural resources in the city.



   (C)   Establish land use patterns and development regulations
consistent with the City of Cologne comprehensive plan.



   (D)   Prevent overcrowding of land.



   (E)   Limit congestion and promote safety in the public
rights-of-way.



   (F)   Prevent the premature demand of public services



   (G)   Stage development consistent with the efficient provision of
public utilities and public services.



   (H)   Maintain the small town character and quality of living in the
community.



   (I)   Establish compatibility of land uses in the city to protect
existing investments and property values.



   (J)   Promote opportunities for cohesive and compatible business
development.



   (K)   Establish guidelines and regulations to promote housing
variety and quality living environments.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Other
words not included in this section shall have the meaning defined in the
Minnesota State Statutes. Other words not so defined shall the meaning
customarily associated with them.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING.  A subordinate building or structure on the same
lot with a principal or main building.



   ACCESSORY USE.A use on the same lot with the principal use or building
that is incidental, subordinate and customary to the principal use or
building.



   AGRICULTURE.  The use of land for agricultural purposes, including
farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, agricultural product storage,
animal and poultry husbandry and accessory uses and buildings.



   ALTERATIONS.  Any modification, additions, or change in construction
or type of occupancy; any enlargement of a building, either horizontally or
vertically; or the moving of a structure from one location to another.



   ANIMALS, DOMESTIC.  Fish, dogs, cats, birds, small reptiles and other
similar customary household pets.



   ANIMALS, FARM.  Cattle hogs, horses, sheep, goats, rabbits, chickens
and other animals kept primarily for dairy and meat production or the
breeding of such animals.



   ANIMALS, WILD  and EXOTIC.  Animals other than domestic and farm
animals customarily found in the wild, such as bears, wolves and tigers.



   APARTMENT.  A room or suite of rooms, including bath and kitchen
facilities, in a multiple-family building designed for occupancy by a single
family.



   APARTMENT, ACCESSORY.  An apartment that is secondary and incidental
to a principal use or building.



   BASEMENT.  A portion of a building located partly underground, having
more than 50% of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground. Split level, split entry and earth sheltered homes shall be
construed to satisfy basement requirements.



   BOARD.  The Board of Appeals and Adjustments of the City of Cologne.



   BOATHOUSE.  Means a structure designed and used solely for the storage
of boats or boating equipment.



   BUILDING.  Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals or chattel, and when said structure is divided
by party walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated
shall be deemed a separate building.



   BUILDING HEIGHT.  The distance between the average ground level at the
building line and the highest point of the roof for flat roof, to the deck
line of a mansard roof or to the highest height of a gable on a pitched or
hipped roof.



   BUILDING LINE.  That line measured across the width of the lot at the
point where the main structure is placed in accordance with setback
provisions.



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.  A building in which is conducted the main or
primary use of the lot on which it is located.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Cologne.



   CLEARCUTTING.  The removal of an entire stand of trees.



   CLUSTER HOUSING.  The grouping of single-family dwellings within a
specified area while maintaining the same overall allowable density in that
same area.



   COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of the City of Cologne.



   COMMISSIONER.  Means the commissioner of the Department of Natural
Resources.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  A compilation of policy statements, goals,
standards and maps for guiding the physical, social and economic development
of the city and including a land use plan, a community facilities plan and a
transportation plan which has been prepared and adopted by the City of
Cologne.



   DAYCARE FACILITY.  A state-licensed daycare facility, as defined in
M.S. Chapter 462, as it may be amended from time to time, in a single-family
residential district or a state-licensed daycare facility serving no more
than 16 persons in a multiple-family residential district.



   DECK.  A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached
railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally
related to a principal use or site.



   DENSITY.  The number of dwelling units residing upon, or to be
developed upon, a gross acre of land or other specified unit of measurement.



   DISTRICT, ZONING.  An area of land for which there are uniform
regulations governing the use of buildings and premises.



   DWELLING.  Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used
exclusively for residential purposes but not including rooms in motels,
hotels, nursing homes, boarding houses, nor trailers, tents, cabins or
trailer coaches.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED.  A dwelling unit, which is attached
to another dwelling by one or more common walls, designed for occupancy by
one family.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED.  A dwelling unit, which is not
attached to any other dwelling, designed for occupancy by one family.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES.  Public and private utilities required by the
resident and working population.



   FAMILY.  An individual, or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption, or a group of not more than five persons not so
related, living together as a single housekeeping unit using common cooking
and kitchen facilities.



   FLOOR AREA.  The sum of the gross horizontal area of the floors of a
building or dwelling unit, measured form the exterior walls, or from the
centerline of party walls separating buildings, excluding basements.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE.  Any accessory building or an accessory portion of a
principal building designed or used solely for the storage of motor vehicles,
boats and other personal belongings which are owned or used by the occupants
of the building to which it is accessory.



   HARDSHIP.  Means the same as that term is defined in M.S. Chapter 462,
as it may be amended from time to time.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  A gainful occupation conducted in a residential
building which is clearly secondary and incidental to the principal
residential use of the building and generates no appreciable increase in
traffic in the district. A home occupation shall be carried on only by the
dwelling's occupants. Retail sales and storage of stock shall be limited and
incidental to the principal home occupation.



   INTENSIVE VEGETATION.  The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a
contiguous clearing patch, strip, row, or block.



   KENNEL.  Any lot or premises for the sale, boarding or breeding of
dogs, cats or other household pets. KENNEL shall mean three or more animals
over six months of age.



   LOT.  A separate parcel, tract or area of land undivided by any public
street or approved private road, which has been established by plat, metes
and bounds subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, and which is
occupied by or intended to be developed for and occupied by a principal
building or group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for
a principal use and uses accessory thereto, including such open spaces and
yards as are designed and arranged or required by this chapter for such
building use or development.



   LOT AREA.  The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side
or rear lot lines, but not including any area occupied by the waters of lakes
or rivers or by street right-of-way.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot which has at least two contiguous sides abutting
upon a street.



   LOT LINE.  The lines bounding a lot as herein described.



   LOT OF RECORD.  A lot which is part of a subdivision or plat, an
auditor’s subdivision or a registered land survey or a parcel of land not
so platted, which has been approved by the city or meets the following
conditions:



      (1)   Was a separate parcel of record April 1, 1945 or the
date of adoption of subdivision regulations under Laws 1945, Chapter 287,
whichever is later, or of the adoption of subdivision regulations pursuant to
a home rule charter;



      (2)   Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered
into prior to such time;



      (3)   Was a separate parcel of not less than 2-1/2 acres in
area and 150 feet in width on January 1, 1966;



      (4)   Was a separate parcel of not less than five acres in
area and 300 feet in width on July 1, 1980;



      (5)   Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of
not less than five  acres and having a width of not less than 300 feet and
its conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more
lots or parcels, any one of which is less than five acres in area or 300 feet
in width;



      (6)   Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land
of not less than 20 acres and having a width of not less than 500 feet and
its conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more
lots or parcels, any one of which is less than 20 acres in area or 500 feet
in width.



   LOT, THROUGH.  A lot where opposite lot lines abut two parallel street
and which is not a corner lot.



   LOT WIDTH.  The width measured along the street frontage or the
building setback line.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or
40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more
square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning,
and electrical systems contained therein; except that the term includes any
structure which meets all the requirements and with respect to which the
manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary and
complies with the standards established under this chapter.



   MINERAL EXTRACTION.  The extraction of sand, gravel, rock or other
such material from the land.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  A self-propelled vehicle for personal or business use
as defined in M.S. § 169.01, as it may amended from time to time.



   NONCONFORMING USE.  A building or use of land which does not conform
to the regulations of the district or zone in which it is situated.



   OPEN SPACE.  Any unoccupied land space open to the sky.



   ORDINARY HIGH WATER LINE (OHWL).  A line delineating the highest water
level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave
evidence on the landscape. The ordinary high water mark is commonly that
point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to
terrestrial.



   PERFORMANCE  STANDARD.  A criterion established to control
appearance, noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and
explosive hazards, glare, heat, waste and other potential impacts generated
by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  A process to acquire rezoning and/or
variances from chapter requirements which includes the preparation of and a
commitment to the implementation of an approved plan.



   PLAT.  The drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing of
record pursuant to M.S. Chapter 505, as it may be amended from time to time,
and containing all elements and requirements set forth in applicable local
regulations adopted pursuant to M.S. § 462.358 and M.S. Chapter 505, as they
may be amended from time to time.



   PRINCIPAL USE or STRUCTURE.  The main use to which the premises are
devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY.  Any real property within the city which is
privately owned and which is not a public property as defined in this section.



   PUBLIC HEARING.  An official public meeting for which notice has been
published in the official newspaper.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Any street or highway and includes the entire width
between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes
of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or
facility.



   QUARTER-QUARTER SECTION.  A land area in the aliquot system
description of the United States Public Land System consisting of 1/16 of a
section (one square mile) of land, or approximately 40 acres in area.



   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY.  A state licensed residential facility, defined
by M.S. Chapter 462, as it may be amended from time to time, serving six or
fewer persons, in a single-family residential district and no more than 16
persons in a multiple family residential district.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A street, alley or easement permanently established for
the passage of persons and vehicles including the traveled surface of lands
adjacent that are formally dedicated to such usage.



   SEMIPUBLIC USE.  The use of land by a private, nonprofit organization
to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside
the regular constituency of the organization.



   SETBACK.  The minimum horizontal distance between a lot line and a
building line or use.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM.  A septic tank and soil absorption system or
other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system but only as
described and regulated by the city's land use regulations.



   SEWER SYSTEM.  Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force
main, and all other construction devices, appliances, or appurtenances used
for conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of
ultimate disposal.



   SHORE IMPACT ZONE.  Land located between the ordinary high water level
of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50% of the
structure setback.



   SHORELAND.  Land located within the following distances from public
waters:  1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or
flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a
floodplain designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is
greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved
are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for
lesser distances and when approved by the commissioner.



   SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE.  Any archaeological site, standing
structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the
National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of
Historic Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under
the provisions of M.S. § 307.08, as it may be amended from time to time. An
HISTORIC SITE meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either
register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after
review by the Minnesota state archaeologist or the director of the Minnesota
Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to
be significant historic sites.



   STEEP SLOPE.  Land where agricultural activity or development is
either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness
and the site's soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available
county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and
construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Where specific information is not available,
steep slopes are lands having average slopes over 12%, as measured over
horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, that are not bluffs.



   STREET.  A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of
access to abutting property.



   STREET LINE.  The legal line of demarcation between a street and
abutting land.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the
ground.



   SUBDIVISION. The separation of an area, parcel or tract of land under
single ownership into two or more parcels, tracts, lots, or long-term
leasehold interests where the creation of the leasehold interest,
necessitates the creation of street, roads, or alleys, for residential,
commercial, industrial, or other use or any combination thereof, except those
separations:



      (1)   Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots, or
interests will be twenty acres or larger in size and 500 feet in width for
residential uses and five acres or larger in size for commercial and
industrial uses;



      (2)   Creating cemetery lots; and



      (3)   Resulting from court orders, or the adjustment of a lot
line by the relocation of a common boundary.



   USE.  The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon
is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied of maintained
and shall include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to
the performance standards of this chapter.



   USE, PERMITTED.  A use that is permitted in the district under which
it is listed.



   VEHICLE.  Any vehicle which is self-propelled or designed to be pushed
or pulled and shall include, but not be limited to , automobiles, buses,
motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf
carts, campers, trailers, boats, planes and gliders.



   VEHICLE, ABANDONED.  Any vehicle as defined in this section, which
does not have lawfully affixed or attached thereto an unexpired state
registration or license plate or plates, or the condition of which is
wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or
discarded.



   WATER-ORIENTED.  A small, above-ground building or other improvement,
except accessory structure stairways, fences, docks, and retaining walls,
which, because of the or facility relationship of its use to a surface water
feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the
normal structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include
boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, and detached
decks.



   WETLAND.  Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems
where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is
covered by shallow water. For purposes of this definition, WETLANDS must have
the following three characteristics:



      (1)   Predominance of hydric soils;



      (2)   Are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at
a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and



      (3)   Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such
vegetation.



   YARD.  A required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided for herein.
The measurement of a yard shall be construed as the minimum horizontal
distance between the lot line and the building line.



   YARD, FRONT.  A yard extending along the full width of the front lot
line between side lot lines and extending from the abutting front street
right-of-way line to a depth required in the yard regulations of the district
in which such lot is located. On a corner lot the front yard shall abut both
street rights-of-way.



   YARD, REAR.  A yard extending along a side lot line between the front
and rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard regulations for the
district in which such lot is located.



   YARD, SIDE.  A yard extending along the full depth between front lot
line and rear lot line to a depth required in the yard regulations of the
district in which such lot is located. On a corner lot, the yard area
opposite each front yard shall be considered a side yard.



   ZONING DISTRICT.  See DISTRICT.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.004  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   For clarity and consistency in the understanding and application of
this chapter the following shall apply:



   (A)   Use of the masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter
genders unless otherwise specifically noted.



   (B)   Grammatical use of references made in the singular shall
include the plural and the plural shall include the singular, unless such use
or reference is otherwise specifically stated.



   (C)   Sentence construction or phraseology in the present tense, and
similarly, references in the future tense may include the present.



   (D)   The word SHALL is used to mean mandatory; whereas the word MAY
is permissive and does not imply obligation.



   (E)   Whenever in any zoning district a use is neither specifically
permitted nor specifically prohibited, the use shall be considered prohibited.



   (F)   The catchlines of the sections of this chapter are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section, and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern,
limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the
provisions of any sections.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.005  SCOPE AND INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Scope.  No structure, or part, thereof, shall be erected,
converted, enlarged, reconstructed, altered or moved without a permit
approved by the city. No structure or land shall be used for any purpose or
altered in any manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   Relationship to comprehensive plan  Interpretation and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter are intended to be consistent
with the implementation of goals, policies and land use elements of the
Cologne comprehensive plan to the extent practical or required by law. The
application of or amendments to this chapter which are determined to be
inconsistent with the comprehensive plan shall require amendments to the
comprehensive plan, this chapter or both.



   (C)   Minimum requirements.  In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general
welfare.



   (D)   Uses not identified.  Uses not specifically identified in
this chapter as permitted shall be prohibited. Amendments to this chapter
shall be required to allow any use which is not clearly permitted by right.



   (E)   Deadline for actions.  It is the intent of the city to comply
with state requirements for timely review and actions requiring formal
approval by the city. Information submissions and applications must be
determined by the city to be complete before a timeline for action is
initiated. In the event the city cannot act upon a request within a 60-day
timeframe, the city will notify an applicant in writing that action will be
completed within 120 days of the date the application was accepted by the
city. In the event that multiple approvals are involved in any action, such
as a site plan review requiring a variance or a zoning ordinance amendment
requiring a comprehensive plan amendment, each action shall require a
separate, independent timeline for action.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.006  LOT PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Lots of record.



      (1)   No lot of record shall be reduced in size below the
district requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   A lot of record shall be deemed a buildable lot even
though the lot area and/or dimensions are less than those required for the
district provided as follows:



         (a)   Evidence must be presented that the lot in
question met minimum requirements for the division of property under
ordinance regulations in effect at the time of the division of property.



         (b)   It fronts on a public street.



         (c)   Minimum requirements for primary and secondary
private sewage systems are met and the minimum setbacks from the water wells
can be maintained.



         (d)   The lot is within 70% of the minimum lot area and
lot width required.



      (3)   If two or more lots are in single ownership and if all
or part of the lots do not meet the width and area requirements of this
chapter, the contiguous lots shall be considered to be an undivided parcel
for the purpose of this chapter.



   (B)   One building per lot.  No more than one principal building
shall be located on a lot unless specifically permitted herein.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.007  NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.



   Any structure or use existing upon the effective date of the adoption
of this chapter which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter may
be continued subject to the following conditions:



   (A)   The nonconforming use is not expanded or enlarged, except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   If a nonconforming use is discontinued or a nonconforming
structure is abandoned for a period of one year, further use of the structure
or property must conform to this chapter.



   (C)   If a nonconforming use is replaced by another use, the new use
shall conform to this chapter.



   (D)   If a nonconforming use or structure is damaged by any cause to
the extent that repair or replacement costs exceed 50% of the market value,
the use or structure may not be replaced or repaired except in conformity
with this chapter.



   (E)   Normal maintenance of a nonconforming structure is permitted,
including necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations which
do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.008  HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   Home occupations in the city must meet the following criteria:



   (A)   Home occupations shall be conducted solely by persons residing
in the residence.



   (B)   All business activities and storage shall take place within
the structure.



   (C)   There shall be no alteration to the exterior of the
residential dwelling, accessory building or yard that in any way alters the
residential character of the premises.



   (D)   No sign, display or device identifying the occupation shall be
used without prior approval by the city.



   (E)   The occupation shall not be visible or audible from any
property line.



   (F)   The occupation may involve limited retail sale or rental of
products on the premises, provided all stock in trade is completely enclosed
in an approved structure.



   (G)   Unless completely enclosed within an approved structure, no
vehicle used in the conduct of the occupation shall be parked, stored or
otherwise present at the premises other than such as is customarily used for
domestic or household purposes.



   (H)   Only on-site off-street parking facilities typically
associated with a residence shall be used.



   (I)   The conduct of an occupation or the use of substances which
may be hazardous to or in any way jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of
neighbors and neighboring property shall not be permitted.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.009  SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING REQUIREMENTS.



   All single-family detached dwellings shall be constructed according to
the following minimum standards:



   (A)   All dwellings shall have a minimum width of 24 feet.



   (B)   All dwellings shall have a permanent frost-free foundation as
defined in the State Building Code. Split level, split entry and earth
sheltered homes shall be considered to comply with this requirement.



   (C)   Main roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 3:12 per definition
of the applicable building code.



   (D)   Roofs shall be shingled with asphalt, wood, tiles, sod or
other comparable materials as approved by the applicable building code.



   (E)   Metal siding, with exposed panels exceeding 16 inches in
width, shall not be permitted.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.010  TEMPORARY DWELLINGS.



   The use and occupancy of a tent, recreation vehicle or other temporary
dwellings for the purpose of living quarters is not permitted in the city.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.011  STREET ACCESS REQUIRED.



   Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot having
frontage on a public street, except as specifically permitted herein.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.012  DRIVEWAY AND PARKING LOT IMPROVEMENTS.



   All required ingress/egress points, driveways and parking areas shall
be paved with bituminous or concrete surfaces, according to minimum city
specifications, in all new residential developments and all new or modified
commercial and industrial uses.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.013  PUBLIC UTILITIES REQUIRED.



   All residential, commercial, industrial, public, institutional or other
uses which include plumbing facilities shall be connected to the public sewer
and water system.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.014  ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   It is unlawful for any person to park, store or leave any abandoned
motor vehicle upon any public or private property within the city, or for any
property owner or occupant to permit the parking, storing or leaving of any
abandoned vehicle upon such private property, unless such vehicle is within
an enclosed building or structure.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.015  RELOCATED BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.



   No existing building or structure may be relocated anywhere in the city
without a permit. A permit for the relocation of any building or structure
may not be issued without site plan approval by the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission shall not approve a site plan without certifying the
following:



   (A)   The building or structure is compatible in appearance, age and
character with existing buildings and structures in the area.



   (B)   The building or structure can meet all code requirements for
new buildings or structures.



   (C)   The building or structure is compatible with any other
buildings or structures existing on the same property.



   (D)   The building or structure meets all other requirements of this
chapter and any other city ordinances.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.016 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   (A)   General.  No accessory structure may be permitted on any
parcel without a principal structure. Accessory structures may not be located
within any public easement areas. No accessory structures may be located in
the required front yard (the area between the principal structure and the
public right-of-way). Corner lots have front yard areas abutting both public
rights-of-way.



   (B)   Site plan review and permit requirements.



      (1)   An administrative site plan review is required for the
construction, erection, or placement of all detached accessory structures not
exceeding 200 square feet in area. Any party intending to construct, erect,
or place such a structure on any property must present a sketch plan of the
property, including location of the principal structure and proposed location
of the accessory structure, to the City Clerk. The City Clerk or designee
shall promptly verify whether the proposed accessory structure meets the
requirements of this chapter, or whether additional review or permitting is
required. No site plan may be approved and no structure may be constructed
unless in conformity with the requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   A building permit application and approval is required
for all detached accessory structures exceeding 200 square feet in area. A
sketch plan, including the location of the principal structure and proposed
location of the accessory structure, shall be attached to the application.
The Building Official shall review and approve the permit application before
construction and shall inspect the construction according to established
procedures.



   (C)   Size limitations.



      (1)   Detached accessory structures shall not exceed an
aggregate total of 200 square feet; except, when no attached or detached
accessory structure exists on the property, or when only a single car
attached or detached accessory structure exists on property within the
Downtown Overlay District, the aggregate total of detached accessory
structures shall not exceed 1,000 square feet. No detached accessory
structure shall exceed 20 feet in height or contain more than one story.



      (2)   If an attached accessory structure is being removed or
converted to living space in order to construct a new accessory structure, a
building permit is required. Any conversion of an accessory structure to
living space shall include the removal of overhead doors, the replacement of
siding to match the principal structure, interior improvements that are
compatible with the principal structure, and the realignment of the existing
driveway when necessary and appropriate to serve a new accessory structure
and when such realignment is necessary aesthetically to be compatible with
the conversion of accessory space to living space.



   (D)   Setback requirements  No accessory structure may be located
in the required front yard in any zoning district. Accessory structures with
permanent foundations must meet the setback requirements of the principal
structure. Accessory structures built directly on the ground or without any
permanent foundation shall meet the following minimum setback requirements:



 

Residential Districts
 
Side yard: 5 feet


 
 
Rear yard: 10 feet


Non-residential Districts
 
Side/Rear yard: 1/2 the principal structure setback



 



   (E)   Design considerations.  All detached accessory structures in
excess of 150 square feet shall be compatible with the principal structure in
appearance, architectural style and building materials. A determination shall
be made during the site plan review process whether a new or realigned
driveway to the accessory structure is necessary and appropriate.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007; Ord. 150-V, passed
7-18-2016)



§ 153.017  SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIRED.



   For all zoning actions or permit applications, other than single-family
residential construction building permits and residential accessory
structures not exceeding 150 square feet, a site plan review is required.



   (A)   Submittal requirements.



      (1)   Boundary survey of parcel including identification of
all monuments.



      (2)   Scaled location of all buildings, structures, driveways,
sidewalks, trails, parking stalls and curbing.



      (3)   Scaled identification of all setback dimensions from
property lines.



      (4)   Scaled locations of all existing and proposed utilities
and easements.



      (5)   Scaled depictions of floor plans for each story.



      (6)   Scaled depictions of each building elevation and
descriptions of exterior building materials and color schemes.



      (7)   Scaled site grading plans, including erosion and
sedimentation control mechanisms and procedures.



      (8)   Scaled delineations of any shoreland, floodplain or
wetland areas on the site.



      (9)   Identification of any floodplain or wetland
encroachments and detailed mitigation plans.



      (10)   Detailed landscape plans, illustrating size, types and
locations of all materials, a description of site seeding or sodding, a
description of the timetable for site landscaping and the identification of
any irrigation systems.



      (11)   Detailed descriptions of any site fencing, including
type, location and height.



      (12)   All plans shall be dated and bear the preparer(s)
name(s), including professional registrations or certifications when
appropriate or required.



   (B)   Review requirements.



      (1)   Applicants shall submit 12 sets of site plans with a
required application form to the City Clerk for distribution. Site plans will
be evaluated for consistency with documentation requirements. Upon acceptance
of the application, site plans will be distributed to the appropriate city
entity for review and recommendation, according to § 153.005(E), above
(Deadline for Actions.) Application fees and reimbursement of the city's out
of pocket expenses shall be in accordance with § 153.093.



      (2)   Action to approve, modify or deny site plan applications
will be based upon consistency of the application with the city's
comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, other policies and official controls
and the compatibility of the proposed action with existing area land uses,
existing area investments and neighborhood character, capacity of public
streets and utilities and future planned land uses.



   (C)   Exceptions.  The city may waive certain submittal
requirements for residential variance applications, when it is determined
that submittal requirements are not applicable or are not necessary to
complete a review of the proposed action. The city may also waive certain
submittal requirements for other actions, when site plan information for the
subject property has previously been submitted to the city and may be more
appropriately supplemented with new information.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.018  STRUCTURE SETBACK PROVISIONS.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   Principal and accessory structure setback dimensions are
measured from property lines to the outer edge of the structure footing or
foundation. In the absence of permanent footings or foundations, the setback
shall be measured from the outer wall of a building or closest part of a
structure to the property line. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter
all structures shall meet the setback requirements established for principal
structures. No structure with permanent footings or foundations shall be
located within any public easement area.



      (2)   Structure setback requirements and dimensional standards
for all zoning districts are illustrated in § 153.043. Special requirements
for accessory structures are included in § 153.042. Special requirements for
fencing are included in § 153.076. Special requirements for signs are
located in § 153.077. Special requirements for structures located within
state shoreland areas are included in § 153.046.



   (B)   Yard areas.



      (1)   The yard area abutting public right-of-way shall be
considered the front yard. Corner lots shall have front yards abutting both
public rights-of-way.



      (2)   On corner lots, both yard areas opposite the public
rights-of-way shall be considered side yards.



      (3)   In any instance where a lot abuts parallel public
rights-of-way, the front yard shall be the area abutting the public
right-of-way where access is gained. The opposite yard area shall be
considered the rear yard.



   (C)   Exceptions.  The following are exceptions to structure
setback requirements:



      (1)   Roof overhangs, cornices, eaves, awnings, and similar
structural or architectural components, provided the encroachment is three
feet or less.



      (2)   Door steps, landings, unenclosed porches, and similar
features, provided the encroachment is five feet or less and any porch or
landing is no greater than 40 square feet in area.



      (3)   Cantilevered windows, greenhouses, or other enclosures,
provided the encroachment is three feet or less.



      (4)   Uncovered and unenclosed ground level decks or patios,
provided the encroachment is no more than 1/2 the principal structure side
yard and rear yard setback and no more than 1/3 the principal structure front
yard setback.



      (5)   Rear yard, uncovered and unenclosed decks, supported by
post footings and unenclosed around the post footings or below the deck,
provided the encroachment is ten feet or less. On corner lots with two front
yards and two side yards, a similar encroachment is allowed on the rear of
the principal structure or attached to the wall opposite from the side of the
principal structure where driveway access is gained.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



ZONING DISTRICTS/USE REGULATIONS



§ 153.030  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the City of Cologne is hereby divided
into the following zoning districts:



   (A)   A  Agriculture;



   (B)   R-1  Single-Family Detached Residential District;



   (C)   R-2  Single-Family Attached Residential District;



   (D)   R-3  Multiple-Family Residential District;



   (E)   PUD  Planned Unit Development District;



   (F)   C-1  Convenience Commercial District;



   (G)   C-2  Central Business District;



   (H)   C-3  General Commercial District;



   (I)   I-1  Industrial Park District;



   (J)   P/I  Public/Institutional District DO Downtown Overlay
District; and



   (K)   SO  Shoreland Overlay District.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.031  ZONING MAP.



   The locations and boundaries of the districts established by this
chapter are set forth on the zoning map of the City of Cologne, which is made
part of this chapter.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007; Ord. 150-T, passed
11-5-2012; Ord. 150-U, passed 3-17-2014; Ord. 150-V, passed 7-18-2016)



§ 153.032  INTERPRETATION OF THE ZONING MAP.



   Where due to the scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the zoning
map attached hereto, there is an uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to
the intended location of any zoning district boundary as shown thereon, the
City Clerk shall make an interpretation of the map upon request of any
person. Any person aggrieved by any such interpretation may appeal such
interpretation to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments. The Board of Appeals
and Adjustments, in interpreting the zoning map or deciding any appeal, shall
apply to the following standards:



   (A)   Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow lot
lines, or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, or along the centerlines of
streets, rights-of-way or watercourses, unless such boundary lines are fixed
by dimensions shown on the zoning map.



   (B)   Where zoning district boundary lines are so indicated that
they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be
such boundary lines.



   (C)   Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the
location of any such zoning district boundary line, unless indicated by
dimensions shown on the zoning map, shall be determined by the use of the map
scale shown thereon.



   (D)   Overlay district boundaries follow watercourses in a parallel
fashion or may be established according to a base elevation.



   (E)   If, after the application of the foregoing rules, uncertainty
still exists as to the exact location of a zoning district boundary line, the
boundary line shall be determined in a reasonable manner, considering the
history of uses of the property and the history of zoning ordinances and
amendments in Cologne as well as other relevant facts.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.033  A AGRICULTURE.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the A District is allow agricultural
activities as a transitional use of the land. The city has limited vacant
land for development and all land in the city is planned for eventual
non-agricultural uses. Because of the limited duration anticipated for
agricultural uses in the city and the incompatibilities which often exist
between agricultural and nonagricultural uses, permitted uses in the A
District will not reflect intensive commercial agricultural uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Farm dwellings at a density not exceeding one home per
40 acres.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



      (3)   Crop production and vegetable gardening.



      (4)   Produce stands for products raised on the premises.



      (5)   Tree nurseries and sod farms.



      (6)   Horses, livestock and fowl, not exceeding a density of
one horse or livestock animal per acre or three fowl per acre.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.034  R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  In addition to the purposes stated in § 153.002,
it is intended that the R-1 District provide for lower density traditional
single family detached dwelling opportunities in areas where public utilities
are available and required for service. The design and circulation of new
residential areas are also intended to be complimentary with and enhance the
community's small town atmosphere.



   (B)   Permitted uses and structures.



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



      (3)   Public parks and recreation facilities.



      (4)   Daycare facility.



      (5)   Residential facility.



      (6)   Home occupations.



   (C)   Special requirements.  All single-family residential
subdivisions shall be required to provide variety in lot sizes and housing
styles to promote a range of housing costs and opportunities for different
age groups. Each new development must provide at least 25% of the total
number of single-family detached dwelling lots with a minimum lot width of
120 feet (corner lots meeting this requirement must be at least 135 feet in
width.) Each development must also include at least seven different models of
homes, which are alternated throughout the development.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.035  SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  In addition to the purposes stated in § 153.002,
it is intended that the R-2 District provide for medium density single family
attached residential opportunities in areas where public utilities are
available and required for service. The design and circulation of new
residential areas are also intended to be complimentary with and enhance the
community's small town atmosphere.



   (B)   Permitted uses and structures.



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings.



      (2)   Single-family attached dwellings.



      (3)   Accessory uses.



      (4)   Public parks and recreation facilities.



      (5)   Daycare facility.



      (6)   Residential facility.



      (7)   Home occupations.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.036  MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  In addition to the purposes stated in § 153.002,
it is intended that the R-3 District provide for higher density single-family
attached residential owner occupied and rental housing opportunities in areas
where public utilities are available and required for service. The design and
circulation of new residential areas are also intended to be complimentary
with and enhance the community's small town atmosphere.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Single-family attached dwellings with more than four
dwelling units per building.



      (2)   Apartments or condominiums at a density not exceeding 16
units per acre.



      (3)   Accessory uses.



      (4)   Public parks and recreation uses.



      (5)   Daycare facility.



      (6)   Residential facility.



      (7)   Home occupations.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.037 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the PUD provisions is to encourage
high quality design standards for development and alternative subdivision
design techniques. Dimensional criteria of the city of Cologne zoning
ordinance districts may be modified or varied for PUD developments in
exchange for higher design standards, site preservation techniques,
extraordinary parkland development, pedestrian circulation, trails linkage to
other neighborhoods and community destinations, and other unique development
considerations. PUD review and approval is a discretionary action by the city
and the eligibility of a proposed development as a PUD shall be determined
solely by the city. Proposed variations from the dimensional standards of
this chapter shall only be approved when it is determined by the city that
such variations are commensurate with benefits to the planned neighborhood
and overall community. Such a determination shall include, but not be limited
to the following considerations:



      (1)   Master site planning and creative design in the proposed
development of the land and uses.



      (2)   Variety in housing styles and housing types and
provisions for life cycle and affordable housing opportunities.



      (3)   Architectural design components and controls for all
planned uses and structures.



      (4)   Protection and incorporation of unique natural features
into the overall planned community.



      (5)   Creation of larger expanses of usable public and private
open spaces, planned recreational facilities, and pedestrian accesses
throughout the proposed development.



      (6)   Landscaping plans for all proposed land uses, public and
private parks, open spaces when appropriate, major transportation corridors,
transition areas between land uses, and within screening and buffering areas.



      (7)   Appropriate screening and buffering of residential uses
from major transportation corridors and dissimilar land uses.



      (8)   Compatibility with the comprehensive plan.



      (9)   Consistency with existing goals and policies of the city.



      (10)   Compatibility with existing and potential development
patterns.



      (11)   Appropriate transitions between land uses to ensure
compatibility within and adjacent to the proposed development.



      (12)   Consistency with the general intent of the Cologne
zoning ordinance and strict compliance with the §§ 153.004 through 153.018
and §§ 153.060et seq.



      (13)   Private subdivision covenants necessary to guarantee
adherence to architectural standards, to implement master planning components
of the proposed development, and to satisfy required private and public area
maintenance provisions.



      (14)   Appropriate transportation access, circulation, design
and impact mitigation, including required improvements to adjacent roadways
serving the proposed development.



      (15)   Financial participation in off-site improvements
required to connect the proposed development to existing and planned
neighborhoods and existing and planned public utility and transportation
infrastructure.



   (B)   Permitted uses – Residential PUD.



      (1)   Single-family detached residences and single-family
attached residences and accessory uses.



      (2)   Multiple residential dwellings and accessory uses.



      (3)   Public parks and recreation facilities.



      (4)   Public buildings and facilities.



      (5)   Public and private schools and accessory recreational
facilities.



      (6)   Licensed daycare and residential facilities in
single-family attached and single-family detached residential areas
consistent with M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to
time.



      (7)   Licensed daycare and residential facilities in multiple
residential areas consistent with M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 8, as it may be
amended from time to time.



      (8)   Residential health care facilities.



      (9)   Home occupations.



      (10)   Permitted uses in the A Agriculture District, except
animal feedlots.



      (11)   Other uses specifically permitted in the approval of
the PUD.



   (C)   Permitted uses – Residential/Commercial Mixed Use PUD.



      (1)   Single-family detached residences and single-family
attached residences and accessory uses.



      (2)   Multiple residential dwellings and accessory uses.



      (3)   Public parks and recreation facilities.



      (4)   Public buildings and facilities.



      (5)   Public and private schools and accessory recreational
facilities.



      (6)   Licensed daycare and residential facilities in
single-family attached and single-family detached residential areas
consistent with M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to
time.



      (7)   Licensed daycare and residential facilities in multiple
residential areas consistent with M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 8, as it may be
amended from time to time.



      (8)   Residential health care facilities.



      (9)   Home occupations.



      (10)   Neighborhood commercial retail and service uses, not
inconsistent with the comprehensive plan, and not incompatible with area
residential land uses and transportation facilities serving the development,
including:



         (a)   Gasoline sales and accessory convenience retail
sales.



         (b)   Full service restaurants, cafes, and drive-through
restaurants.



         (c)   Off-sale and on-sale liquor.



         (d)   Video rentals and sales.



         (e)   Daycare centers.



         (f)   Dry cleaning, laundry, tailoring, hair salons and
similar household services.



         (g)   Small appliance, electronics, and household item
repair and service and accessory sales conducted wholly within principal
structures.



         (h)   Automobile service and accessory sales conducted
wholly within principal structures.



      (11)   Permitted uses in the A Agriculture District, except
animal feedlots.



      (12)   Other uses specifically permitted in the approval of
the PUD.



   (D)   Permitted uses – Commercial/Light Industrial Mixed Use PUD.



      (1)   Gasoline sales and accessory convenience retail sales.



      (2)   Retail sales and accessory services.



      (3)   Full service restaurants, cafes, and drive-through
restaurants.



      (4)   On-sale and off-sale liquor establishments.



      (5)   Family movie theaters.



      (6)   Hotels and motels.



      (7)   Professional offices.



      (8)   Hospitals and medical clinics.



      (9)   Funeral homes and mortuaries.



      (10)   Household service and repair businesses.



      (11)   Vehicle and equipment repair and service.



      (12)   Office/showroom sales and service uses.



      (13)   Building supply centers.



      (14)   Lawn and garden centers.



      (15)   Permitted uses in the A Agriculture District, except
animal feedlots.



      (16)   Other uses specifically permitted in the approval of
the PUD.



   (E)   Dimensional standards.  The dimensional standards applied to
lots, uses and structures within a PUD shall be established in the review and
approval process. The city shall have total discretion in establishing
dimensional criteria, and departures from the zoning ordinance standards
shall be based upon the level of site plan detail, architectural quality and
controls, overall master planning, utility and roadway capacity, neighborhood
and community benefit, public safety issues, and overall development controls.



   (F)   Special requirements.



      (1)   The minimum site area requirements for a residential or
residential/commercial mixed use PUD is 100 acres.



      (2)   The minimum site area requirements for a commercial/
light industrial mixed use PUD is 20 acres.



      (3)   An increase in the density allowed by the districts of
the zoning ordinance for any residential uses shall result in corresponding
increase in the amount or quality of the following:



         (a)   Group usable open space, recreational amenities,
and pedestrian ways.



         (b)   Architectural features, housing styles, and
housing variety.



         (c)   Landscaping, screening, and streetscape amenities.



         (d)   Environmental protection and controls.



         (e)   Site design and development control.



      (4)   The city shall determine whether open space provisions
and recreational amenities shall be publicly dedicated or privately owned and
maintained.



      (5)   Private open space and recreation areas and, specific
improvements on public property, such as landscaped medians or subdivision
monuments and design features within public rights-of-way, will require
covenants, restrictions, homeowner association agreements or other acceptable
mechanisms that guarantee perpetual private maintenance of private open
spaces, recreation areas, common areas, and other areas.



      (6)   Residential/commercial mixed use PUDs shall require
common or compatible street landscaping, street lighting, and parking lot
lighting throughout the development. The quality and amount of landscaping,
screening, and buffering between dissimilar uses shall be a major component
of all PUDs and subsequent site plan reviews.



      (7)   Architectural features and controls shall be a major
component of all PUDs and all mixed use PUDs will require compatibility of
architectural features between dissimilar uses.



      (8)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to approve or
permit variations in construction materials, craftsmanship, building codes,
electrical codes, plumbing codes, fire codes, design or construction of
public improvements, which in any way suggest substandard or inferior
development or construction.



   (G)   Process.  All PUDs requiring the subdivision of land shall
follow the platting requirements and PUD provisions of the Cologne
subdivision ordinance. Mandatory or discretionary review of the potential
environmental effects of the proposed development may be required prior to
the submission of Concept PUD and preliminary plat. A sketch plan PUD/plat
review and approval, Concept PUD/preliminary plat review and approval, and
Final PUD/final plat review and approval shall occur concurrently as
prescribed in the subdivision ordinance.



   (H)   Submittal requirements.  A sketch plan shall be prepared with
sufficient detail and information to illustrate the major features of the
proposed development and its eligibility as a PUD. Following sketch plan
review and approval by the City Council, PUD and platting information may be
assembled and combined in a single format, provided the platting submission
requirements of the Cologne subdivision ordinance and the following minimum
information are provided:



      (1)   Written narrative summarizing the proposed development
features and all proposed exceptions to or departures from conventional
development standards.



      (2)   Complete details of the proposed site development,
including locations of buildings, driveways, parking spaces, dimensions of
the parking spaces, dimensions of the lots, lot area and yard dimensions,
sidewalks, and trails.



      (3)   Open space and recreation plans illustrating all public
and private recreational amenities, facilities, and structures, including
trails.



      (4)   Circulation plans for proposed pedestrian and vehicle
traffic.



      (5)   Detailed plans for landscaping, screening, and buffering.



      (6)   Preliminary architectural plans, including the floor
plans and building elevations of proposed structures.



      (7)   Descriptions for exterior wall finishes proposed for all
principal and accessory structures.



      (8)   Calculations of gross and net residential densities for
each residential product.



      (9)   A two-foot contour map of the existing site, including
the depiction of existing uses and structures, and the delineation of all
wetlands, floodplains, and shoreland areas.



      (10)   A grading plan and erosion control plan consistent with
best management practices must also be submitted.



      (11)   Preliminary covenants and documents for a homeowners
association, condominium association, or other joint maintenance mechanism to
be approved by the city that includes:



         (a)   Ownership and membership requirements.



         (b)   Organization of the association.



         (c)   Time at which the developer turns the association
over to the members.



         (d)   Approximate monthly or yearly association fee for
members.



         (e)   Specific listing of items owned in common,
including such items as roads, recreational facilities, parking, common open
spaces, and utilities, and any public areas subject to association
maintenance.



      (13)   A development agreement shall be entered into with the
city to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of an approved PUD.
Such an agreement shall include the uses permitted in the PUD, the details of
waivers or departures from conventional dimensional standards and other
ordinance requirements and all other special conditions and features of the
PUD. Such an agreement shall include all other standard provisions of
development agreements required by the city to assure ordinance conformance
and financial guarantees.



   (I)   Required actions.



      (1)   Sketch plan.  The Planning Commission shall recommend
either approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the PUD sketch
plan. Such recommendation shall be based upon the determination that the
proposed development either may qualify as a PUD and appears to be capable of
satisfying the provisions and requirements of the PUD District or the
proposed development does not qualify as a PUD. The City Council shall
consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission and either approve,
approve with modifications, or deny the PUD sketch plan. Such action shall be
based upon the determination that the proposed development either may qualify
as a PUD and appears to be capable of satisfying the provisions and
requirements of the PUD District or the proposed development does not qualify
as a PUD.



      (2)   Concept PUD.  The Planning Commission shall recommend
either approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the Concept PUD.
Such recommendation shall be based upon the determination that the proposed
development either qualifies as a PUD and will satisfy the provisions and
requirements of the PUD District or the proposed development does not qualify
as a PUD and does not satisfy the provisions and requirements of the PUD
District. The City Council shall consider the recommendations of the Planning
Commission and either approve, approve with modifications, or deny the PUD
sketch plan. Such action shall be based upon the determination that the
proposed development either qualifies as a PUD and will satisfy the
provisions and requirements of the PUD District or the proposed development
does not satisfy the provisions and requirements of the PUD District and the
proposed development does not qualify as a PUD.



      (3)   Final PUD.



         (a)   A Final PUD shall be submitted with the final
plat, containing final development plan details and required modifications.
All phased developments shall require a Final PUD submitted with each
subsequent final plat. The Final PUD shall contain final architectural plans
for all uses and detailed site plans for all non-single family detached
residential uses. The Final PUD shall not be inconsistent with the approved
Concept PUD, except as modified and approved by the city.



      (b)   The Planning Commission shall recommend either approval,
approval with modifications, or denial of the Final PUD. Such recommendation
shall be based upon the determination that the Final PUD is consistent with
the approved Concept PUD, modified appropriately, or inconsistent with the
approved Concept PUD. The City Council shall either approve, approve with
modifications, or deny the Final PUD. Such action shall be based upon the
determination that the Final PUD is consistent with the approved Concept PUD,
modified appropriately, or inconsistent with the approved Concept PUD.



   (J)   Zoning amendment and zoning map.



      (1)   Upon approval of a PUD and completion of the procedures
required for amending zoning classifications, the land within a PUD may be
zoned PUD. Alternatively, all or portions of a PUD which conform to the
district dimensional standards and district uses of the zoning ordinance may
be assigned specific zoning district classifications. The PUD District
classification shall imply that approved PUD uses and dimensional standards
are in conformance with the Cologne zoning ordinance. Each amendment to the
zoning ordinance establishing a PUD District shall include an amendment to
the Cologne zoning map, illustrating the amended zoning classification, and
an appendix, illustrating the uses permitted within the development, the
amended dimensional standards for each use, and other performance standards
pertinent to the approved PUD.



      (2)   Subsequent uses and structural improvements within a
PUD, including but not limited to new uses, building additions, and site plan
revisions, shall conform to the approved uses and approved development
standards within the approved PUD. The city may at its discretion interpret
such new uses and revisions to be consistent with the approved PUD or at its
discretion may require an amendment to the PUD. Any amendment to a PUD shall
follow the procedures established in this section to review and approve a PUD.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.038  C-1 CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  In addition to the purposes stated in § 153.002,
it is intended that the C-1 District provide limited convenience commercial
uses near major intersections and residential neighborhoods. It is also the
purpose of the C-1 District to minimize the impacts which may exist between
dissimilar land uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  Self-service gasoline station and
convenience store.



   (C)   Special requirements.



      (1)   Except for gas pumps, all operation shall be conducted
within the principal building.



      (2)   No automobile service, repair, maintenance, sale or
storage shall be permitted.



      (3)   Where abutting a residential district, a screen wall or
fence eight feet in height and having 90% opacity shall be required along the
common property line between the uses.



      (4)   Parking and maneuvering areas shall be paved and curbed.



      (5)   The site shall be planned so as not to allow water from
a permitted car wash to run into a public street or accesses thereto. A
drainage system shall be installed subject to the approval of the city.



      (6)   Pump islands and canopies shall conform to yard
requirements or a minimum of 30 feet from a street right-of-way whichever is
greater.



      (7)   Parking for employees, customers and stacking shall be
provided in accordance with other provisions of this chapter.



      (8)   Artificial lighting shall be accomplished so as to have
no direct light source visible from a public street or a residential district.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.039  C-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  In addition to the purposes stated in § 153.002,
it is intended that the C-2 District provide for the unique layout and
character of a traditional central business district with retail and
professional office functions and other mixed uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Retail sales conducted within structures, but excluding
automobile and motorized equipment sales, truck stops, gasoline and fuel
sales, drive-through restaurants and adult-oriented businesses.



      (2)   Repair and service conducted within structures, but
excluding automobile and motorized equipment repair.



      (3)   Professional and business offices.



      (4)   Legal, nonconforming residences and accessory uses.



      (5)   Accessory apartments.



      (6)   Theaters and recreational businesses conducted within
structures, but excluding adult-oriented businesses.



      (7)   Daycare centers.



      (8)   Cabinet making and sales showroom.



   (C)   Interim uses.



      (1)   Tractor trailer parking.



      (2)   Masonry construction trade business and showroom.



      (3)   Churches and pre-schools in renovated pre-existing
commercial structures, located on A-Minor Arterial Highways as depicted on
figure four of the City of Cologne 2030 Comprehensive Plan.



      (4)   Used automobile sales as an accessory use to legal
nonconforming automobile body repair businesses.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007; Am. Ord. 150-Q, passed
10-5-2009; Am. Ord. 150-R, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 153.040  C-3 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  In addition to the purposes stated in § 153.002 ,
it is intended that the C-3 District provide opportunities for retail and
service business uses which require larger development sites, highway
visibility or highway access.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Retail sales and service, but excluding adult-oriented
businesses.



      (2)   Automobile and motorized equipment sales and service.



      (3)   Farm implement sales and service.



      (4)   Building supply sales and storage yards.



      (5)   Daycare centers.



      (6)   Funeral homes and mortuaries.



      (7)   Hotels and motels.



      (8)   Wholesale distribution.



      (9)   Full service gasoline sales and service.



      (10)   Accessory apartments in structures built prior to 1990.



      (11)   Agricultural service businesses.



      (12)   Rental storage buildings (mini-storage).



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007; Ord. 150-T, passed
11-5-2012)



§ 153.041  INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  In addition to the purposes stated in § 153.002,
it is intended that the I-1 District provide opportunities for light
manufacturing and industrial uses, trade businesses, machine shops and other
more extensive land uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Business and professional offices.



      (2)   Machine and repair shops.



      (3)   Construction trade offices and yards.



      (4)   Manufacturing, warehousing, distribution, processing,
packaging, assembly and research uses, except waste management.



      (5)   Adult-oriented business.



      (6)   Motor vehicle service and repair.



   (C)   Special requirements.



      (1)   The storage of supplies, products, vehicles, equipment
or other materials shall be kept indoors unless totally screened from public
rights of way and adjacent properties.



      (2)   Adult-oriented businesses are regulated by city of
Cologne ordinance 135.



      (3)   The maximum height allowable for structures accessory to
principal uses, such as towers, spires, chimneys, agricultural elevators and
blending equipment, and similar accessory structures, is 90 feet.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007; Ord. 150-S, passed
8-16-2010)



§ 153.042  P/I PUBLIC/INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  In addition to the purposes stated in § 153.002,
it is intended that the P/I District provide opportunities for government
facilities, schools, churches, hospitals, libraries and other similar public
and institutional uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Government buildings, structures, facilities, utilities,
rights-of-way, easements, parks, open spaces and vacant land.



      (2)   Schools, churches, cultural and educational facilities
and uses, libraries, hospitals and health facilities.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.043  DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.



   Minimum lot area, width, and setbacks, and maximum density, height, and
lot coverage are listed for all zoning districts below. Front yards exist on
both sides of corner lots that abut public rights-of-way. Special
requirements for accessory structures are included in § 153.016. Special
requirements for fencing are included in § 153.076. Special requirements for
signs are located in § 153.077. Special requirements for structures located
within State shoreland areas are included in § 153.046.



 


District

 

Lot Area

 

Lot Width2

 

Max. Density3

 

Front Yard4

 

Side Yard5

 

Rear Yard6

 

Max. Height

 

Lot Coverage7





Ag
 

40 acre

 

300 ft

 

1/40 acre

 

50 ft

 

50 ft

 

50 ft

 

50 ft

 

N/A



R-1
 

10,000 sf

 

90 ft

 

3/acre

 

30 ft

 

10 ft

 

30 ft

 

30 ft

 

25%



R-2
 

6,000 sf1

 

100 ft

 

6/acre

 

30 ft

 

10 ft

 

30 ft

 

35 ft

 

50%



R-3
 

2,720 sf1

 

120 ft

 

16/acre

 

30 ft

 

10 ft

 

30 ft

 

40 ft

 

75%



PUD
 

Varies

 

Varies

 

Varies

 

30 ft

 

10 ft

 

30 ft

 

40 ft

 

Varies



C-1
 

20,000 sf

 

120 ft

 

N/A

 

30 ft

 

30 ft

 

30 ft

 

40 ft

 

75%



C-2
 

7,500 sf

 

50 ft

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

40 ft

 

N/A



C-3
 

20,000 sf

 

120 ft

 

N/A

 

30 ft

 

30 ft

 

30 ft

 

40 ft 9

 

75%



I-1
 

20,000 sf

 

120 ft

 

N/A

 

30 ft

 

30 ft

 

30 ft

 

40 ft 8

 

75%



P/I
 

20,000 sf

 

120 ft

 

N/A

 

30 ft

 

30 ft

 

30 ft

 

40 ft

 

50%



Notes to table:


1. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit.


2. Corner lots for all uses must be 15 feet wider to accommodate double
setback requirements; lot width averaging is permitted in the R-1 District,
provided no lot is less than 75 feet in width and the number of lots less
than 90 feet and the degree of deviation from 90 feet  is commensurate with
the number of lots greater than 90 feet and the degree of deviation from 90
feet (corner lots, if averaged, must include the additional 15 feet lot
width). For determining consistency with ordinance requirements, 75 feet 
and greater lot widths shall be considered conforming.


3. Units per net acreage (net acreage equals gross acreage less wetlands,
surface water, floodplain, and existing road easements or rights-of-way).


4. Parking and loading areas may occupy one-half of the required yard area.


5. Yards with street frontage in residential districts shall be 30 feet. The
yard areas opposite corner lot street frontages shall be considered side
yards. Parking and loading areas may occupy one-half of the required yard
area.


6. Parking and loading areas may occupy one-half of the required yard area.


7. Relationship of impervious surface area to total site area.


8. The maximum height for accessory structures in the I-1 District, as
described in § 153.041(C)(3), is 90 feet.


9. The maximum height for agricultural service business principal structures
is 75 feet and the maximum height for agricultural service business accessory
structures, such as agricultural elevators, towers, spires, blending
equipment, and similar accessory structures, is 160 feet.




 



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007; Ord. 150-S, passed
8-16-2010; Ord. 150-U, passed 3-17-2014)



§ 153.044  PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   The following table illustrates the minimum number of parking spaces
required for various uses permitted in the City. The City may modify minimum
parking requirements in the C-2 District, if it is determined that the use is
consistent with the purpose of the district and street parking is sufficient
to accommodate the use.



 


Uses

 

Minimum Parking Required





Car wash
 
5 stacking plus 1/bay


Churches
 
1/3 seats in largest assembly


Convenience store
 
7/1,000 sf gross floor area


Drive-up restaurant
 
5 stacking plus 1/3 seats


General service
 
4/1,000 sf gross floor area


Manufacturing
 
3/1,000 sf gross floor area


Offices
 
5/1,000 sf gross floor area


Other industry
 
3/1,000 sf gross floor area


Residential
 
2/dwelling unit


Restaurants
 
1/3 seats


Retail
 
6/1,000 sf gross floor area


Schools
 
1/classroom plus 1/3 seats in largest assembly


Theaters
 
1/3 seats


Trade business
 
3/1,000 sf gross floor area




 



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.045 DO DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  Lot dimensions, lot areas and structure placement
on many of the lots in the older portion of the city are inconsistent with
current dimensional standards required in this chapter. The C-2 District
incorporates relief from traditional dimensional standards; yet, other zoning
districts in the older portion of the city have existing lot conditions
similar to the C-2 District. In order to preserve the unique character of the
older portion of the city and to protect existing public and private
investments in property in this area, the Downtown Overlay (DO) District is
hereby established. The expressed purpose of the DO District is to permit
flexibility in meeting the strict dimensional requirements of this chapter
and to avoid widespread nonconformance with performance standards in this
unique area.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The permitted uses in the DO District shall be
the same as those permitted in the underlying zoning district.



   (C)   Special requirements. Lots in existence on September 1, 2000
within the DO District shall meet the dimensional standards of the C-2
District. Lots created after September 1, 2000 shall meet the lot area and
lot width requirements of underlying zoning districts; except that, average
dimensional standards of abutting parcels in the same zoning district may be
used to govern new parcel dimensions. Setbacks from Highway 284 shall be
governed by the average existing structure or use setback in the block in
which a new structure or use is proposed. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as a waiver from easement requirements or from the special
conditions applicable within the SO Shoreland Overlay District.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.046  SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The uncontrolled use of shorelands of Cologne
affects the public health, safety and general welfare not only by
contributing to pollution of public waters, but also by impairing the local
tax base. Therefore, it is in the best interests of the public health, safety
and welfare to provide for the wise subdivision, use and development of
shorelands of public waters. The Legislature of Minnesota has delegated
responsibility to local governments of the state to regulate the subdivision,
use and development of the shorelands of public waters and thus preserve and
enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural
environmental values of shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters
and related land resources. This responsibility is hereby recognized by
Cologne.



   (B)   Jurisdiction.  The provisions of this article shall apply to
the shorelands of the public waters as classified in division (E) below.
Pursuant to Minn. Rules, parts 6120.2500 to 6120.3900, lakes, ponds, or
flowage less than ten acres in size are exempt from this chapter. A body of
water created by a private user where there was no previous shoreland is
exempt from this subchapter.



   (C)   Variances.  The Board of Appeals and Adjustments shall hear
and decide requests for variances in accordance with the rules that it has
adopted for the conduct of business. When a variance is approved after the
Department of Natural Resources has formally recommended denial in the
hearing record, the notification of the approved variance required in
division (D) below shall also include the summary of the public
record/testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions which supported
the issuance of the variance. For existing developments, the application for
variance shall clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment
system is present for the intended use of the property. The variance, if
issued, shall require reconstruction of a nonconforming sewage treatment
system.



   (D)   Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources.  Copies
of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances or amendments
under local shoreland management controls shall be sent to the commissioner's
designated representative and postmarked at least ten days before the
hearings. Notices of hearings to consider proposed subdivisions/plats shall
include copies of the subdivision/plat. A copy of approved amendments and
subdivisions/plats, and final decisions granting variances under local
shoreland management controls shall be sent to the commissioner's designated
representative and postmarked within ten days of final action.



   (E)   Shoreland classification system.



      (1)   The public waters of Cologne have been classified below
consistent with the criteria found in Minn. Rules, part 6120.3300, and the
Protected Waters Inventory Map for Carver County, Minnesota. The shoreland
area for the waterbodies listed below shall be as defined in this Section and
as shown on the official zoning map.



         (a)   Lakes.



            1.   Natural Environmental Lake: Meuwissen;



            2.   General Development Lake: Benton Lake.



         (b)   Rivers and streams.  Tributary Streams: Benton
Creek.



      (2)   All protected watercourses in Cologne shown on the
Protected Waters Inventory Map for Carver County, a copy of which is hereby
adopted by reference, not given a classification herein shall be considered
tributary.



   (F)   Lot area and width standards. The lot area (in square feet)
and lot width standards (in feet) for single, duplex, triplex and quad
residential lots created after the date of enactment of this chapter for the
lake and river/stream classification are as follows:



      (1)   Sewered lakes: natural environment.



 


Riparian Lots

 

Non-riparian Lots




Unit

 

Area

 

Width

 

Area

 

Width




Single

 

40,000 sf

 

125 ft

 

20,000 sf

 

125 sf




Duplex

 

70,000 sf

 

225 ft

 

35,000 sf

 

220 sf




Triplex

 

100,000 sf

 

325 ft

 

52,000 sf

 

315 sf




Quad

 

130,000 sf

 

425 ft

 

65,000 sf

 

410 sf




 



      (2)   Sewered lakes: general development.



 


Riparian Lots

 

Non-riparian Lots




Unit

 

Area

 

Width

 

Area

 

Width




Single

 

15,000 sf

 

75 ft

 

10,000 sf

 

75 ft




Duplex

 

35,000 sf

 

135 ft

 

26,000 sf

 

135 ft




Triplex

 

50,000 sf

 

195 ft

 

38,000 sf

 

190 ft




Quad

 

65,000 sf

 

255 ft

 

49,000 sf

 

245 ft




 



      (3)   Sewered tributary rivers/streams lot widths.  There are
no minimum lot size requirements for rivers and streams. The lot width
standards for single, duplex, triplex and quad residential developments for
tributary rivers or streams are as follows:



 


Unit

 

Lot Width




Single

 

75 ft




Duplex

 

100 ft




Triplex

 

120 ft




Quad

 

120 ft




 



      (4)   Additional special provisions.  Residential
subdivisions with dwelling unit densities exceeding those in the tables in
divisions (F)(1) through (F)(3) can only be allowed if designed and approved
as planned residential districts pursuant to § 153.037. Only land above the
ordinary high water level of public waters shall be used to meet lot area
standards, and lot width standards shall be met at both the ordinary high
water level and at the building line.



   (G)   Placement of structures on lots.



      (1)   When more than one setback applies to a site, structures
and facilities shall be located to meet all setbacks. Structures and on-site
sewage treatment systems shall be setback from the ordinary high water level
as follows:



 

 
 
Setbacks for



Classes of Public Waters

 

Sewered Structures

 

Unsewered Structures

 

Sewage Treatment Systems



Lakes
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Natural environment
 

150 ft

 

150 ft

 

150 ft



   General development
 

50 ft

 

75 ft

 

75 ft



Rivers
 


 


 




   Agricultural, tributary
 

50 ft

 

100 ft

 

75 ft




 



      (2)   (a)   When a structure exists on a lot on either
side, the setback of a proposed structure shall be the greater of the
distance set forth in the above table or the setback of the existing
structure.



         (b)   One water-oriented accessory structure designed in
accordance with these provisions may be setback a minimum distance of ten
feet from the ordinary high water level.



         (c)   Uncovered and unenclosed decks, supported by post
footings and which are unenclosed around the post footings or that area below
the deck, may encroach a maximum of ten feet into the setback area from the
ordinary high water level.



   (H)   Additional structure setbacks.  The following additional
structure setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the waterbody.



 


Setback From

 

Setback




Top of bluff

 

30 ft




Unplatted cemetery

 

50 ft




Right-of-way line of federal state, or county highway

 

50 ft




Right-of-way line of town road, public street, or other roads or streets not
classified

 

20 ft




 



   (I)   Bluff impact zones.  Structures and accessory facilities,
except stairways and landings, shall not be placed within bluff impact zones.



   (J)   Non-residential uses without water-oriented needs.  Uses
without water-oriented needs shall be located on lots or parcels without
public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public waters
frontage, shall either be set back double the normal ordinary high water
level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by
vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.



   (K)   Design criteria for structures.



      (1)   High water elevations.  Structures shall be placed in
accordance with any floodplain regulations applicable to the site. Where
these controls do not exist, the elevation to which the lowest floor,
including basement, is placed or flood-proofed shall be determined as follows:



         (a)   For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a level
at least three feet above the highest known water level, or three feet above
the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher;



         (b)   For rivers and streams, by placing the lowest
floor at least three feet above the flood of record, if data are available.
If data are not available, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet
above the ordinary high water level, or by conducting a technical evaluation
to determine effects of proposed construction upon flood stages and flood
flaws and to establish a flood protection elevation. Under all three
approaches, technical evaluations shall be done by a qualified engineer or
hydrologist consistent with Minn. Rules, parts 6120.5000 to 6120.6200
governing the management of flood plain areas. If more than one approach is
used, the highest flood protection elevation determined shall be used for
placing structures and other facilities; and



         (c)   Water-oriented accessory structures may have the
lowest floor placed lower than the elevation determined in this item if the
structure is construed of flood-resistant materials to the elevation,
electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above the elevation and, if
long duration flooding is anticipated, the structure is built to withstand
ice action and wind-driven waves and debris.



      (2)   Water-oriented accessory structures.  Each lot may have
one water-oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal structure
setback in divisions (G) and (H) if this water-oriented accessory structure
complies with the following provisions:



         (a)   The structure or facility shall not exceed ten
feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater
than 250 square feet. Detached decks shall not exceed eight feet above grade
at any point.



         (b)   The setback of the structure or facility from the
ordinary high water level shall be at least ten feet;



         (c)   The structure or facility shall be treated to
reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by
vegetation, topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions;



         (d)   The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails,
but shall not be enclosed or used as a storage area;



         (e)   The structure or facility shall not be designed or
used for human habitation and shall not contain water supply or sewage
treatment facilities; and



         (f)   As an alternative for general development and
recreational development waterbodies, water-oriented accessory structures
used solely for watercraft storage, and including storage of related boating
and water-oriented sporting equipment, may occupy an area of up to 400 square
feet provided the maximum width of the structure is 20 feet as measured
parallel to the configuration of the shoreline.



      (3)   Stairway, lifts and landings.  Stairways and lifts are
the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving
access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and
lifts shall meet the following design requirements:



         (a)   Stairways and lifts shall not exceed four feet in
width on residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial
properties, public open-space recreational properties, and planned unit
developments;



         (b)   Landings for stairways and lifts on residential
lots shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square
feet may be used for commercial properties, public open-space, and
recreational properties;



         (c)   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways,
lifts, or landings;



         (d)   Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either
constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground,
provided they are designed and build in a manner that ensures control of soil
erosion;



         (e)   Stairways, lifts, and landings shall be located in
the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface
of the public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical;
and



         (f)   Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths
for physically handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to
shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of
divisions (K)(3)(a) to (e), above, are complied with in addition to the
requirements of Minn. Rules, Chapter 1340.



      (4)   Significant historic sites.  No structure shall be
placed on a significant historic site in a manner that affects the values of
the site unless adequate information about the site has been removed and
documented in a public repository.



      (5)   Steep slopes.  The Zoning Administrator shall evaluate
possible soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters
before issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads,
driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined
necessary, conditions shall be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion
and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and
other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming
summer, leaf-on vegetation.



   (L)   Height of structures.  All structures in residential
districts, except churches and nonresidential agricultural structures, shall
not exceed 35 feet in height.



   (M)   Vegetation alterations.



      (1)   Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of
structures and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and
parking areas regulated by division (O) are exempt from the following
vegetation alteration standards.



      (2)   Removal or alteration of vegetation is allowed subject
to the following standards:



         (a)   Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and
bluff impact zones and on steep slopes is not allowed. Intensive vegetation
clearing for forest land conversion to another use outside of these areas is
allowable if permitted as part of a development approved by the City Council
if an erosion control and sedimentation plan is developed and approved by the
soil and water conservation district in which the property is located.



         (b)   In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep
slopes, limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and
trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view of the water from the
principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and
landings, picnic areas, access paths, livestock watering areas, beach and
watercraft access areas, and permitted water-oriented accessory structures or
facilities, provided that:



            1.   The screening of structures, vehicles, or
other facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions, is not substantially reduced;



            2.   Along rivers, existing shading of water
surfaces is preserved; and



            3.   The above provisions are not applicable to
the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose
safety hazards.



   (N)   Connections to public waters. Excavations where the intended
purpose is connection to a public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons,
and harbors, shall be controlled by this subchapter. Permission for
excavations may be given only after the Commissioner has approved the
proposed connection to public waters.



   (O)   Placement and design of roads, driveways, and parking areas.



      (1)   Public and private roads and parking areas shall be
designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve
maximum screening from view from public waters. Documentation shall be
provided by a qualified individual that all roads and parking areas are
designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters
consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water
conservation district, or other applicable technical materials.



      (2)   Roads, driveways, and parking areas shall meet structure
setbacks and shall not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when
other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no
alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas, and shall be
designed to minimize adverse impacts.



      (3)   Public and watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and
access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided
the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this subpart are
met.



   (P)   Stormwater management. Impervious surface coverage of lots
shall not exceed 25% of the lot area, except 35% is permitted for medium/high
density residential zones developed in accordance with Planned Residential
District.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.047  TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTH CARE DWELLINGS OPT OUT.



   Pursuant to the authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593, the city opts
out of the requirements of M.S. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates
Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings.



(Ord. 150-V, passed 7-18-2016)



PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



§ 153.060  ON-SITE SEWAGE TREATMENT STANDARDS.



   The installation and repair of individual on-site sewer systems shall
be in compliance with Minnesota Pollution Control Agency rules, Minn. Rules,
Chapter 7080.



   (A)   Permit required.  No person shall install, repair, alter or
pump an on-site sewer system without first obtaining a permit. Applications
provided by the city must be completed in writing prior to issuance of a
permit. Permit fees are established by resolution of the City Council.



   (B)   License required.  Installation, repair, pumping and hauling
of private on-site sewer systems requires licensing per Minn. Rules, Chapter
7080.



   (C)   Required conditions.



      (1)   Soil percolation tests must be completed by a competent,
independent tester and must be favorable for the operation of an on-site
sewer system before a permit will be issued.



      (2)   Soil percolation tests and scaled site location plans
must be submitted for both primary and secondary (backup) treatment systems
with the initial application.



      (3)   Installations, alteration, repairs and maintenance shall
be performed in accordance with the latest Minn. Rules, Chapter 7080
standards published by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



      (4)   No private on-site sewer system shall be permitted on
any site less than one acre, subject to all conditions or exceptions noted in
this chapter.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.061  ODORS AND EMISSIONS.



   Odors and emissions from any use shall not exceed the regulations set
forth by Minnesota Pollution Control Agency rules.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.062  DUST AND PARTICULATES.



   Dust and particulate matter from any use shall be in compliance with
and regulated by Minnesota Pollution Control Agency rules.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.063  NOISE AND VIBRATIONS.



   Noise and vibrations generated from any use shall be in compliance with
and regulated by Minnesota Pollution Control Agency rules.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.064  GLARE.



   Glare or illumination from any source of lighting from any use shall be
aimed or deflected away from adjoining property and public rights of way,
except street lighting and traffic signals.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.065  WASTE.



   All waste generated from any use shall be managed in compliance with
and regulated by Minnesota Pollution Control Agency rules. Waste generated on
any premises shall be kept in containers designed for waste collection and
stored in a structure or within an enclosed or screened area. The
accumulation, storage, processing or disposal of waste, compost or recyclable
materials on any premises, which is not generated on that premises, is
prohibited, except as specifically provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.066  EXPLOSIVES.



   Any activity or operation requiring the use, storage or manufacturing
of explosives shall be located no closer than 500 feet from any residence,
provided further that the location of said activity or operation is such that
damage from explosion, including flying debris, vibration or smoke, is
limited to the site on which the activity or operation is permitted.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.067  BURNING.



   No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the
city without first having obtained an open burn permit. Any person setting a
fire or burning anything in the city shall do so following Department of
Natural Resources and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency rules.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.068  BULK STORAGE.



   The storage of all bulk liquids, fuels, chemicals, and gases shall be
in compliance with and regulated by Minnesota Pollution Control Agency rules,
Minnesota State Fire Marshal rules and the Minnesota State Building code.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.069  OUTSIDE STORAGE.



   All products, materials and equipment, except as specifically provided
in this chapter, shall be stored within permitted structures, except for the
following:



   (A)   Agricultural products, equipment and appurtenances owned by
the owner of the property and used on the property on which they are kept.



   (B)   A maximum of three licensed and operational motor vehicles per
residential dwelling unit, parked on the permitted driveway area.



   (C)   A maximum of one of the following may be stored outside of a
structure for more than 48 hours on any residential parcel, provided also
they are stored on the permitted driveway area.



      (1)   Boat (must be on a trailer).



      (2)   Camper.



      (3)   Motor home.



      (4)   Snowmobile (maximum of two on one trailer).



      (5)   Personal watercraft (maximum of two on one trailer).



      (6)   Motorcycle.



      (7)   Trailer.



   (D)   Clothes lines, antennae, air conditioners, outdoor grills,
play equipment, ornaments and monuments.



   (E)   Temporary storage of materials and equipment during
construction and landscaping.



   (F)   Storage of products, materials and equipment, excluding
rubbish or junk, which is necessary to an approved business operation in a
commercial or industrial district, and which is completely screened from
adjoining properties and rights-of-way. The site plan review process is
required to determine the appropriateness for storage permitted in this
section, surfacing required for the storage area and the screening required.



   (G)   Outside display of vehicles, equipment and merchandise for
direct sale to consumers when such outside display is customary and necessary
to the trade and is a permitted use within the zoning district. The site plan
review process is required to determine the appropriateness of the storage or
display proposed, surfacing required for the display area and any additional
landscaping or screening which may be required.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.070  SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   Stormwater shall be managed in accordance with the National
Urban Runoff Program (NURP) standards for the design of new stormwater ponds
and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's urban best management practices,
titled Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas to the review of any proposed
development occurring to reduce non-point source pollutant loadings in
stormwater runoff.



   (B)   Existing natural drainageways, natural water storage or
retention areas, and vegetated soil surfaces should be used to the greatest
extent possible to store, filter and retain stormwater runoff before
discharge occurs into any public waters. When natural features and vegetation
are not available to handle stormwater runoff, constructed facilities such as
diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, and manmade waterways
and ponds may be used. Preference shall be given to designs using surface
drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and manmade
materials and facilities. Development should be planned and conducted in a
manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities,
erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.071  WETLAND PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT.



   In accordance with the Wetlands Conservation Act of 1991, the following
regulations shall apply to wetland areas:



   (A)   Permanent natural buffer areas and appropriate erosion control
measures be taken surrounding wetland areas to prevent sedimentation of the
wetland.



   (B)   Wetlands may not be drained or filled, wholly or partially,
unless replaced by restoring or creating wetland areas of at least equal
public value. Wetland encroachment must be guided by the following principles
in descending order:



      (1)   Avoiding the direct or indirect impact of the activity
that may destroy or diminish the wetland;



      (2)   Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or
magnitude of the wetland activity and its implementation;



      (3)   Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or
restoring the affected wetland environment;



      (4)   Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by
preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the activity;



      (5)   Replacing or providing substitute wetland resources or
environments.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.072  WOODLAND PRESERVATION.



   In residential areas, structures shall be located in such a manner that
the maximum number of woodlands shall be preserved. If large numbers of trees
are cut in residential areas, trees shall be replanted in a density and
manner satisfactory to the City Council. Clearcutting of woodlands for
non-agricultural purposes is prohibited, unless the action involves a utility
or roadway, required by the public, and includes a reforestation plan
required by the City Council.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.073  EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL.



   (A)   No land occupant or developer in the city shall cause or
conduct any land disturbing activity which causes excessive erosion or
sedimentation, or which results in damage to water or soil resources. All
development in the city shall conform to the natural limitations presented by
the topography and soil types in order to minimize soil erosion and
sedimentation. Erosion and sedimentation controls shall be consistent with
the MPCA' s best management practices.



   (B)   Land disturbing activities shall occur in increments of
workable size such that adequate erosion and sediment controls can be
provided throughout all phases of the development. The smallest practical
area of land shall be exposed or otherwise disturbed at any one period of
time. Areas where natural vegetative barriers are not enough to contain
erosion and sedimentation from penetrating water bodies, wetlands, water
courses or neighboring properties shall be staked with silt fences and straw
bales.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.074  SEASONAL MINERAL EXTRACTION.



   (A)   Any seasonal or temporary mineral extraction activity in the
city requires a permit approved by the City Council and must meet the
following conditions:



      (1)   An application for seasonal extraction must be filed
with the City Clerk, and an approved permit must be received from the City
Council prior to beginning of operations;



      (2)   The applicant must furnish the city with detailed plans,
identifying existing elevations and contours, material quantities,
access/haul routes and final grades/contours.



      (3)   The duration of a seasonal extraction permit shall be
from April 15 to October 15 of the permit year;



      (4)   Material stockpiles may not remain after the duration of
the permit.



      (5)   Topsoil may not be removed from the site, unless
authorized by the City Council.



   (B)   A seasonal extraction permit shall not be required for any of
the following:



      (1)   Excavation for a foundation, cellar or basement of a
building if a building permit has been issued.



      (2)   Excavation by state, county, city or city authorities in
connection with construction or maintenance of roads, highways or utilities.



      (3)   Excavation less than 100 square feet in area or one foot
in depth in a calendar year.



      (4)   Excavation or grading for agricultural purposes.



   (C)   The following rehabilitation standards shall apply to the site
of any seasonal extraction operation:



      (1)   Topsoil shall be removed from the excavation area(s) and
stockpiled for rehabilitation.



      (2)   Rehabilitation shall be continuous, occurring as quickly
as possible after the extraction operation has moved into another part of the
extraction site.



      (3)   The excavation area shall be graded to blend in with the
unexcavated area, without changing or impacting the natural course of
drainage.



      (4)   Topsoil shall be replaced and the disturbed area
re-seeded prior to permit expiration.



      (5)   All water areas resulting from excavation shall be
eliminated upon rehabilitation of the site, unless previously approved by the
city.



      (6)   The slope of the restored site shall not exceed a 5:1
ratio.



   (D)   The City Council shall require the applicant or owner of the
premises on which the seasonal extraction operation is located to post cash
escrow or letter of credit in an amount and form determined by the City
Council. This letter of credit or cash shall pay the city the extraordinary
cost and expense of repairing any roads where such repair work is made
necessary by the seasonal extraction, or to complete rehabilitation of the
site consistent with the rehabilitation standards in § 153.074(C) and any
out of pocket expenses incurred in the enforcement of this chapter. The
security shall remain in full force for a minimum period of one year after
expiration of the extraction permit to guarantee the required rehabilitation
as well as the other requirements herein provided.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.075 LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Minimum quantities.  All new development activities,
including site modifications or use intensifications, shall be subject to
landscaping improvements. The following table illustrates requirements within
each zoning district:



 


District

 

Overstory Trees

 

Foundation Plantings4






R-1

 
Two trees/unit/street frontage1
 
None



R-2

 
Two trees/unit/open space exposure2
 
1/10 ft. building and parking area



R-3

 
Eight trees plus two trees/unit3
 
1/10 ft. building and parking area



PUD

 
Based on underlying uses
 
Based on underlying uses



C-1

 
Eight trees or 1/3,000 sq. ft. site area5
 
1/10 ft. building and parking area



C-2

 
Eight trees or 1/3,000 sq. ft. site area5
 
1/10 ft. building and parking area



C-3

 
Eight trees or 1/3,000 sq. ft. site area5
 
1/10 ft. building and parking area



I-1

 
Eight trees or 1/3,000 sq. ft. site area5
 
1/10 ft. building and parking area



P/I

 
Eight trees or 1/3,000 sq. ft. site area5
 
1/10 ft. building and parking area


Notes to table:


1. Trees shall be deciduous and planted at the boulevard, except on cul de
sacs where one of the required trees may be planted off the boulevard but in
the front yard area.


2. Two trees shall be deciduous. Unit exposures with street frontage shall be
planted at the boulevard.


3. Tree spacing must include trees at the boulevard at minimum 50 feet
intervals.


4. The calculation for the number of foundation plantings is based upon one
planting for each lineal feet of building perimeter and parking lot
perimeter. Plantings may be grouped rather than dispersed at ten feet
intervals.


5. The required number of trees is based upon a minimum of eight trees or one
tree per 3,000 square feet of site area, whichever is greater. Tree spacing
must include trees at the boulevard at minimum 50 feet intervals.




 



   (B)   Minimum standards.



      (1)   Overstory trees.



         (a)   Deciduous trees: Two-and-a-half-inch caliper
planting size, balled and burlapped.



         (b)   Coniferous trees: Six feet in height planting
size, balled and burlapped.



      (2)   Foundation plantings.  Coniferous and deciduous shrubs
shall be planted at a minimum of 1/3 of the mature spread and height of
typical growth habits.



      (3)   Boulevard trees.  All boulevard trees shall be hardwood
shade trees or flowering trees.



      (4)   Overstory mix.  When multiple quantities of overstory
trees are required, at least 75% of the trees required shall be deciduous
trees.



      (5)   Hardiness.  All landscape materials proposed shall
consistent with Minnesota hardiness zones, whether indigenous or foreign.
Plant species must also be tolerant to snow storage, exposure to salt and sun
scald in parking areas.



      (6)   Diversification.  In any development in which at least
eight overstory trees or foundation plantings are required, at least three
varieties of plantings are required. In residential subdivisions, at least
three varieties of boulevard trees are required on each side of a block.



      (7)   Warranty.  All required landscape materials shall be
warranted for growth for a minimum of two years after planting.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.076  FENCING.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   No fence may be erected which creates visual
obstructions at any intersection, alley, driveway or street for safe
vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian movement. Only decorative fences may be
constructed in the required residential front yard (that area between any
wall of the principal structure and any public right-of-way). Electric fences
may not be used and such material as hog wire fencing and barbed wire fencing
will not be allowed. Snow-stop fencing, used between November 1 and April 1,
construction fencing, and other similar temporary fencing are permitted
without site plan review.



      (2)   All fences shall be constructed and maintained in a
substantial, workmanlike manner and of material reasonably suited for the
purpose for which the fence is proposed to be used. Every fence shall be
constructed so that the side containing the framing supports and cross pieces
face the interior of the fence owner's lot. Any fence which does not comply
with the provisions of this Section or which endangers the public safety,
health or welfare shall be considered a public nuisance.



   (B)   Site plan review required.  A sketch plan showing property
lines and the proposed location of the fence shall be submitted to the City
Clerk for administrative site plan review. The City Clerk or designee shall
promptly verify whether the proposed fencing meets the requirements of this
section or whether additional review or interpretation is required. No site
plan may be approved and no fence may be constructed unless in conformity
with the requirements of this chapter. The City Clerk may refer and the
applicant may request referral of the site plan to the Planning Commission
for clarification on any questions of conformity with zoning ordinance
provisions.



   (C)   Location.



      (1)   Residential fences.  Fences may be placed on the
property line, except only decorative fences may be located in the required
front yard (that area between any wall of the principal structure and any
public right-of-way). Privacy or security fences (non-decorative fences) must
be constructed from and located at the rear of the principal structure and
may be no closer to any public right-of-way than the principal structure. See
Appendix A for illustrations of privacy fence locations. Upon review and
consideration of individual site conditions, the Planning Commission may
modify certain privacy fence setback provisions, provided the exceptions or
modifications are consistent with the intent of this chapter and the
modifications do not result in standards that others with similar situations,
site conditions, and circumstances would not be granted.



      (2)   Non-residential fences  Fences may be placed on the
property line, except fences located in the front yard may be no closer than
15 feet from the right-of-way or the front of the parking area, whichever
setback is greater. Any fence located in a front yard area must be a cyclone
fence or similar non-opaque type of fencing. Any gated fences must be set
back a sufficient distance from any public street so that no vehicle parked
in front of the gate obstructs the street.



      (3)   Easements.  Fences may be located within platted or
recorded yard area public easements, provided the easement areas do not
contain or are not specifically planned to contain public utilities, public
drainage facilities, trails, sidewalks, wetlands, or surface waters.



   (D)   Height.



      (1)   Residential fences.  The maximum height of any
residential fence shall be six  feet, except when a residential property
line abuts a commercial or industrial use the fence may be eight feet in
height along that property line. The maximum height of a decorative fence
shall be three feet.



      (2)   Non-residential fences.  The maximum height of any
non-residential fence shall be eight feet.



   (E)   Exceptions. 



      (1)   Decorative fences.  Decorative fences are permitted in
the front yard area of residential properties, provided the following
requirements are met. Fencing may not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian views
or passage at intersecting public streets or driveways or pedestrian ways.
Decorative fences shall not exceed three feet in height. Decorative fences
shall be either a vertical picket-type or horizontal rail-type. Picket board
widths shall not exceed four inches and the minimum spacing between picket
boards shall not be less than two inches. Rail-type fences shall be either
two-rail or three-rail and shall include a minimum of four-inch spacing
between rails. See Appendix B for illustrations of decorative fences. The
Planning Commission may modify specific dimensional standards for
pre-manufactured decorative fencing, provided the provided the modifications
are consistent with the intent of this chapter and the modifications do not
result in standards that others with similar situations, site conditions, and
circumstances would not be granted.



      (2)   Subdivision development fencing.  Fencing that is
approved as a part of a subdivision development may be exempt from some of
the dimensional requirements of this section, subject to recommendation of
the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.077  SIGN REGULATIONS.



   (A)   General provisions.  Signs that are permitted by this chapter
shall meet the following requirements:



      (1)   A sign is a structure or a part of a structure for the
purpose of applying yard and height requirements.



      (2)   Except as specifically permitted herein, no signs shall
be permitted within public rights-of-way other than authorized public street
signs, public safety and public informational signs, and city-authorized
civic signs and seasonal decorations.



      (3)   Electronic messaging signs (electronic changeable
message, electronic graphic display, video display, or any other electronic
message display) are permitted on-site advertizing signs, according to
specific dimensional standards and criteria for signs in the C-l, C-2, C-3,
I-1, and P/I Zoning Districts, and subject to the following requirements:



         (a)   The electronic display background color tones,
illumination intensity, lettering, logos, pictures, illustrations, symbols,
and any other electronic graphic or video display for advertising signs shall
not change at intervals less than 15 minutes;



         (b)   The maximum duration of the transition of the
electronic image or message change shall be no more than two seconds;



         (c)   All electronic messaging signs must be equipped
with a default mechanism that will stop the messaging or freeze the image in
one position when a malfunction in electronic programming occurs;



         (d)   Small electronic messaging signs that are
pedestrian-oriented, customer service signs and not highway-oriented general
advertizing signs, such as drive-through restaurant menu boards and gas pump
dispenser information, are not subject to restrictions on the frequency of
message change intervals or default equipment; and



         (e)   Time or temperature signs or similar
non-commercial, non-message-content, public information signs are not subject
to restrictions on the frequency of message change intervals or default
equipment.



      (4)   Illuminated signs shall be permitted in the C-l, C-2,
C-3, I-1, and P/I Zoning Districts, provided such external illumination
source is shrouded and not directed toward public rights-of-way or adjacent
property, or such signs are illuminated by an internal light source. The
source of sign illumination may not blink, flash, change in illumination
intensity, or otherwise change in outward appearance.



      (5)   Business signs shall not be painted, attached, or in any
manner affixed to trees, rocks or similar natural surfaces.



      (6)   No signs of any type will be painted directly on to the
roof or the sides of a building.



      (7)   Signs which interfere with the ability of vehicle
operators or pedestrians to see traffic signals, or which impede the vision
of traffic by vehicle operators or pedestrians are prohibited.



      (8)   Signs shall not project above the roofline of any
structure.



      (9)   No sign shall obstruct any window, fire escape or
opening intended to provide entry or exit to any structure or building or
public way.



      (10)   Campaign signs posted by bona fide candidates for
political office or by a person or group promoting a political issue for a
candidate may be placed in any district subject to the requirements of the
district. Campaign signs may be posted for a period not to exceed 60 days and
shall be removed within seven days following the date of the election.



      (11)   Temporary banners and pennants employed for grand
opening of business establishments, special events and holidays shall be
removed within 14 days after such an opening, event or holiday. Banners or
pennants which are an integral part of the design or architecture or a
building are permitted.



      (12)   One temporary identification sign, setting forth the
name of the project, architect, engineers, contractors, planners and
financing agencies, may be installed at a construction site in any district
for the period of construction. The sign area of a temporary identification
sign shall not exceed 35 square feet.



      (13)   In any district, one temporary real estate sign may be
erected for the purpose of advertising the lease or sale of property upon
which it is placed. Only one such sign shall be permitted per street frontage.



         (a)   Such sign shall be removed within seven days
following lease or sale.



         (b)   The maximum size of such signs for each district
is as follows:



 


Residential Districts

 

10 sf



Agriculture and Public/Institutional Districts
 

25 sf



Commercial/Industrial Districts
 

32 sf




 



      (14)   Temporary real estate advertising signs may be erected
for the purpose of selling or promoting a residential project of five or more
dwelling units or any new residential projected provided:



         (a)   Such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area
and have a maximum height of ten feet.



         (b)   Maximum number of said temporary real estate
advertising signs shall not exceed two in number.



         (c)   Maximum distance between said advertising signs is
500 feet.



         (d)   Such signs shall be removed when the project is
75% complete, sold, or leased.



         (e)   Such signs shall be located no closer than 150
feet to a pre-existing residential dwelling unit.



         (f)   Information regarding the size and location of
said temporary real estate advertising signs must be transmitted to the
zoning officer prior to the issuance of the building permit.



      (15)   Portable/temporary advertising signs are prohibited in
all districts except as specifically authorized below.



         (a)   Portable/temporary advertising signs are
coincidental to or used in conjunction with a civic, school, or church
function.



         (b)   Portable/temporary advertising signs are allowed
three times per year per business for grand openings, anniversaries,
holidays, or other special events.



         (c)   The period of use for any portable/temporary
advertising sign shall not exceed ten consecutive days.



         (d)   Prior approval by the Planning Commission or its
designee shall be required for the use of any such portable/temporary
advertising sign.



         (e)   Portable/temporary signs shall not exceed 64
square feet in area and shall not be located in public rights-of-way or any
location obstructing vehicular visibility.



         (f)   Temporary retail product advertizing signs that
are no larger than four square feet in area and are attached to buildings,
gas pumps, or authorized outdoor product displays are exempt from the
restrictions in divisions (a) through (e) above.



      (16)   One address sign shall be required per building in all
districts.



      (17)   Signs are permitted on window or door awnings provided
the sign area does not exceed district dimensional standards for total wall
area signs or lettering size and the awnings do not extend above the height
of the wall.



      (18)   Signs located on the interior of a building and not
visible from the exterior are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.



      (19)   A comprehensive sign plan is required at the time of
Planning Commission review of any proposed commercial or industrial
development. The plan shall indicate the location, size, height, color,
lighting and orientation of all proposed signs and shall be submitted for
approval pursuant to the regulations of the city.



      (20)   Legal nonconforming signs may not be expanded or
intensified but may be continued through repair, maintenance, restoration, or
replacement, unless:



         (a)   The sign is discontinued for a period of more than
one year (discontinued shall mean the use or business associated with the
sign with the sign has been discontinued for a period of more than one year);
or



         (b)   The sign is destroyed by fire, neglect, or other
peril to the extent of greater than 50% of its market value, and no building
permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the sign was damaged.



   (B)   District regulations.  In addition to those signs permitted
in all districts, signs as herein designated shall be permitted in each
specified district and shall conform as to size, location and character
according to the requirements herein set forth.



      (1)   The following signs are permitted in the Agriculture,
Residential and Public/Institutional Districts.



         (a)   Name plate signs: One sign not to exceed two
square feet in area for each single family detached dwelling or six square
feet in area for each multiple family building. The nameplate shall indicate
only name and address.



         (b)   Park, recreational, and agricultural signs: one
freestanding sign per street frontage for each above use in the districts,
provided the sign shall not exceed 24 square feet in area and shall not be
placed closer than ten feet to any street right-of-way, and shall not exceed
ten feet in height.



         (c)   Area identification sign: One sign not to exceed
24 square feet in area for each planned residential district entrance,
provided said sign is not placed within ten feet of any street right-of-way
and not in exceed of ten feet in height.



         (d)   Public, medical, religious, cultural, and
educational building signs:



            1.   One freestanding sign for each permitted use
in the Public and Institutional District, provided the sign shall not exceed
80 square feet in area and shall not be placed closer than ten feet to any
street right-of-way or property line, and shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
The freestanding sign for a public or institutional use with multiple
principal buildings shall not exceed 24 feet in height.



            2.   Wall signs are permitted on each wall with
street frontage, provided such signs do not exceed 10% of the wall area or up
to 64 square feet in area, whichever is smaller. The plane of the wall sign
must be affixed to and parallel with the wall. The average height of
individual lettering on wall signs shall not exceed 15% of the height of the
wall area the sign is affixed to or a maximum of 24 inches in height,
whichever is less. The Planning Commission may vary the maximum lettering
height if it is determined such lettering is not out scale with the total
wall area or building facade or in instances where such wall signs face major
roadways rather than local streets. Exceptions to lettering height may also
be considered for first and last letters of a sign, for logos, or for emblems.



      (2)   The following signs are permitted in the C-1 Convenience
Commercial, C-3 General Commercial, and I-1 Industrial Park Districts:



         (a)   Businesses. Businesses may have a maximum of one
freestanding sign per building and one wall sign per wall with street
frontage, or no freestanding sign and two wall signs.



         (b)   Wall signs.



            1.   Wall signs are permitted on each wall with
street frontage, provided such signs do not exceed 10% of said wall area or
up to 64 square feet in area, whichever is smaller. Wall signs may include
individual signs for multiple businesses located within the same structure,
provided such signs are similar in size, complementary in nature, and
collectively do not exceed the maximum sign area permitted on a wall. The
plane of the wall sign must be affixed to and parallel with the wall.



            2.   The average height of individual lettering on
wall signs shall not exceed 15% of the height of the wall area the sign is
affixed to or a maximum of 24 inches in height, whichever is less. The
Planning Commission may vary the maximum lettering height if it is determined
such lettering is not out scale with the total wall area or building facade
or in instances where such wall signs face major roadways rather than local
streets. Exceptions to lettering height may also be considered for first and
last letters of a sign, for logos, or for emblems.



         (c)   Freestanding signs.  One freestanding sign is
permitted per structure provided, the sign does not exceed 80 square feet in
area and 20 feet in height and is placed no closer than ten feet from any
street right-of-way. Any structure with multiple tenants and proposed
multiple tenant advertising may expand the allowable sign area to 100 square
feet.



         (d)   Area identification signs.  One area
identification sign is permitted per commercial or industrial development
approved by the city as a single development and containing four or more lots
or detached business structures. Area identification signs shall not exceed
64 square feet in area and 20 feet in height, or be placed within ten feet of
any street right-of-way.



      (3)   The following signs are permitted for commercial
structures in the C-2 Central Business District:



         (a)   Wall signs.



            1.   Wall signs are permitted on each wall with
street frontage, provided such signs do not exceed 10% of the wall area or up
to 64 square feet in area, whichever is smaller. Wall signs may include
individual signs for multiple businesses located within the same structure,
provided such signs are similar in size, complementary in nature, and
collectively do not exceed the maximum sign area permitted on a wall. The
plane of the wall sign must be affixed to and parallel with the wall.



            2.   The average height of individual lettering on
wall signs shall not exceed 15% of the height of the wall area the sign is
affixed to or a maximum of 24 inches in height, whichever is less. The
Planning Commission may vary the maximum lettering height if it is determined
such lettering is not out scale with the total wall area or building facade
or in instances where such wall signs face major roadways rather than local
streets. Exceptions to lettering height may also be considered for first and
last letters of a sign, for logos, or for emblems.



         (b)   Projecting signs. One projecting sign is permitted
on each wall with street frontage, provided such sign does not extend more
than three feet from the plane of the wall, the bottom of such sign is
located at least eight feet above the ground elevation where the sign is
placed, and such sign does not exceed 18 square feet in area.



         (c)   Freestanding signs. One freestanding sign is
permitted per structure, provided the sign does not exceed 80 square feet in
area and 20 feet in height and is placed no closer than ten feet from any
street right-of-way. No building on property with a freestanding sign shall
also be entitled to a projecting sign.



   (C)   Site plan approval.  All signs, except temporary signs and
address signs, require Planning Commission site plan review according to §
153.017. Upon approval by the Planning Commission and the payment of all city
fees, the City Clerk may issue a sign permit.



   (D)   Maintenance and repair.  All signs shall be maintained in a
safe and aesthetic condition at all times.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007; Am. Ord. 150-P, passed
9-8-2009)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 153.090  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Board of Appeals and Adjustment. The Planning Commission shall
act as the Board of Appeals and Adjustments and shall have the power to hear
and decide requests for the following:



      (1)   Interpretation. Hearing appeals where it is alleged that
there is an error in a decision or judgment made by an administrative officer
in the interpretation or enforcement of this chapter or in the interpretation
of zoning district boundaries.



      (2)   Variances.  Grant variances from literal ordinance
requirements in instances where strict enforcement would cause undue hardship
because of circumstances unique to the individual property under construction.



   (B)   Variance procedures.



      (1)   Applications provided by the city must be completed in
writing prior to any consideration of variance petitions. Fees for variances
are established by resolution of the City Council.



      (2)   The Board of Appeals and Adjustments may require the
applicant to provide ten copies of plans, maps, surveys, etc., as deemed
necessary, to ensure proper review and consideration of variance petitions.



      (3)   After filing an application, the City Clerk shall set a
date for a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be posted and
published at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, and notice
shall be mailed to each property owner within 350 feet of the property to
which the variance relates. Defects in the notice or failure to notify
individual property owners shall not validate the proceedings, provided a
good faith effort was made to comply with these provisions.



      (4)   Upon the hearing request, the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments shall either approve or deny the variance and shall state the
reasons for said action. Conditions for approval may be attached to any
variance granted.



      (5)   The Board of Appeals and Adjustments must find as
follows in the granting of a variance from this chapter:



         (a)   Granting a variance will not adversely affect the
public health, welfare and safety and will not be detrimental or injurious to
property or improvements in the neighborhood.



         (b)   Strict interpretation or enforcement would result
in a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that is not self created,
that is inconsistent with the intent of this chapter and the comprehensive
plan.



         (c)   There are exceptional or extraordinary
circumstances or conditions applicable to the property, use or facilities
that do not apply generally to other properties in the same district.



         (d)   Strict or literal interpretation would deprive the
applicant of the use and enjoyment of his property in a manner similar to
others in the same district.



         (e)   Granting of the variance will not allow a use
which is otherwise not a permitted use in the zoning district in question.



      (6)   A variance granted but not used shall become void one
year after its effective date.



      (7)   No application for the same or essentially the same
variance shall be made within six months of the date of denial.



   (C)   Variance appeal procedures.  Within 30 days of the action of
the Board of Appeals and Adjustments, the applicant or an affected property
owner may file an appeal to the City Council to the decision of the Board of
Appeals and Adjustments. The City Council shall set a date for a public
hearing, within 45 days of receipt of the appeal, to consider granting or
denying the variance request.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.091  AMENDMENTS, PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Amendments to this chapter may be initiated by the Planning
Commission, City Council or by a petition of a landowner.



   (B)   Applications provided by the city must be completed in writing
prior to any consideration for an amendment. Fees for zoning amendments are
established by resolution of the City Council.



   (C)   The city may require the applicant to provide plans, maps,
surveys, etc., to ensure proper review and consideration of any proposed
amendment to the written provisions of this chapter or zoning district
boundaries.



   (D)   After the filing of an application, or initiation by the City
Council, the City Clerk shall set a date for a public hearing. Notice of the
hearing shall be posted and published at least ten days prior to the date of
the hearing, and notice shall be mailed to each property owner within 350
feet of the proposed zoning district boundary amendments.



   (E)   Upon hearing the request, the Planning Commission shall
recommend either approval or denial the proposed amendment and shall state
the reasons of the action.



   (F)   Within 30 days of the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall consider the recommendation of the
Planning Commission and shall approve, deny or modify the request to amend
this.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.092  INTERIM USES.



   (A)   Purpose and definition.  In addition to the purposes stated
in § 153.002, it is intended that the interim use permit procedures allow
flexibility in the use of land or structures in the city when such uses are
not permanent and when such uses meet appropriate conditions and performance
standards that protect the public health, safety, and welfare. An interim use
is a temporary use of property until a particular date, until the occurrence
of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit it. The
use must cease upon termination of the permit.



   (B)   Application, public hearing, and procedure.  The application,
public hearing, notice, and procedure requirements for interim use permits
shall be the same as those for amendments, as provided in § 153.091, except
that approval of an interim use by the City Council requires only a simple
majority affirmative vote. If a proposed interim use is not listed as a
permitted interim use in this chapter, a text amendment to this chapter will
be required before an interim use permit may be considered.



   (C)   Termination.  All interim use permits shall terminate on the
happening of any of the following events, whichever first occurs:



      (1)   The termination date stated in the permit.



      (2)   A violation of the conditions under which the permit was
issued.



      (3)   A change in the city's zoning regulations that renders
the use nonconforming.



   (D)   Standards.



      (1)   The interim use must be allowed in the zoning district
where the property is located.



      (2)   The interim use must meet or exceed the performance
standards set forth in this chapter and other applicable city ordinances.



      (3)    The interim use must comply with the specific standards
for the use identified in this chapter, and must comply with all conditions
of approval, which shall be included in the interim use permit agreement.



   (E)   Conditions.  The city may attach conditions to approval of a
permit to mitigate anticipated adverse impacts associated with the use, to
ensure compliance with the standards of approval, to protect the value of
other property, and to achieve the goals and objectives of the comprehensive
plan.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.093  FEES AND LICENSING.



   Fees and licensing provisions, affecting the administration and
enforcement of this chapter, shall be established by resolution of the City
Council. The city does require payment for its legal, planning and
engineering expenses, resulting from the review of proposed actions in the
city. The City Council may require full payment of fees and out of pocket
expenses incurred in the review of proposed actions prior to taking final
action.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



§ 153.999  PENALTY.



   The City Clerk is directed by the City Council to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and maintain all necessary records pertaining to
this chapter including but not limited to amendments, variances, complaints
and violations. Any person who violates or fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction may be punished to the maximum extent allowed by law. Each day a
violation exists constitutes a separate offense.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. passed 3- -2007)



APPENDIX A: PRIVACY FENCE LOCATION



   Appendix A is incorporated by reference as if appearing in total. A
copy of this Appendix is on file in the city offices.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. 3- -2007)



APPENDIX B: DECORATIVE FENCES



   Appendix B is incorporated by reference as if appearing in total. A
copy of this Appendix is on file in the city offices.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. 3- -2007)



APPENDIX C: ZONING MAP



   Appendix C is incorporated by reference as if appearing in total. A
copy of this Appendix is on file in the city offices.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. 3- -2007)



APPENDIX D: PUBLIC HEARING APPLICATION FORM



 




Type of Request

 

Application Fees




      Variance;         Interim Use

 

$250 Non-refundable application fee




      Zoning amendment

 

$250 Consulting escrow fee




      Comprehensive plan amendment

 

$500 Application payment due\




              Date application complete

 

                    Date payment received




              Public hearing date

 





Property Location

 





Parcel I.D.:                                          
               

 





Subdivision:                                          
             

 

Lot:                   Block:                    




Street address:                                        
           

 





Current zoning:                                        
         

 

Proposed zoning:                                        




Current comp. plan:                                      
   

 

Proposed land use:                                      




Description of Request:




                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
       




(Attach additional narrative information, site plans and other relevant
information to the application form).




Agreement:




I am the fee owner or authorized representative of the fee owner of the
property for the above proposed action. I understand that there may be
required for submittal in duplicate form before the application is accepted
and the public hearing is set. I understand that the application fee is
non-refundable. I understand the consulting escrow fee is required to cover
the city’s out-of-pocket expenses caused by the review of the application.
I understand that this is an escrow only and full payment for consulting fees
in excess of $250 will be required prior to the issuance of any permits or
final action on the request. Any unexpended escrow funds will be refunded.




Signature of applicant:                                   
                              Date:                 
                 




                                                   
                                                   
                                                 




Planning Commission action:                                 
                    Date:                           
           




City Council action:                                     
                                Date:               
                       





 



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. 3- -2007)



APPENDIX E: THE VILLAGE AT COLOGNE PUD



   A.   Permitted uses:



      1.   Permitted uses in the Village of Cologne PUD, lying
westerly of CSAH 53 and southerly of the Twin Cities and Western Railroad,
include those permitted uses describe for Residential/Commercial Mixed Use
PUDs in § 153.037(C) of the Cologne zoning ordinance (Chapter 153 of the
Cologne Code) and the following additional permitted uses:



         a.   Retail sales and services.



         b.   Professional offices, bank, and financial
institutions.



         c.   Neighborhood medical clinic.



         d.   Fitness centers.



      2.   Permitted uses in the Village of Cologne PUD outlots
lying easterly of CSAH 53 and outlots lying northerly of the Twin Cities and
Western Railroad.



         a.   No uses have been assigned to the outlots lying
easterly CSAH 53. Future development of the outlots lying easterly of CSAH 53
shall require final plat/PUD approval and rezoning.



         b.   No site plans, access locations, or proposed uses
have been approved for the outlots lying northerly of the Twin Cities and
Western Railroad. Future development on these outlots shall be subject to
final plat/PUD approval and detailed site plan review. Permitted uses on
these outlots are limited to the following:



            1.   Agriculture crop production and fruit and
vegetable gardening.



            2.   Seasonal produce stands for sales of fruits
and vegetables and agricultural products.



            3.   Landscape production and seasonal stands for
sales of bedding plants, landscape stock, and landscape materials.



            4.   Rental storage (mini storage) buildings.



            5.   Welding, machine shops, and similar specialty
businesses.



            6.   Construction trade offices and yards.



            7.   Office/warehouses, except major distribution
facilities.



            8.   On-site advertising signs for permitted uses
consistent with Ordinance No. 150 (Chapter 153 of the City Code.)



            9.   Off-site advertising signs limited to Village
at Cologne development and marketing signs.



            10.   Other compatible uses approved by the City
Council at the time of site plat approval and final plat/PUD approval.



   B.   Exceptions to dimensional standards:



      All uses within the Village of Cologne PUD shall meet the
dimensional standards as required in the Cologne zoning ordinance (Chapter
153 of the City Code) for the zoning district that allows the specific use,
with exception to the dimensional standards for the type lots itemized below:



 

      1.    Executive Home Lots
 


      Minimum lot width
 
75 feet


      Minimum lot depth
 
125 feet


      Minimum setback requirements
 


         Front
 
25 feet


         Rear
 
25 feet


         Side
 
5 feet minimum and 15 feet between homes



 

      2.    Designer Home Lots
 


      Minimum lot width
 
62 feet


      Minimum lot depth
 
125 feet


      Minimum setback requirements
 


         Front
 
25 feet


         Rear
 
25 feet


         Side
 
5 feet minimum and 15 feet between homes



 



      3.    Village/Carriage Home Lots
 


      Minimum lot width
 
36 feet


      Minimum lot depth
 
95 feet (100 feet interior lots)


      Minimum setback requirements
 


         Front
 
15 feet home


25 garage from ROW or sidewalk, whichever is less


         Front (corner lot)
 
15 feet


         Rear
 
25 feet


         Side
 
4 feet minimum and 8 feet between homes




 



      4.    Alley Home Lots
 


      Minimum lot width
 
55 feet


      Minimum lot depth
 
120 feet


      Minimum setback requirements
 


         Front
 
25 feet


         Front (corner lot)
 
20 feet


         Rear
 
25 feet from alley


         Side
 
8 feet from house side


0 feet garage side




 



      5.   Townhomes, Senior/Multiple-Family Residential and
Commercial Uses



         General site and architectural townhome plans have been
included in the approved Concept PUD and are consistent with the Cologne
zoning ordinance (Chapter 153 of the City Code.) Specific site and
architectural plans for the senior/multiple-family residential and commercial
uses have not been included in the approved Concept PUD. At the time of Final
PUD approval detailed site and architectural plans for the
senior/multiple-family residential and commercial uses will be submitted
consistent with the standards included in this chapter. All such uses require
detailed site plan review to be approved by the city at the time of final
plat approval. The city may at its discretion consider exceptions to the
dimensional standards for these uses as required in the Cologne zoning
ordinance (Chapter 153 of the City Code,) provided such exceptions are
consistent with the pre-approved exceptions and are compatible with adjacent
land uses



      6.   Street Standards



 



 

Right-of-Way

 

Pavement Width*



Local
 
50 feet
 
28 feet


Parkway (west of St. Louis Street)
 
80 feet minimum
 
16-foot travel lanes**


8-foot bump-outs/parking lane


Louis Street (east of parkway)
 
100 feet
 
Parkway with center median width to be determined


Alley (private street)
 
30 feet
 
20 feet


Notes to table


* Pavement widths are measured from the back of curb to the back of curb.


** Turn lanes and parking lanes/bump-outs shall be provided where found
necessary by the City Engineer




 



   C.   Architectural and Site Design Standards.



      The following standards shall apply to the development:



      1.   Residential Development Standards



         a.   No single-family home shall have the same front
elevation or colors as the adjacent home.



         b.   Single-family homes shall be constructed with
durable materials, including the following requirements:



            1. )   The house elevations facing public streets
in the Village at Cologne shall be consistent with the 2016 model home
illustrations, including but not limited to, the Cedarwood A & C, Coblestone
B & C, Eastman A & C, Elmwood F & H, Kaiden AS & BB & BS, Linden A & C,
Payton A & B & C, Pinehurst C, Rockford A, Standford C & D, and Taylor A & B
& C Series.



            2. )   Architectural features of the house
elevations facing public streets in the Village at Cologne shall be
consistent with Appendix F: Front Elevation Requirements for Vinyl Siding.



            3.)   House elevations facing two public streets
shall conform with the above requirements on the street side from which
primary access is gained, except in the home served by alleys where the above
requirements shall be met on the street side opposite from which primary
access is gained.



         c.   Single-family homes that are served by alleys shall
have varied and interesting detailing as part of the architectural design.
Each home shall utilize architectural accent features such as dormers, arched
windows, shutters, front porches, stoops, etc.



         d.   The applicant shall implement architectural review
and design guidelines for all residential buildings. These guidelines shall
be consistent with the design concepts and standards identified in The
Village at Cologne booklet dated October 12, 2004.



         e.   Townhome buildings shall be constructed with
durable materials, including the following requirements:



            1.)   The building elevations facing public
streets of at least 60% of the townhome buildings in the Village at Cologne
shall be finished with brick, stone, stucco, or wood, or a combination
thereof, excluding the roof, roof trim, dormers, corner trim, gutters,
downspouts, porch roof, porch roof trim, porch supports, windows, window
trim, shutters, doors, door trim, garage doors, garage door trim, drip ledge,
other incidental trim and similar architectural and construction features,
railings, and door steps.



            2.)   The building elevations facing public
streets of no more than 40% of the townhomes in the Village at Cologne may be
finished with materials other than brick, stone, stucco, or wood, provided
the Front Elevation Requirements for Vinyl Siding as illustrated on the
attached Appendix B, or comparable features and treatments, are met, and
provided that brick, stone, stucco, or wood are incorporated as accents on at
least 10% of the street facing elevation.



            3.)   The applicant may request an amendment to
these provisions at the time of subsequent final plat approval, based upon
detailed architectural and site plans prepared at that time. The city shall
consider such requests, provided the detailed architectural and site plans
are found to be consistent with the Concept PUD documentation and intent of
this chapter.



         f.   All mechanical equipment associated with townhome
units shall be locate adjacent to the garage notched in the building or
screened with materials compatible with the building and project landscaping.



         g.   Site plan approval by the city is required for all
townhome and senior/multiple-family housing buildings. Guest parking shall be
provided within close proximity to townhomes and senior/multiple-family
housing buildings. Guest parking shall be provided within close proximity to
townhomes and senior/multiple-family housing when public street parking is
not immediately available or conveniently located to serve guests. Guest
parking shall be provided at ta rate of one parking space per two housing
units.



         h.   Senior/multiple-family housing buildings shall be
constructed with durable materials, including the following requirements:



            At least one-third of the exterior elevations of
senior/multiple-family housing  building(s) in the Village at Cologne shall
be finished with brick, stone, stucco, or wood, or a combination thereof,
excluding the roof, roof trim, dormers, corner trim, gutters, downspouts,
porch roof, porch roof trim, porch supports, windows, window trim, shutters,
doors, door trim, garage doors, garage door trim, drip ledge, other
incidental trim, and similar architectural and construction features,
railings, and door steps.



            The city may upon detailed site plan and
architectural review, and at its discretion, allow a lesser percentage of
brick, stone, stucco, or wood on some exterior elevations, provided a higher
percentage of brick, stone, stucco, or wood is used on elevations facing
public streets and single-family homes, and provided the architectural
details and features on all elevations are not inconsistent with the
requirements illustrated on Appendix B.



         i.   All mechanical equipment associated with
senior/multiple-family housing buildings shall be notched in the building or
screened with materials compatible with the building and project landscaping.



      2.   Commercial Development Standards



         a.   Site plan approval by the city is required for all
commercial buildings.



         b.   All exterior building materials shall be high
quality and constructed of durable materials. Exterior surfaces of all walls
facing public streets and/or residences shall be face brick, stone, glass,
stucco (or similar), architecturally enhanced concrete panels, or decorative
block. Painted block is prohibited.



         c.   All roof mounted equipment shall be screened by
parapet or roof forms or painted to match the exterior of the building. 
Wood and metal enclosures on the roof shall be prohibited. Ground mounted
equipment must be screened by walls designed and located to be aesthetically
harmonious and compatible with the principal building on the lot. Materials
for screening walls shall be of the same materials as the principal structure.



         d.   The exterior design of the buildings shall have
varied and interesting detailing. Large unadorned wall shall be prohibited.
All large walls must be relieved by architectural detailing, such as change
in materials, change in color, offsets, or other significant visual relieve
provided in a manner or at intervals in keeping with the size, mass and scale
f the wall and its views from public rights-of-way.



         e.   Trash and recycling storage areas shall be designed
within an enclosure designed to match the principal building or located
within a structure.



         f.   Exterior elevations of all sides of a proposed
building noting the material and color of each component shall be submitted
with the site plan for determination of compliance with the above
requirements.



         g.   Landscape screening or building design measures
shall be required to minimize and limit the visual impact of loading areas
from customer access points and public rights-of-way.



      3.   Light Industrial Development Standards.



         a.   Site plan approval by the city is required for all
light industrial uses and buildings.



         b.   All exterior building materials shall be of high
quality and constructed of durable materials. Exterior surfaces of all walls
facing public roads shall be architecturally enhanced concrete panels,
decorative block, or steel panels with masonry wainscoting or similar masonry
accents.



         c.   The storage of supplies, products, vehicles,
equipment or other materials shall be kept indoors unless totally screened
from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties.



         d.   The exterior design of the buildings shall have
varied and interesting detailing.  Large unadorned walls shall be
prohibited. All large wall areas must be relieved by architectural detailing,
such as change in materials, change in color, offsets, or other significant
visual relief provided in a manner or at intervals in keeping with the size,
mass, and scale of the wall and its views from public rights-of-way and
adjacent properties.



      4.   Landscaping



         a.   Landscaping for the parkways, berms, and public
medians shall be consistent with the landscape elements shown in the The
Village of Cologne booklet dated October 12, 2004, “composite” plans,
dated November 3, 2004, and Preliminary Landscape Plans, dated February 25,
2005.



         b.   Landscape plans consistent with city requirements
shall be submitted for the commercial buildings, townhomes, and
senior/multiple-family housing at the time of final platting.



         c.   Boulevard trees shall be planted along both sides
of the parkway.  The trees shall be planted at a minimum of 80 feet on
center.



         d.   The periphery of all parking lots shall be
landscaped and screened to minimize off-site views of large parking areas.



         e.   Exterior lighting shall be consistent throughout
the development.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. 3- -2007; Ord. 150-W, passed 9-19-2016)



APPENDIX F: FRONT ELEVATION REQUIREMENTS



   Appendix F is incorporated by reference as if appearing in total. A
copy of this Appendix is on file in the city offices.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. 3- -2007)



APPENDIX G: THE VILLAGE MARKET PUD STANDARDS



   A.   Permitted Uses:



      1.   Permitted uses in The Village Market PUD include those
permitted uses described for Residential/Commercial Mixed Use PUDs in §
153.037(C) and the following additional permitted uses:



         a.   Retails sales and service.



         b.   Professional offices, banks, and financial
institutions.



         c.   Neighborhood medical clinic.



         d.   Fitness centers.



   B.   Exceptions to Dimensional Standards:



      All permitted commercial structures within The Village Market PUD
shall be setback a minimum of 30 feet from public rights-of-way and
properties abutting The Village Market PUD. The minimum separation between
commercial structures shall be 20 feet. There shall be no other minimum
structure setbacks from private property lines or common areas within the PUD.



   C.   Architectural and Site Design Standards:



      1.   Site plan approval by the city is required for all
commercial buildings.



      2.   All exterior building materials shall be of high quality
and constructed of durable materials. Exterior surfaces of all walls facing
public streets and/or residences shall be face brick, stone, glass, stucco
(or similar), architecturally enhanced concrete panels, or decorative block.
Painted block is prohibited.



      3.   All roof mounted equipment shall be screened by parapet
or roof forms or painted to match the exterior of the building. Wood and
metal enclosures on the roof shall be prohibited. Ground mounted equipment
must be screened by walls designed and located to be aesthetically harmonious
and compatible with the principal building on the lot. Materials for
screening walls shall be of the same materials as the principal structure.



      4.   The exterior design of the buildings shall have varied
and interesting detailing. Large unadorned walls shall be prohibited. All
large wall areas must be relieved by architectural detailing, such as change
in materials, change in color, offsets, or other significant visual relief
provided in a manner or at intervals in keeping with the size, mass, and
scale of the wall and its views from public rights-of-way.



      5.   Trash and recycling storage areas shall be designed
within an enclosure designed to match the principal building or located
within a structure.



      6.   Exterior elevations of all sides of a proposed building
noting the material and color of each component shall be submitted with the
site plan for determination of compliance with the above requirements.



      7.   Landscape screening or building design measures shall be
required to minimize and limit the visual impact of loading areas from
customer access points and public rights-of-way.



      8.   Exterior lighting shall be consistent throughout the
development.



   D.   Landscaping and Lighting:



      1.   Landscaping for the parkways, berms an public medians
shall be consistent with the landscape elements shown in the The Village of
Cologne booklet dated October 12, 2004, “composite” plans, dated November
3, 2004, Preliminary Landscape Plans, dated February 25, 2005, and the The
Village Market Phase I Landscaping, dated August 15, 2005.



      2.   Final landscape plans consistent with city requirements
shall be submitted for the commercial buildings at the time of time of final
platting and site plan review.



      3.   Boulevard trees shall be planted along both sides of the
parkway. The trees shall be planted at a minimum of 80 feet on-center.



      4.   The periphery of all parking lots shall be landscaped and
screened to minimize off-site reviews of large parking areas.



      5.   Exterior lighting shall be consistent throughout the
development.



   E.   Sign Standards:



      1.   Number of Allowed Signs:



         Each tenant shall be entitled to one wall sign on the
building elevation facing the parking lot and an additional wall sign on the
elevation facing a public street. A tenant occupying all of a free-standing
building shall be entitled to a maximum of three signs on any of the four
wall elevations.



      2.   Type of Signs:



         All signs shall consist of individual dimensional letters
and be backlit or halo lighted if illuminated. Sign cans and dimensional
letters attached to a raceway are prohibited. Exception to sign cans may be
made, in Hans Hagen Home’s sole discretion, in cases involving logos or
limited portions of the sign.



      3.   Size of Signs for Tenants in Professional Building:



         •   The maximum height of any sign, measured from the
top of any ascender to the bottom of any descender, shall not exceed 24
inches.



         •   Multiple rows are not to exceed 24 inches in total
height, including spaces.



         •   Maximum size of any individual letter shall not
exceed 32 inches. Minimum letter size is eight inches.



         •   Minimum stroke is one inch.



         •   Total horizontal measurement shall not exceed 75%
of the lease space width on spaces up to 30 feet in width. On spaces greater
than 30 feet in width, sign width shall be determined on a case by case basis.



         •   Total area of sign(s) shall in no even exceed 7%
of the tenant’s wall area.



      4.   Size of Signs for Tenants in Multi-Tenant Retail
Buildings:



         •   The maximum height of any sign, measured from the
top of any ascender to the bottom of any descender, shall not exceed 40
inches.



         •   Multiple rows are not to exceed 40 inches in total
height, including spaces.



         •   Maximum size of any individual letter shall not
exceed 36 inches. Minimum letter size is ten inches.



         •   Minimum stroke is 1-1/2 inches.



         •   Total horizontal measurement shall not exceed 75%
of the lease space width on spaces up to 30 feet in width. On spaces greater
than 30 feet in width, sign width shall be determined on a case by case basis.



         •   Total area of sign(s) shall in no event exceed 7%
of the tenant’s wall area. Tenants with only one exterior wall shall be
allowed 10% coverage.



         •   In addition to the above, one projecting sign that
is architecturally compatible with the building may be approved by the Hans
Hagen Homes at its sole discretion.



      5.   Size of Signs for Tenants Occupying All of a
Free-Standing Building:



         •   The maximum height of any sign, measured from the
top of any ascender to the bottom of any descender, shall not exceed 48
inches.



         •   Multiple rows are not to exceed 48 inches in total
height, including spaces.



         •   Maximum size of any individual letter shall not
exceed 36 inches. Minimum letter size is ten inches.



         •   Minimum letter stroke is 1-1/2 inches.



         •   Total area of sign(s) shall in no event exceed 7%
of the tenant’s wall area.



      6.   Size of Signs for Grocery Store Tenants:



         •   The maximum height of any sign, measured from the
top of any ascender to the bottom of any descender, shall not exceed 156
inches.



         •   Multiple rows are not to exceed 156 inches in
total height, including spaces.



         •   Maximum size of any individual letter shall not
exceed 114 inches. Minimum letter size is 18 inches.



         •   Minimum stroke is 1-1/2 inches.



         •   Total area of sign(s) shall in no event exceed 7%
of the tenant’s wall area. Tenants with only one exterior wall shall be
allowed 10% coverage.



         •   Major signage areas of grocer tenant shall not
exceed 430 square feet of 7% of the elevation, whichever is greater.



         •   Secondary signage for other tenants within the
grocery building shall not exceed 250 square feet or 3% of the facade,
whichever is greater.



      7.   Measurement of Signs:



         Wall Area: For purposes of these criteria, tenant’s wall
area shall be the sum of the areas of all exterior facades of the tenant’s
premises, measured from the ground to the top of the parapet and to the
centers fo the two demising walls. For an in-line tenant, this will be the
sum of the area of the front, rear, and any exterior side wall. For an end
cap tenant, this will be the sum of the area of the front, rear, and any
exterior side wall. For a freestanding building, this will be the area of all
four exterior wall facades.



         Sign Area: Signs shall be measured by the sum of the areas
of the rectangle(s) enclosing the individual words in the sign, ignoring any
ascenders or descenders.



      8.   Style of Signs:



         To be approved by Hans Hagen Homes on a case by case basis.



      9.   Colors and Materials of Signs:



         To be approved by Hans Hagen Homes on a case by case basis.



      10.   Placement of Signs:



         Centered horizontally and vertically, subject to Hans Hagen
Homes modification based on building design and location of adjacent signs.



      11.   Mounting of Signs:



         Mounted flush to the surface with non-corrosive fasteners
with no exposed connections and no exposed raceways. Final electrical hook-up
shall be performed by a licensed electrician.



      12.   Approval of Signs:



         Three sets of scaled drawings of the sign must be submitted
to Hans Hagen Homes for review. The drawings shall include and elevation
indicating placement of the sign, cross-section indicating construction and
installation of the sign and shall otherwise indicate complete conformance
with this criteria. Upon approval of the sign by Hans Hagen Homes, the tenant
shall apply for City of Cologne Planning Commission approval. No sign shall
be fabricated or installed unless and until tenant has obtained all necessary
city approvals.



      13.   Address Signs:



         Tenants are required to identify their front entrance and
rear delivery door with their address number in three-inch decals. The rear
delivery door shall also contain the tenant’s name. Number and letter style
is restricted to standard block. Letters shall be white reflective. Decals
shall be centered on the door.



      14.   Gas Station Monument Sign:



         Maximum height 20 feet, but no greater than ten feet as
measured from the grade of the intersection of Village Parkway and CSAH 53;
80 square feet maximum signage area. Backlit acrylic sign panels (changeable
for prices.) Architecturally designed dot match primary materials and details
of center.



      15.   Project Monument Sign (Hwy. 53 and 212):



         Maximum height eight feet (measured from proposed grade.)
Ninety-seven square feet of signage area (neighborhood/center identification
only - no tenant identification.) Architecturally designed to be an integral
part of pond improvements.



      16.   Project Monument Signs (Hwy. 53 and Village Parkway):



         Two monuments north and south of the parkway and west of
Highway 53 to identify the entrance to the center. Maximum height eight feet
(measured from proposed grade.) Sixty-four square feet of signage area
(neighborhood/center identification only - no tenant identification.)



      17.   Multi-Tenant Monument Sign (commercial entrance west of
round about):



         Maximum height ten feet. Ninety-seven square feet of
signage area. Pre-finished aluminum sign panels with backlit letters for
multiple tenants. Architecturally designed to match materials and color of
center.



      18.   Multi-Tenant Monument/Electronic Message Sign (Hwy. 212):



         Maximum height 37 feet above grad (top of sign area is
approximately 26 feet above Hwy. 212 surface elevation.) Minimum property
line setback is ten feet. One hundred and sixty square feet of total sign
area, including 60 square feet of electronic messaging display. The
electronic display background color tones, lettering, logos, pictures,
illustrations, symbols, and any other graphic presentation shall not blink,
flash, rotate, scroll, change in illumination intensity, or otherwise change
in outward appearance, except when the electronic message or display is
changed to another message or display. Background color tones, lettering,
logos, pictures, illustrations, symbols, and any other electronic display
shall not change more than four times per hour or at intervals less than 15
minutes. The sign structure shall be architecturally designed to match the
color and materials of the Village Market Center, including brick and
cultured stone.



   F.   Parking Standards:



      The Village Market PUD includes eight commercial buildings
totaling approximately 108,400 square feet of building floor area.
Individually, the commercial buildings would require 689 parking spaces under
current zoning requirements. The Village Market PUD site plan allows for
shared parking centered between all buildings via common areas and access
easements over the site. Shared usage of central parking is complementary to
businesses which have offsetting day time or evening peak hour clientele. As
a result of this concept, the minimum number of parking spaces required in
The Village Market PUD is reduced to 561 parking spaces.



      Minimum parking lot design shall include minimum nine feet by 18
feet stalls and minimum 24 feet wide access drives and aisles between parking
stalls. The parking area serving The Village Market may be constructed in
phases as individual buildings are constructed; except that, when the grocery
store is constructed the entire parking area and drives must be completed.



(Ord. 150, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. 3- -2007)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table




         I.   FRANCHISES





         II.   STREET NAME CHANGES





         III.   ANNEXATIONS





         IV.   ZONING MAP CHANGES




TABLE I:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




53
 
4-7-1941
 
Interstate Power Company granted permission to erect, install, and construct
an electric plant for 15 years


58
 
9-2-1952
 
Interstate Power Company granted a franchise for 20 years


59
 
4-6-1953
 
Minnesota Valley Natural Gas Company granted a franchise to operate a gas
system


60
 
12-5-1956
 
Northern States Power Company granted a franchise to operate for 20 years


105
 
4-18-1983
 
Minnegasco, Inc., granted a gas franchise


120A
 
9-3-2002
 
North American Communications Corporation granted a cable franchise


 
 




 



TABLE II:  STREET NAME CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


94
 
8-6-1979
 
Renaming of certain public streets and public ways


 
 



 



TABLE III:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




57
 
5-3-1949
 
Extension of city boundaries


58-B
 
3-17-1950
 
Extension of city boundaries


64
 
5-31-1962
 
Extension of corporate limits to include certain unplatted land


67
 
12-10-1964
 
Extension of corporate limits to include certain unplatted land


68
 
12-26-1964
 
Extension of corporate limits to include lands owned by the city


69
 
11- -1965
 
Extension of corporate limits to include certain lands


72
 
2-6-1967
 
Extension of corporate limits to include certain unplatted land


127
 
5-2-1994
 
Annexing certain lands into the corporate limits of the city


133
 
11-4-1996
 
Annexing certain lands into the corporate limits of the city


145
 
7-7-1997
 
Annexing certain lands into the corporate limits of the city


166
 
10-1-2012
 
Annexing a 1.54-acre parcel of land in Benton Township, adjacent and
contiguous to the city’s easterly border, into the corporate limits of the
city


 
 




 



TABLE IV:  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


128
 
10-17-1994
 
Rezoning Tract B from Agricultural (A) to Low Density Residential (R-1) and
zoning Tract A as Agricultural (A)


150-V
 
7-18-2016
 
Expanding the DO Downtown Overlay District to include all properties lying
easterly of State Highway 284, lying southerly of Benton Avenue, and lying
northerly of US Highway 212


 
 
 
 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Minnesota Statutes





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES



 

M.S.
 
Code Section




12.25
 
32.01; 32.04


12.31
 
32.06


13.37(b)
 
91.21


13D
 
30.18


14.57–14.70
 
111.36; 111.99


15.99
 
31.05


16B.59–16B.75
 
150.03


16B.62, Subd. 1
 
150.01; 150.02


16B.65, Subd. 1
 
150.01


16B.69
 
150.98


16B.70
 
150.02


84.787, Subd. 7
 
73.02


84.787, Subd. 8
 
73.02


84.81–84.91
 
72.01


84.872
 
72.06


88.16–88.22
 
95.65


103I.301–103I.345
 
37.06


115.01(8)
 
52.001


115.07
 
52.001


152
 
93.01


152.021–152.025
 
93.01


157.16
 
111.03


157.16, Subd. 3d
 
111.03


168B.011, Subd. 3
 
95.20


169
 
70.01; 72.01; 72.10; 73.08


169.01
 
95.26; 152.003


169.01, Subd. 3
 
70.09


169.045(7)
 
73.08


196.222
 
74.26


169.522
 
73.08


169.69
 
70.10


169.693
 
70.10


216D.01-216D.09
 
91.14; 91.24


216B.02, Subd. 4
 
91.02


216B.02, Subd. 6
 
91.02


216B.34
 
91.22


237.012
 
54.01


238
 
91.02


301B.01
 
91.02


307.08
 
152.003


329
 
115.03


340A
 
111.01; 111.02; 111.20; 111.23; 111.36; 111.99


340A.14, Subd. 6
 
111.22


340A.101
 
111.03; 111.22


340A.401, Subd. 1
 
111.22


340A.404, Subd. 4a
 
111.22


340A.404, Subd. 4b
 
111.22


340A.408, Subd. 2b
 
111.22


340A.408, Subd. 3
 
111.22


340A.408, Subd. 5
 
111.23


340A.409
 
111.25


340A.413, Subd. 3
 
111.20


340A.414
 
111.35


340A.504
 
111.33


340A.504, Subd. 3
 
111.22


340A.504, Subd. 3c
 
111.22


340A.504, Subd. 5
 
111.22


340A.509
 
111.02


340A.801
 
111.25


347.151
 
92.12


347.51
 
92.12


347.54
 
92.12


349
 
113.01; 113.02; 113.13


349.11–349.23
 
113.06; 113.07


349.12
 
113.04


349.12, Subd. 25
 
113.11


349.213
 
113.02


429.061
 
95.24


429.101
 
95.01; 95.02; 95.24; 95.43


462
 
152.003


462.353, Subd. 4(d)
 
31.06


462.357, Subd. 3
 
30.50


462.357, Subd. 7
 
153.037


462.357, Subd. 8
 
153.037


462.358
 
152.003


462.358, Subd. 2b
 
152.015


462.361
 
31.06


462.3593
 
153.047


463.15, Subd. 3
 
116.055


463.15–463.26
 
95.01


463.17
 
95.23


505
 
152.003


514.67
 
95.01


609.02, Subd. 3
 
93.11


609.75–609.763
 
113.06


624.717
 
130.02


626.862
 
10.20


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




4C
 
- -
 
98.01; 98.03; 98.05


90A
 
- -
 
31.35


97A
 
- -
 
31.35


135
 
- -
 
153.041


150
 
- -
 
31.35


150A
 
- -
 
Ch. 153


150B
 
- -
 
Ch. 153


150C
 
- -
 
Ch. 153


150D
 
- -
 
Ch. 153


150E
 
- -
 
Ch. 153


150F
 
- -
 
Ch. 153


150G
 
- -
 
Ch. 153


150H
 
- -
 
Ch. 153


150I
 
- -
 
Ch. 153


150J
 
- -
 
Ch. 153


150K
 
- -
 
Ch. 153


150L
 
- -
 
Ch. 153


150M
 
- -
 
Ch. 153


150N
 
- -
 
Ch. 153


150O
 
- -
 
Ch. 153


159
 
- -
 
31.35


161
 
- -
 
31.35


161A
 
- -
 
31.35


16
 
12-27-1915
 
130.02


53
 
4-7-1941
 
TSO I


57
 
5-3-1949
 
TSO III


58-B
 
3-17-1950
 
TSO III


58
 
9-2-1952
 
TSO I


59
 
4-6-1953
 
TSO I


60
 
12-5-1956
 
TSO I


64
 
5-31-1962
 
TSO III


67
 
12-10-1964
 
TSO III


68
 
12-26-1964
 
TSO III


69
 
11- -1965
 
TSO III


72
 
2-6-1967
 
TSO III


79
 
7-29-1970
 
72.10


83
 
8-3-1974
 
130.01


86
 
9-2-1975
 
30.01


94
 
8-6-1979
 
TSO II


101
 
10-4-1982
 
90.01-90.07; 90.98


105
 
4-18-1983
 
TSO I


121
 
5-2-1988
 
93.01-93.12; 93.99; Ch. 93, App. A


80B
 
12-18-1989
 
30.40-30.51


122
 
4-2-1990
 
151.01–151.09


76A
 
10-4-1993
 
71.04; 71.05


127
 
5-2-1994
 
TSO III


90-B
 
6-6-1994
 
92.08, 92.11


128
 
10-17-1994
 
TSO IV


125C
 
3-18-1996
 
95.25; 95.26


133
 
11-4-1996
 
TSO III


141
 
7-7-1997
 
152.001-152.016; 152.030-152.034; 152.045-152.048; 152.060-152.063;
152.075-152.077; 152.090-152.095; 152.110-152.112; 152.125-152.128; 152.999


145
 
7-7-1997
 
TSO III


150
 
2-22-2000
 
153.001-153.018; 153.030-153.046; 153.060-153.077; 153.090-153.093; 153.999;
Ch. 153, App. A–G


151
 
5-1-2000
 
31.20-31.24


141A
 
7-17-2000
 
152.008


152
 
8-7-2000
 
91.01-91.31


155
 
2-20-2001
 
112.01-112.13


130A
 
7-2-2001
 
97.01–97.08, 97.98


156
 
6-3-2002
 
96.01–96.07, 96.98


120A
 
9-3-2002
 
TSO I


123A
 
4-7-2003
 
150.01-150.04; 150.98


159
 
10-6-2003
 
50.01; 50.02; 50.98


160
 
12-6-2004
 
31.01-31.08


141-B
 
12-20-2004
 
152.015


157
 
1-3-2005
 
30.15-30.26


101A
 
5-4-2005
 
90.05


162
 
9-20-2005
 
53.01-53.08


141-C
 
12- -2005
 
152.015


135
 
12-5-2005
 
110.01-110.21


163
 
10-2-2006
 
30.02


161B
 
12-18-2006
 
31.35; 31.36; Ch. 31, App. A


–
 
3- -2007
 
153.001-153.018; 153.030-153.046; 153.060-153.077; 153.090-153.093; 153.999;
Ch. 153, App. A–G


–
 
4- -2007
 
152.001-152.016; 152.030-152.034; 152.045-152.048; 152.060-152.063;
152.075-152.077; 152.090-152.095; 152.110-152.112; 152.125-152.128; 152.999


161C
 
12-17-2007
 
31.35; 31.36; Ch. 31, App. A


150-P
 
9-8-2009
 
153.077


150-Q
 
10-5-2009
 
111.31; 153.039


161-D
 
12-15-2009
 
Ch. 31, App. A


161-E
 
12-21-2009
 
Ch. 31, App. A


150-R
 
4-5-2010
 
153.039


150-S
 
8-16-2010
 
153.041; 153.043


161-F
 
12-6-2010
 
Ch. 31, App. A


164
 
5-2-2011
 
54.01–54.16


166
 
10-1-2012
 
TSO III


150-T
 
11-5-2012
 
153.031, 153.040


161-H
 
1-7-2013
 
Ch. 31, App. A


161-I
 
12-16-2013
 
31.35, 31.36, Ch. 31, App. A


150-U
 
3-17-2014
 
153.031, 153.043


161-J
 
1-5-2015
 
31.35, 31.36, Ch. 31, App. A


161-K
 
12-21-2015
 
Ch. 31, App. A


150-V
 
7-18-2016
 
153.016, 153.031, 153.047, TSO IV


150-W
 
9-19-2016
 
Ch. 153, App. E


161-L
 
12-19-2016
 
Ch. 31, App. A


 
 
 
 
 




 


