Municipal Code
Chisago City, Minnesota
Adopted: ______________
Chisago City
Page 1 of 4
CHAPTER 10
COUNCIL
10.01 REGULAR MEETINGS
(A) Regular meetings of the council shall be held on the fourth Tuesday of each month at 6:30 P.M. at the
Municipal Offices. The second Tuesday of the month will be the preferred day for addition of special
meetings of the council. The City Council may adopt a new start time from time to time by Council
Resolution. If any such Tuesday is a legal holiday, the meeting will be canceled or held on another
date and time as established by council action.
10.02 SPECIAL MEETINGS
Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by any two members of the Council by a written request
filed with the clerk who shall then post a three (3) day notice and mail a notice to all members of the time
and place of meeting at least one (1) day before the meeting.
10.03 ORDER OF BUSINESS
At the hour appointed for the meeting, the members shall be called to order by the Mayor, and in his/her
absence, by the acting mayor; the clerk shall call the roll and note the absentees. If a quorum is present,
the Council shall then proceed with its business.
10.04 MINUTES
Subd. 1 Approval of Minutes
The clerk shall provide a printed copy of the minutes of each meeting to each councilperson.
Amendments or corrections proposed by any member of the Council may be made by the clerk,
but no amendment to which objection is raised by any councilperson shall be made without the
approval of a majority of the Council.
Subd. 2 General Contents of Minutes
The clerk shall record all material matters considered by the Council in the minutes. Ordinances,
resolutions, communications, and claims considered by the Council need not be recorded in full in
the minutes if they appear in other permanent records of the clerk and can be accurately
identified from the description given in the minutes. The Council may, in its discretion, direct that
any one of the above be fully set out in the minutes.
10.05 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
Subd. 1 Preparation and Introduction
All legislation of the municipality shall be by ordinance. Ordinances, resolutions, and other
matters requiring council action shall be prepared at the direction of the Council, provided,
however, that the clerk or attorney may present ordinances, resolutions and other matters for
consideration.
Subd. 2 Enactment of Ordinances and Amendments
Every ordinance and amendment of an ordinance shall be enacted by a majority vote of all of the
members of the Council except where a larger number is required by law. It shall be signed by
the Mayor or in his absence by the acting mayor, attested by the clerk and published once in the
Chisago City
Page 2 of 4
legal newspaper. Proof of the publication shall be attached to and filed with the ordinance.
Every ordinance shall be recorded in the Ordinance Book within 20 days after its publication. All
ordinances shall be suitably entitled.
10.06 RULES OF ORDER
Subd.1 Presiding Officer
The Mayor, or in his absence, the acting mayor, shall preside at council meetings, preserve order
and decorum, and decide questions of order. The Mayor’s duties under this subdivision shall be
in addition to his/her duties, rights and privileges as a council member.
Subd. 2 Special Rules
The following special rules shall be applied:
(A) A member may be excused from voting on a matter duly before the Council only with
the unanimous consent of the other members present.
(B) A motion before the Council shall be reduced to writing by the clerk at the request of
any council member.
(C) Such other special rules may be adopted and included in this subdivision, as the
Council from time to time deems necessary.
Subd. 3 Finality of Council Decisions
(A) Ordinances. An ordinance may be repealed or amended at any time upon a motion,
second, vote, and publication in the legal newspaper, all in accordance with applicable
Minnesota Statues.
(B) Motions and Resolutions. After a motion or resolution has been duly passed or
adopted by the Council, it shall be final, in all respects, except as hereafter noted:
(I) No council can bind a successor council by a motion or a resolution.
(II) Within any session, a motion or resolution which has been duly passed or
adopted by the Council may only be modified or repealed after two votes have
been approved:
(a) A motion to reconsider the previous motion or resolution must be made
by a member who originally supported that motion or resolution, seconded
by any member, and passed by a majority vote. Such a motion shall only
be made and passed upon the grounds that new evidence or information
which was previously unavailable warrants a reconsideration.If the motion
to reconsider is defeated, the issue cannot be reconsidered during that
session and the original motion or resolution stands as previously passed
or adopted.
Chisago City
Page 3 of 4
(b) If the motion to reconsider passes, a new motion with a specific action
may be made and seconded by any member. If it passes by a majority
vote, it shall be deemed passed or adopted. If it is defeated, the original
motion or resolution stands as previously passed or adopted and the issue
may not be considered during that session.
(C) Definitions
(I) Session: is defined as the two-year period commencing upon the first council
meeting in January of an odd-numbered year until the first council meeting during
the next January of an odd-numbered year.
(II) Successor Council: is one, which is seated as of January after a general
election has been held to fill any council seat, even if all council members are the
same after said election. A successor council is in office during the next session of
the City Council.
(III) Unavailable Information or Evidence: is information or evidence which was not
presented to the council at a prior meeting when a motion or resolution was
passed and which, with reasonable diligence, could not have been found or
produced at said meeting.
Subd. 4 General Rules
In all other matters of parliamentary procedure, the Council shall be governed by the latest
printed edition of “Robert’s Rules of Order”.
Subd. 5 Suspension of rules
The operation and effect of any rule established or followed pursuant to this section may only be
suspended upon the unanimous vote of the Council.
10.07 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS
The attendance at council meetings of each member of the Council is deemed to be one of the most
important duties imposed by law upon him/her. His/her presence to participate in the hearings,
deliberations and decisions of the Council is essential to the proper discharge of his/her official duties.
Recognizing that it is not always possible for each member of the Council to be present at all meetings,
and that by reason of business demands, state of health, personal problems, vacations, and other
matters; occasional absences are excusable, the Council may compel the attendance of members and
punish non-attendance by resolution adopted by a majority.
10.08 COMPENSATION OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Subd. 1. Mayor’s Compensation
The salary of the Mayor shall be $4,000.00, for all regular city council meetings. When attending
additional meetings for official City business as an appointee, a $35.00 fee will be paid, with the
exception of special council meetings immediately before or following a regularly scheduled
council meeting, and any City paid training course. The $35.00 per meeting fee shall be effective
January 1, 2005.
Chisago City
Page 4 of 4
Subd. 2. Councilpersons Salaries
The salary of each councilperson is fixed at $3,000.00 for all regular city council meetings. When
attending additional meetings for official City business as an appointee, a $35.00 fee will be paid,
with the exception of special council meetings immediately before or following a regularly
scheduled council meeting, and any City paid training course. The $35.00 per meeting fee shall
be effective January 1, 2005.
Subd. 3. Method of Payment
Said compensation shall be paid quarterly
10.09 GENERAL POWERS.
Subd. 1 Composition of Council
The Council shall consist of the Mayor and four Councilpersons. Three members shall constitute
a quorum although a smaller number may adjourn from time to time.
Subd. 2 Special Powers
The Council may preserve order at its meetings, and shall be the judge of the election and
qualification of its members. The Council shall have power to regulate its own procedure. Every
current contract, conveyance, license or other written instrument shall be executed on behalf of
the municipality by the Mayor and clerk, with the corporate seal affixed, and only pursuant to
authority form the Council.
10.10 ACTING MAYOR
At its first meeting each year the Council shall choose an acting mayor from the Councilpersons. (S)he
shall perform the duties of Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor from the Municipality or, in
case of vacancy in the office of Mayor, until a successor has been appointed and qualifies.
10.11 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS
The Council may appoint such officer’s, employees, and agents for the Municipality as may be deemed
necessary for the proper management and operation of municipal affairs. The Council may prescribe the
duties and fix the compensation of all officers, both appointive and elective, employees and agents,
when not otherwise prescribed by law. The Council may, except as otherwise provided, remove any
appointive officer or employee when in its judgment the public welfare will be promoted by the removal.
Such power of removal is subject to veterans’ preference and civil service laws that may be applicable.
10.12 OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER
At its first meeting each year the Council shall designate the Official Newspaper that shall be the legal
newspaper for the Municipality.
10.13 DEPOSITOR
At its first meeting each year, the Council shall designate the depository for the municipal funds.
Amended 8/24/93, Amended 10/22/02, Ord. 250, Ord. 278(8/12/08), Ord. 296(2/13)
CHAPTER 11
ELECT I ONS
11.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE
The following Minnesota Statutes are hereby adopted by reference.
Subd. 2. 201.00 Registration of voters
Subd. 3. 203.00 Elections, general and specific
Subd. 4. 204.00 Elections, conduct of
Subd. 5. 205.00 Municipal elections
Subd. 6. 207,00 Absent and disabled voters
Subd. 7. 209.00 Election Contests
Subd. 8. 210.00 Penal provisions
Subd. 9. 211,00 Corrupt practices
11.02 DATES OF ELECTIONS, TERMS
Subd. 1. Date of Election. Notwithstanding any other provision in Chapter 11
to the contrary, the regular Municipal election shall be held
biennially on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November
in every even numbered year beginning with the 1974 election.
Subd. 2. Extension of Terms of Council Members. The terms of the Mayor
and the councilmen persons whose current terms will expire on the first
business day of January 1976 are extended to the first business day of
January 1977 and those offices shall be filed at the 1976 city election.
Subd. 3. Terms and Transition. Two councilmen persons shall be
elected for four-year terms at each biennial election commencing in
1974. Two Councilmen shall be elected for a four-year term at the
1978 city election. The Mayor shall be elected for a two-year term
at each such election commencing in 1976.
11.02 ABSENTEE BALLOT PRECINCT
As authorized by Minnesota Statutes, Revised 1976, Section 207.30. an absentee ballot
precinct ‘is hereby established at City Hall, the purpose of which ‘is to receive, transfer
and count city-wide absentee ballots.
11
CHISAGO CITY
AMENDMENT ORDINANCE NO. 12
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE EXISTING CHISAGO CITY ORDINANCE
PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CLERK ADMINISTRATOR
POSITION.
The Municipal Code, Section 12.02, of Chisago City is hereby repealed and replaced
with the following language:
12.02 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
Subd. 1 The duties of the City Administrator shall be as follows:
(A) Direct the administration of City affairs as provided by City
Council action, state, and federal laws. Coordinate with the City
Council in the administration of City affairs.
(B) Perform all functions of Clerk imposed by Minnesota Statutes
and/or City Ordinance.
(C) Coordinate and enforce all ordinances, regulations, and law
enforcement policies of the City Council and all laws of the
State of Minnesota applicable within the City.
(D) Prepare an annual fiscal budget and capital improvement plan
for submission to the City Council. Maintain financial guidelines
for the City within the scope of the approved budget and capital
program.
(E) Attend and participate in all City Council meetings and prepare
the City Council agendas. Attend, with discretion, or by
invitation, other committee and commission meetings.
(F) Coordinate City programs and activities as authorized by the
City Council.
(G) Supervise the conduct of City elections in accordance with the
prescribed laws and regulations.
(H) Supervise the activities of City personnel in the administration of
City policy. Assist the Personnel Committee in annual
evaluation and review of work performance of City personnel.
Assist the Personnel Committee in screening and interviewing
prospective City personnel as permitted by law. The City
Administrator shall have authority to effectively recommend their
employment, suspension, and removal to the Personnel
Committee and the City Council.
(I) Work in cooperation with the City Council’s appointed attorney
and engineer.
(J) Prepare or oversee preparation of the City newsletter.
(K) Maintain good relations with the general public.Consult with
appointed officials and with other public or private agencies as
may be required.
(L) Keep informed regarding federal, state and county programs
which may affect the City.
(M) Perform all duties as may be prescribed by law, ordinance, or
resolutions adopted by the City Council.
(N) Notify City officials of their elections or appointments to office,
certify to the County Auditor all appointments and results of all
Municipal elections, coordinate and enforce all ordinances,
regulations, and law enforcement policies of the City Council
and, where applicable, all County and State laws within the City.
(O) Perform the duties of Zoning Administrator.
Subd. 2 The qualifications of the City Administrator shall be as follows:
(A) Considerable knowledge of municipal government operation,
proper procedures, public relations, finances, purchasing, and
all administrative requirements for proper City operation.
(B) Knowledge of or ability to acquire full knowledge of all laws
affecting the City.
(C) Ability to provide harmonious relations with City employees and
the general public.
(D) Possess degree in public administration or equivalent
experience, knowledge, and/or abilities, which in the opinion of
the City Council qualifies the person for the position.
(E) Ability to coordinate development, to collect and analyze
material for reporting, to conduct and implement studies,
procedures, operations, and organization.
Subd. 3 The City Administrator shall be bonded, at City expense. This
shall be a position bond, which will indemnify the municipality.
Subd. 4 In the absence of, or temporary vacancy in the position of City
Administrator the title of City Administrator as written in all ordinances and/or
resolutions adapted by the City Council, shall be replaced by the title of City
Council or their designee.
Subd. 5 The City Administrator shall be appointed by the City Council with a
majority vote for an indefinite term and may be removed only by a majority vote
of the City Council.
Chisago City Municipal Code Page 1 of 3
Chapter 13 - Personnel
CHAPTER 13
PERSONNEL
Chisago City Municipal Code Page 2 of 3
Chapter 13 - Personnel
ORDINANCE NO 295
ORDINANCE RELATING TO CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND FOR APPLICANTS FOR
CITY EMPLOYMENT AND CITY LICENSES
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Chisago City, Chisago County,
Minnesota, as follows:
Section 1. That the Chisago City Code shall be amended by adding a new Chapter 13, as
follows:
CHAPTER 13
EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND CHECKS
Section 1 APPLICANTS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT
Purpose: the purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations that
will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized Criminal History
information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment background
checks for the positions described in Section 2.
Section 2 CRIMINAL HISTORY EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS:
The Lakes Area Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity
within the City, to do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants
for the following positions within the city, unless the city’s hiring authority
concludes that a background investigation is not needed:
Employment positions:
(all regular part-time or full-time employees of the City of Chisago, and other
positions that work with children or vulnerable adults)
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen
employment applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access data
maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized
Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data
that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police Department
under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her
designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal History data
may be released by the Police Department to the hiring authority, including the
City Council, the City Administrator, or other city staff involved in the hiring
process.
Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police
Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent
must fully comply with the provisions of Minn. Stat. Chapter 13 regarding the
collection maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth
in Minnesota statute’s Section 364.09, the city will not reject an applicant for
employment on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is directly
related to the position of employment sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross
misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the City rejects the applicant
request on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
Chisago City Municipal Code Page 3 of 3
Chapter 13 - Personnel
A. The grounds and reasons for the denial.
B. The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota
Statues Section 364.06.
C. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment
D. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
Reapplication.
Section 3. That this ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication.
Passed by the City Council of the City of Chisago City this _______ day of _________, 2013.
ATTEST:
___________________________________ ___________________________________
Mayor City Administrator
ORD 295(2/13)
CHAPTER 15
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT FINANCING AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
FOR LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
15.01 LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
(A) Intent. The policies contained herein establish a procedure for making
public improvements, public financing policies and levying special
assessments pursuant to the requirements of Minnesota Statutes. When
an improvement conveys special benefit to properties in a definable area,
the City intends to levy special assessments on the benefited properties to
finance such improvements. It is the policy of the City that the amount of
the assessment for public improvements should not exceed the special
benefit to the property. The City has adopted this ordinance and will use
the assessment policies adopted hereby to ensure that assessments have
a reasonable relationship to benefits. Public improvements include, but
are not limited to the construction or reconstruction of streets, sidewalks,
storm sewers or ditches, sanitary sewers, water works, street lighting or
any other public improvements allowed by State law.
15.02 FINANCING POLICIES.
(A) General. The financing policies of the City are described in detail in the
Public Improvement Financing Policy and Assessment Manual adopted by
the City (hereinafter referred to as the “Assessment Policies”) as modified
or amended from time to time by the City Council of the City.
(B) Required Public Improvements. The following is a non-exhaustive
description of Public Improvements required to be completed for each
development within the City and are described in more detail in the
Assessment Policies:
1. Grading;
2. Sanitary Sewer Facilities;
3. Water Facilities;
4. Storm Sewer;
5. Streets;
6. Street and Traffic Signs;
7. Sidewalks; and
8. Street Lights.
(C) Trunk Sewer Area and Unit Charges. Area and unit charges as described
in the Assessment Policies and in the amounts determined to be
appropriate by the City Council from time to time shall be charged by the
2
City to finance trunk sewer facilities as described in the Assessment
Policies.
(D) Trunk Watermain Area and Unit Charges. Area and unit charges as
described in the Assessment Policies and in the amounts determined to
be appropriate by the City Council from time to time shall be charged by
the City to finance trunk watermain facilities as described in the
Assessment Policies.
(E) Surface Water Management Planning and Storm Sewer Trunk Charges.
The City may charge area and/or unit charges in amounts determined to
be appropriate by the City to finance Surface Water Management
Planning and Storm Sewer Trunk facilities as described in the Assessment
Policies.
15.03 GENERAL ASSESSMENT POLICIES.
(A) Initiation of Improvements. Improvements may be initiated by the City
Council or by Petition of the owners of not less than thirty-five percent
(35%) in frontage of the real property abutting on the streets named in the
petition as the location of the improvement. Petitions requesting
improvements must be substantially on a form as approved by the City
Administrator and will be received by the City Council until November 15
of the year prior to the year of the requested construction. Petitions
presented after this date will be received only upon special consent from
the City Council. The City Council shall, by resolution, determine whether
or not the petition has been signed by the required percentage of owners
of the property affected by such petition.
(B) Project Cost. The “project cost” of an improvement shall be deemed to
include the cost of all necessary construction work required to accomplish
the improvement plus expenses incurred or to be incurred in making the
improvement including engineering, legal, administration, financing, rightof-
way acquisition and other contingent costs.
(C) City Cost. Where the project cost of an improvement is not entirely
attributable to the need for service to the area served by said
improvement, or where unusual conditions beyond the control of the
property owners in the area served by the improvements would result in
an inequitable distributions of special assessments, the City, through the
use of other funds, may pay such “City Costs” which, in the opinion of the
City Council, represents those costs not directly attributable to the area
served.
(D) Assessable Cost. The “Assessable Cost” of an improvement shall be
defined as those costs which, in the opinion of the City Council, are
attributable to the need for service in the area served by the improvement
and are not in excess of the special benefit conveyed to the property by
3
the improvements. Said assessable cost shall be equal to the project cost
of the current project as defined above, minus City Cost, as defined
above, minus other financial assistance applied to the project.
(E) City Property. City owned property, including building sites, parks and
playgrounds, but not including public streets and alleys, shall be regarded
as being assessable on the same basis as if such property was privately
owned.
(F) Distribution of Assessments. Several methods exist for assessing
property benefited by local improvement projects. It is the policy of the
City to use the method that most equitably distributes the project costs.
The assessable costs of the improvement shall be distributed among the
affected property owners as determined by one or more of the methods
described in the City of Chisago City Assessment Policies adopted by this
Ordinance.
(G) Application of Policy. In the event the literal application of the provisions
outlined herein would result in an inequitable distribution of special
assessments, the City Council reserves the right to adjust the policy so as
to achieve a more equitable distribution. Such adjustments may be based
on current or anticipated land use.
15.04 CLASSIFICATION OF PROJECTS.
(A) General. Public Improvements are divided into three classes specified in
the following subdivisions according to their respective benefit to the
whole City and to property specially served by the improvement and taking
into account past City practices.
(B) Class A Improvements. Class A Improvements are those which are of
general benefit to the City at large, including: (1) Public buildings, except
a building which is part of an improvement described in one of the
following subdivisions; (2) any public park, playground or recreational
facility; (3) the installation and maintenance of street lighting systems; and
(4) any improvement not described in M.S. 429.021 Subd. 1 or M.S.
429.101 Subd. 1. Any such improvement shall be financed from general
City funds and not from special assessments.
(C) Class B Improvements. Class B Improvements are those which are of
both general benefit and special benefit to abutting or nearby property.
Class B Improvements include: (1) Trunk water mains ten inches (10”) or
larger in diameter; (2) trunk sanitary sewer mains eight inches (8”) or
larger in diameter; (3) permanently surfacing arterial-collector street; (4)
storm sewers; and (5) the construction of off-street facilities.
(D) Class C Improvements. Class C Improvements are those which are
primarily, if not exclusively, a benefit to property abutting or in the area of
4
improvement or including: (1) the construction of sidewalks; (2) the
construction of water mains no larger than eight inches (8”); (3) the
construction of curbs and gutters; (4) grading, graveling, oiling and
applying non-permanent surfacing to streets; (5) permanently surfacing
residential streets; and (6) the abatement of nuisances and the draining of
swamps, marshes and ponds on public or private property and filling the
same.
15.05 FINANCING IMPROVEMENTS
(A) Policy. It is the policy of the City to finance improvements by the methods
described in the City of Chisago City Assessment Policies adopted by the
City and as amended from time to time hereafter. The apportionment of
the cost between benefited property and the City at large and the method
of levying assessments prescribed in the manual shall be followed in each
case unless the City Council, by resolution, finds that because of special
circumstances stated in the resolution a different policy is necessary or
desirable in the particular case. Any local improvement described in M.S.
Sec. 429.02 and not meeting the requirements of Class A, B or C by
section 8.10 shall be financed as the City Council determines to be most
feasible and equitable in each case.
In each case the City Council shall examine the assessment role before
approval and adjust any assessment which exceeds the benefit received
by the property assessed.
15.06 DISTRIBUTION OF ASSESSMENTS
(A) Distribution. Distribution of assessments will be conducted according to
the provisions outlined in the City of Chisago City Assessment Policies as
adopted on the date hereof and as amended from time to time hereafter.
15.07 ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES
(A) Procedures. Assessment procedures are explained in detail in the City of
Chisago City Assessment Policies adopted on the date hereof and as
amended from time to time hereafter.
15.08 FEDERAL, STATE AND COUNTY AID USE
(A) Application of Aid. If the City receives financial assistance from the
federal government, the State of Minnesota or Chisago County, to defray
a portion of the cost of a public improvement project, such aid shall be
used first to reduce the share of the project cost which would be met from
general City funds according to the assessment procedures contained in
this Ordinance and the City of Chisago City Assessment Policies. If such
aid is more than the amount of the improvement cost to be borne by the
City, the remainder of the aid so received shall be used to reduce
assessments as deemed appropriate and equitable by the City Council.
5
15.09 WATER AND SEWER STUBS
(A) Installation. Water and sewer service stubs shall be installed from the
main to the property line of property to be served before any permanent
street surfacing is constructed in the street. If any property owner fails to
connect to such water and sewer service lines within one (1) year after
notice from the City Engineer, the City Council shall proceed to have water
and sewer service installed and to assess the cost against the property.
15.10 ASSESSMENT POLICIES
(A) Adoption. The specific manner of applying the general policies as set
forth in this Ordinance shall be detailed in a document entitled, “City of
Chisago City Public Improvement Financing Policy And Assessment
Manual” which may be adopted by the City Council by a resolution of such
council.
The City of Chisago City Assessment Policies may be modified from time
to time by further resolution of the City Council and all references to such
City of Chisago City Assessment Policies in this Ordinance shall mean the
City of Chisago City Assessment Policies as so modified.
15.11 EFFECTIVE DATE
(A) Passage and Publication. This Ordinance shall take full effect and be in
full force from and after its passage and publication according to law.
CHAPTER 20
REVENUE SHARING FUND
20.01 DEFINITIONS
As used in this Chapter, the definitions adopted pursuant to 31 Code of Federal
Regulations, Subtitle B, Part 51, Federal Assistance to State and Local Governments,
Are hereby adopted by reference.
20.02 PROCEDURES AND AUDITING
Subd. 1 Establishment of Trust Fund
There is hereby established and created a trust fund wherein there shall be
deposited all entitlement funds received by the Municipality pursuant to the
Revenue Sharing Act. The trust fund shall be established on the hooks and
records of the Municipality as a separate set of accounts and shall be accounted
for in a manner customarily followed in accounting for trust or other segregated
funds, or a separate bank account may be established.
Subd.2 Uses of Trust Fund
Such funds shall be used of appropriated, including any interest earned thereon,
within twenty-four months from the date of the check received by the Municipality
pursuant to the Revenue Sharing Act, unless permission is obtained from the
Secretary for a linger period within which the funds may be utilized. Permission
for an extension of time in which to utilize the fund must be obtained by
application to the Secretary. Such application will set forth the facts and
circumstances supporting the need for more time and the amount of additional
time required.
Subd. 3 Expenditures
The Municipality shall provide for the expenditure of entitlement funds in
accordance with the laws and procedures applicable to the expenditure of its own
revenues.
Subd. 4 Accounting Procedures
The Municipality shall use the fiscal, accounting, and reporting procedures
relative to entitlement funds as are used with respect to expenditures made form
revenues derived from its own sources. The fiscal accounts shall be maintained
in such manner as to permit the reports required by the Secretary to be prepared
there from.
Subd. 5 Examination
The Municipality shall provide to the Secretary and to the Comptroller General of
the United States, on reasonable notice, access to and the right to examine such
books, documents, papers, or records as the Secretary may reasonably require
for the purpose of reviewing compliance with the Revenue Sharing Act and the
regulations of this part or, in the case of the Comptroller General, as the
Comptroller General may reasonably require for the purpose of reviewing
compliance and operations under the Acts.
Subd. 6 Auditing and Evaluation
(A) Scope of Audit
The Secretary shall provide for such auditing, examination, evaluation, and
review as may be necessary to insure that expenditures of entitlement
funds by the Municipality comply with the requirements of the Revenue
Sharing Act and regulations adopted. The scope of such review or
examination shall include a review of the Municipality’s accounting for such
funds with appropriate attention paid to verifying compliance with the
requirements of the Revenue Sharing Act and regulations adopted.
(B) Reliance on State, County, or Municipal Auditors
The Secretary may rely on independent public accountants when in his
judgment this may reasonably he done consistent with the provisions of
the Revenue Sharing Act and regulations adopted. Such audits shall be
performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. Audit
work papers will be retained for three (3) years after the close of the first
entitlement period unless released earlier by the Secretary. Audit work
papers will be made available to the Secretary and to the Comptroller
General or to their representatives. The Governor or Chief Executive
Officer will submit audit reports to the Secretary when an audit report
indicates a possible failure to comply substantially with any requirements
of the Revenue Sharing Act or regulations adopted.
20.03 PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF FUNDS
Subd. 1 Matching Funds
(A) In General
The Municipality may not use any part of its entitlement funds as a
contribution in order to obtain any matching federal funds under any
federal program.
(B) Use of Entitlement Funds to Supplement Federal Grant Funds
The prohibition on use of entitlement funds in paragraph (a) does not
prevent the use of such funds to supplement other federal grant funds.
Subd. 2. Permissible Expenditures.
(A) In General
Entitlement funds received may be used only for priority expenditures. As
used in this part, the term “priority expenditures” means:
(1) Ordinary and necessary maintenance and operating
expenses for:
a. Public safety (including lay enforcement, fire
protection, and building code enforcement);
b. Environmental protection (including sewage disposal,
sanitation and pollution abatement);
c. Public transportation (including transit systems and
streets and roads);
d. Health;
e. Recreation;
f. Libraries;
g. Social services for the poor or aged;
h. Financial administration;
(2) Ordinary and necessary capital expenditures authorized by
law.
(B) Non-priority Expenditures
The Municipality may not use entitlement funds for non-priority
expenditures, which are defined as any expenditure other than those,
included above. The Mayor of the Municipality must certify to the
Secretary that entitlement funds received by it have been used only for
priority expenditures as required by the Act.
(C) Effect of Non-compliance
In case the Municipality uses an amount of entitlement funds for other than
priority expenditures, it will pay over to the Secretary an amount equal to
110% of any amount expended in violation of the Revenue Sharing Act,
unless such amount is promptly repaid to the trust fund of the Municipality
after notice by the Secretary and opportunity for corrective action.
20.04 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED
No person in the Municipality shall, on the grounds of race, color, national origin or sex,
be excluded form participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to
discrimination under, any program or activity funded in whole or in part with entitlement
funds.
20.05 WAGE RATES
(A) Construction laborers and mechanics
The Municipality shall require that all laborer’s and mechanics employed by
contractors or sub-contractors in the performance of work or any construction
project, twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the costs of which project are paid
out of its. Entitlement funds will be paid wages at rates not less than those
prevailing on similar construction in the locality as determined by the Secretary of
Labor, and will be covered by laborer standards specified by the Secretary of
Labor.
(B) Government employees
When the Municipality employs individuals whose wages are paid in whole or in
part from entitlement funds, that said wages must not be lower than the
prevailing rates of pay for persons employed in similar public occupations by the
same employer. However, this subdivision shall apply with respect to employees
in any category only if twenty-five percent (25%) of the wages of all employees of
the Municipality in such categories are paid form the trust fund established by it
under this chapter.
CHAPTER 30
PLANNING COMMISSION
30.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION
A Planning Commission for the City is hereby established. The Commission shall be the City
Planning Agency.
30.02 COMPOSITION AND TERMS
Subd. 1 Composition
Such Planning Commission shall consist of 7 members, Members shall be residents of the city.
Members shall be appointed by the Council and may be removed by a four-fifths vote of the
Council. In addition, the Council shall select an ex officio member from among its own members
to serve on the Commission.
Subd. 2 Terms
Of the members of the Commission first appointed, one shall be appointed for the term of one (1)
year, one for the term of two (2) years, one for the term of three (3) years, and one for terms of
four (4) years. Their successors shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years. Both original and
successive appointees shall hold their offices until their successors are appointed and qualified.
Terms shall expire each year on December 31. Vacancies during the term shall be filled by the
Council for the unexpired portion of the term.
Subd. 3 Compensation
All members shall be compensated at a fixed per diem rate of $35 per meeting attended (regular
and special).
30.03 ORGANIZATION MEETINGS
Subd. 1 Organization
The Commission shall elect a Chairman from among its appointed member’s for a term of one
year, and the Commission may create and fill such other offices as it may determine
Subd. 2 Meetings
The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. It shall adopt rules for the
transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, and findings,
which record shall be public record. On or about January 1st of each year, the Commission shall
submit to the Council a report of its work during the preceding year. Expenditures of the
Commission shall be within amounts appropriated for the purpose by the Council.
30.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION
The Planning Commission shall be the planning agency and shall have the powers and duties
given such agencies generally by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 462. It shall also exercise the
duties conferred upon it by this Chapter.
30.05 ZONING ORDINANCES, PUBLIC HEARINGS
The Council thereto shall hold thereon by the Planning Commission upon notice as provided in
Chapter 50 of this code.
30.06 PLATS - APPROVAL
Any plat of land submitted to the Council for approval shall be referred to the Planning Commission
for review and recommendation. Any plat so referred shall be returned to the Council by the
Commission within 30 days, and failure of the Commission to report within such period is deemed
to have satisfied the requirements of this section.
30.07 ATTENDANCE
Duly appointed members of the Planning Commission shall be required to attend no less than half
the official meetings of the Planning Commission unless specifically excused by the Chair of the
Planning Commission and said excused absence noted in the minutes. Further, duly appointed
members of the Planning Commission and said excused absence noted in the minutes. Failure to
meet either of these two attendance requirements shall be considered as formal notice of
resignation from said Planning Commission.
30.08 STAFF FOR THE COMMISSION
The City Administrator, Building Inspector, City Planner, City Engineer and City Attorney shall act
as staff for the Planning Commission and maybe required at times to attend commission meetings.
City Staff shall provide the Commission with information as requested by the Commission. The
City Administrator shall act as secretary to the Commission and shall be responsible for the
keeping of records.
Adopted by the City Council this 24th day of March 1992. Revised 3/28/06, 3/7/13
Revised 4/30/92, ORD 251, ORD 262, ORD 297(2/13)
CHAPTER 31
PARK COMMISSION
31.01 FORMATION OF PARK COMMISSION
(A) There is hereby established a Park Commission which shall advise the City Council as to
construction, contracts, purchases of supplies, equipment and services, maintenance, and
funding of city parks. As an advisory commission, the Park Commission shall not have any
of the power enumerated in Section 412.521 of the Minnesota Code.
(B) The Park Commission shall consist of 7 voting members and up to 3 non-voting youth
members appointed by the City Council. Members shall be residents of the city.
(C) Three members of the original shall serve for a term of one year, two for a term of two years
and thereafter the appropriate number shall be appointed each year for a term of four years.
Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the original terms by appointment of the City
Council. In addition, the Council shall select an ex officio member from among its own
members to serve on the commission.
(D) Members of the Park Commission shall be compensated at a fixed per diem rate of $35.00
meeting attended.
(E) The Council shall have cause to remove any member who is absent at three consecutive
Park Commission meetings without notifying or obtaining the consent of the Commission
Chairman or is absent at five out of any 18 consecutive meetings without notifying or
obtaining the consent of the commission chairman.
(F) The Commission shall meet once per month except it will not meeting during the month of
December. The commission shall schedule additional special meetings, as it may deem
necessary.
31.02 ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE
(A) The commission shall choose one of its members as chairman and may select a secretary,
either from among its own members or otherwise.
(B) The Commission may recommend rules of procedure governing its operation to the City
Council, which shall take effect only if approved by a majority of council members present at
a duly called meeting of the City Council.
(C) Written minutes of meetings of the commission shall be kept and filed with the City
Administrator prior to the next regularly scheduled council meeting, but shall be subject to
approval at the next Park Commission meeting.
31.03 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION
The Commission shall serve only as an advisory body for the City Council. In particular, the Commission
shall make recommendations to the council regarding:
(A) Necessary personnel to adequately care for parks and the compensation of said personnel;
and
(B) The construction of roadways, buildings and other necessary structures and improvements
in parks;
(C) Contracts and leases for the construction and operation of park facilities;
(D) Purchases of all necessary materials and supplies, equipment and services pertaining to
parks;
(E) The maintenance of park property so that it is adequately maintained and cared for;
(F) Entertainment for the general public on park grounds, and
(G) Such other duties and powers as the City Council may delegate to the commission.
31.04 PARK FUNDS
(A) For the purpose of maintaining the city parks, there shall be established a special fund
called the “park fund”.
(B) The council may transfer to the park fund such monies as it shall consider necessary for
park purposes.
(C) The Park Commission may conduct benefits for the purpose of raising monies, soliciting
donations, and running concessions provided that all such activities are approved by the
Council and not in conflict with City or County ordinances or State Law.
(D) The Park Commission shall have no authority whatsoever to expend city funds. The
Commission may make recommendations to the City Council regarding expenditures, but
no expenditures for park purposes shall be made unless and until authorized by the City
Council.
(E) No later than September 1 of each year, the Park Commission shall present to the Council
in detail its estimate of the financial needs of the city parks for the ensuing fiscal year.
Amended July 13, 1993, April 10, 2001, ORD 252, ORD 263, ORD 298(2/13)
Revised 07/24/07
CHAPTER 32
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
32.01 SHORT TITLE
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Chisago City Economic Development
Authority Chapter.
32.02 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following words and their derivations shall have the
meanings as set out in the subdivisions, which follow:
Subd. 1 Authority is the Economic Development Authority of the City as created by this
chapter.
Subd. 2 President is the President of the Economic Development Authority as
provided for hereunder.
Subd. 3 Planning Commission is the Planning Commission of the City of Chisago City.
32.03 ESTABLISHMENT
An Economic Development Authority is hereby established to be advisory to the City Council
and Planning Commission.
32.04 COMPOSITION
The Authority shall consist of seven (7) persons appointed by the Council, two Council members
and 5 appointed at large.
32.05 TERMS OF OFFICE
Of the members of the Authority first appointed, four (4) shall be appointed for the term of two
(2) years, the second three (3) shall be appointed for the term of one (1) year. Their successors
shall be appointed for terms of six (6) years. Vacancies during the term shall be filled by the
Council.
32.06 QUALIFICATIONS
The qualifications of the members of the Authority shall be those who in the judgment of the
Council are representative of the community, and are qualified by training, experience and
interest useful for the fulfillment of the Authority’s responsibility in Economic Development.
Residency in the City is not a qualification for appointment.
32.07 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS
The Council, by a unanimous vote of all its members, shall have the authority to remove any
member of the Authority from office, whenever, in its discretion, the best interests of the City
shall be served thereby.
Revised 07/24/07
32.08 OATH AND COMPENSATION
Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, take an oath
that he will faithfully discharge the duties of this office. All members shall be compensated at a
fixed per diem rate of $35 per meeting attended (regular and special).
32.09 MEETINGS-OFFICERS
The Authority will name its own officers to serve at its pleasure: President, Vice-president,
Secretary, and Treasurer.
A) Regular Meetings
The Authority shall meet publicly in regular session at least once each quarter at a time
and place selected by a majority of its members.
B) Special Meetings
The President or any three members of the Authority shall have the authority to call
special meetings of the Authority. Written notice of special meetings shall be given to all
members at least 24-hours prior to the time of the meeting unless the time and place for
the special meeting is at a regular or regularly adjourned meeting.
C) Officers
Within 30-days after their appointment, the members of the Authority shall meet in
regular session.
32.10 DUTIES
The Authority is an agency of the Council with responsibility to:
A) Promote the development and use of planned industrial, commercial, business sites,
and recreation sites in the City.
B) Provide information to realtors and lending institutions serving industrial, commercial,
or business clients.
C) Cooperate with site selection committees and industrial, commercial, or business
leaders seeking a location for new or expanded plant facilities.
D) Cooperate with civic betterment agencies interested in promoting the potential of the
City’s labor force and industrial, commercial, and business areas.
E) Cooperate and coordinate the layout, preparation, and distribution of unsolicited
industrial, commercial or business information from the City to out-state prospects
with the State of Minnesota Department of Economic Development and its agencies.
Revised 07/24/07
32.11 POWERS
Subd. 1 The Authority shall have the power to appoint subcommittees of a size
and nature it may deem necessary and enlist the aid of persons and/or organizations
that are not members of the Authority. The Authority shall have power to make contracts,
levy taxes, borrow money, or condemn property, and shall have the full power and
responsibility to investigate the necessity and recommend the taking of these and any
other actions related to industrial and commercial development, by the Council and all
other officers of the City responsible, to formulate the terms of and the procedure for
taking such action.
Subd. 2 To confer with and advise the Council and Planning Commission on all
matters concerning the industrial, business, commercial, and recreation development of
the City.
Subd. 3 To publicize the industrial, and commercial advantages and opportunities
of the City.
Subd. 4 To collect data and information as to the type of industries and commerce
best suited to the City.
Subd. 5 To periodically survey the over-all condition of the City from the
standpoint of determining whether the City has a community climate for economic
development and to determine the general receptiveness of the City to particular types
of industry, commerce, or business.
Subd. 6 To publicize information as to the general advantages and disadvantages
of industrial and commercial development in a community.
Subd. 7 To cooperate with all industries and businesses in the City in the solution
of any community problems, which they may have, and to encourage the expansion,
development, and management of such industries and businesses so as to promote the
general welfare of the City.
Subd. 8 To cooperate with all community groups and civic organizations within the
City and to furnish them such aid and advice as deemed appropriate.
Subd. 9 To aid the Council and Planning Commission in the proper zoning and
orderly development of areas suitable for industrial and commercial development.
Subd. 10 To develop, compile, coordinate, and publicize with available funds
information such as, but not limited to, the following:
A) Existing industrial and commercial concerns with the City, their addresses, type of
business, number of employees and whether each serves local, regional, or
national markets.
B) Available industrial and commercial sites including number of acres, approximate
price, existing zoning and proximity to trackage and highways.
Revised 07/24/07
C) Available buildings for industrial and commercial operation including type of
building, number of square feet, existing zoning and proximity to trackage and
highway facilities.
D) Transportation facilities, including railroads, motor carriers, water transportation,
air transportation, and highway facilities.
E) Electric power available.
F) Fuel available for industrial and commercial use.
G) Sewage disposal facilities.
H) Water supply facilities.
I) Community facilities such as fire, police, and educational.
J) Recreational facilities.
K) Going wage rates in the City for the trades, skilled, semi-skilled, and white collar
workers.
L) Availability of labor.
M) General community attitude toward industrial and commercial expansion,
development, and attraction.
N) Experience and program of surrounding suburban communities in regards to
industrial and commercial expansion, development, and attraction.
Subd. 11 To recommend to the Council and Planning Commission policies and
particular actions in regards to industrial and commercial expansion, development, and
attraction.
Subd. 12 City officials to cooperate. All City officials, department heads,
employees, and appointees shall cooperate with the Authority and render all reasonable
assistance.
Subd. 13 Annual Report-the Authority shall render annually a full report of its work
to the Council if requested by the Council.
ORD 253
52-1
CHAPTER 52
PRIVATE & COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS
52.01 DEFINITIONS. The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code,
shall be defined as follows:
(a) Antenna. A device used to transmit and/or receive radio or
electromagnetic waves between terrestrial and/or orbital-based structures.
(b) Commercial Receiving/Transmitting Antenna. Any antenna erected for the
commercial use of the information.
(c) Satellite Dish Antenna. A combination of (1) a dish-shaped antenna for
receiving communication or other signals from orbiting satellites and other
extraterrestrial sources; (2) a low-noise amplifier (LNA) situated at the focal point
of the receiving component for magnifying and transferring signals; and (3) a
coaxial cable for carrying the signals into the interior of the building.
(d) Municipal Antenna Site. A location in the City on which is located one or
more radio or television antennas available for connection and use by any
person, firm or corporation in accordance with the provisions of this Title.
(e) Private Receiving and/or Transmitting Antenna: Any antenna erected for
the non-commercial use of the information.
52.02 CONDITIONAL USES, CONNECTION TO MUNICIPAL ANTENNA SITE
(a) Private receiving or transmitting antennas more than twenty feet (20”) in
height above a man-made structure or more than fifty feet (50’) in height above
the ground if constructed on the ground, are a conditional use.
(b) Commercial receiving or transmitting antennas regardless of height or size
with the exception of satellite dish antennas shall connect to and use the
Municipal antenna site if use of such facilities is technically feasible.
(c) Commercial receiving or transmitting antennas not located on the
Municipal antenna site shall require a conditional use permit.
(d) The applicant shall present documentation of the possession of any
required license by any Federal, State or local agency.
52.03 LOCATION
(a) For the purpose of regulation, all antennas shall be subject to the
52-2
appropriate requirements of Section 10-7-4 (A), (D), and (E), and the setback
requirements established for accessory structures in the applicable zoning
district.
52.04 STANDARDS
(a) All antennas shall be designed and situated to be visually unobtrusive,
shall be screened as appropriate, shall not be multi-colored, and shall
contain no signage, including logos, except as may be required by any
State and Federal regulations.
52.05 EXISTING TRANSMITTING AND RECEIVING FACILITIES
(a) Existing transmitting and receiving, facilities at the time of the adoption of
this Title may remain in service. However, at such time as any material change is
made in the facilities, full compliance with this Title shall be required. No
transmitting or receiving antennas may be added to existing non-conforming
facilities.
54-1
CHAPTER 54
MOBILE HOMES
54.01 DEFINITIONS
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code, shall be defined as
follows:
(A) Conditional Use Permit. A permit, issued by the Council in accordance
with procedures specified in this Code, as a flexibility device to enable the
Council to assign dimensions to proposed uses or conditions surrounding it after
consideration of adjacent uses, their functions and the special problems which
the proposed use presents.
(B) Mobile Home, Trailer Coach. Trailer or Automobile Trailer. Any vehicle or
structure designed and constructed in such manner as will permit occupancy
thereof as a dwelling, or sleeping quarters for one or more persons, or the
conduct of any business or profession, occupation or trade (or use as a selling or
advertising device), and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and
used as a conveyance on highways or city streets, propelled or drawn by its own
or other motive power, or it may be a structure designed and constructed in such
a manner that it can be transported in one or several segments by some other
means other than its own power, excepting a device used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
(C) Mobile Home Court or Mobile Home Park. Any park, trailer park, trailer
court, trailer camp, court, camp site, lot, parcel, or tract of land designed,
maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying locations or
accommodations for any mobile home(s) and upon which any mobile home(s) is
parked and shall include all buildings used or intended for use as part of the
equipment thereof whether a charge is made for the use of the mobile home park
and its facilities or not. Automobile or mobile home sales lots on which
unoccupied mobile homes are parked for purposes of inspection and sale shall
be excluded from this definition.
(D) Mobile Home Lot. A section of land within a mobile home park designated
as the location for the placement of one mobile home and other such uses
accessory to the use of a mobile home residence as permitted by this Chapter,
(E) Person. An individual, firm, partnership, association, company,
corporation, tenant, owner, lessee, their agents, heirs or assigns.
54.02 LOCATION
(A) It shall be unlawful within the limits of the City for any person to park any
mobile home on any street, alley, or highway, or other public place or on any
tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied within the City except
as provided in this Chapter.
(B) Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street,
alley or highway for not longer than three hours subject to any other and further
prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking
regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or highway.
54-2
(C) No person shall park or occupy any mobile home which is situated outside
of an approved mobile home park except that the parking and storage of no more
than one mobile home in an accessory private garage building or in a rear yard in
any district is permitted providing that no living quarters shall be maintained, nor
any business practiced in said mobile home.
54.02 TEMPORARY MOBILE HOME PERMITS
Temporary mobile home permits may be issued by the Council for the temporary use of
a mobile home as a temporary office when said mobile home is located outside of an
authorized mobile home park. The Council may establish such conditions for said
mobile home, as it deems appropriate to insure the health, safety and general welfare.
Such temporary mobile home permit shall be limited to periods of not more than ninety
days. Upon written application, the Council may renew such permit. A fee of $25.00
must accompany each application for a temporary mobile home permit and $10.00 for
each renewal thereof. Each temporary mobile home permit shall be displayed in a
conspicuous location on the outside of the mobile home.
54.04 MOBILE HOME PARK PERMITS
(A) No person shall establish, construct, improve, enlarge, extend, alter or
maintain a new or existing mobile home park in the City unless he has first
obtained a conditional use permit therefore form the Council,
(B) Application for a conditional use permit for a mobile home park shall be
accompanied by 10 copies of a mobile home park site plan.
(C) At the time such application is filed with the Clerk, the applicant shall pay a
base-processing fee of $150.00. Prior to issuance of the conditional use permit,
the applicant shall pay all expenses incurred by the City in the review, evaluation,
and processing of said application.
(D) The applicant shall comply with all the applicable provisions of the zoning
and subdivision codes prior to issuance of the conditional use permit,
(E) The Planning Commission shall review applications for conditional use
permits and make recommendations thereon to the Council.
(f) No conditional use permit for any mobile home park shall be issued until a
public hearing has been held on the matter by the Council. This hearing shall be
advertised in the official newspaper at least 10 days prior to the public hearing,
the Clerk shall mail a notice of said hearing to each property owner within 350
feet of the proposed park, A conditional use permit can only be issued for
property that is zoned for such use as set forth in Chapter 50 of this Code,
54.05 SITE PLAN
The following information shall be shown on or attached to the site plan submitted with
the application.
(A) Name and address of owner and developer(s).
(B) The existing plat or a proposed preliminary plat of the mobile home park
site.
(C) Location and size of all individual mobile home lots, storage areas,
54-3
recreation areas, laundry drying areas, roadways, parking sites, and central
office.
(D) Location and size of all streets abutting the mobile home court and all
proposed driveways from such streets to the mobile home court.
(E) Street construction, and surfacing plans and specifications.
(F) Plans for sanitary sewage disposal, surface water drainage, water supply
systems, electrical service, and gas service.
(G) Setback dimensions.
(H) Plans for any and all structures.
(I) Detailed landscaping plans and specifications.
(J) Lighting plans and specifications.
(K) Location and width of sidewalks,
(L) Description of the method of disposing of garbage and refuse.
(M) Detailed description of maintenance procedures and grounds supervision.
(N) Proposed development schedule including proposed deadlines for
completion of each stage.
(o) Such other information as required by the Council or Planning
Commission.
54.06 DESIGN STANDARDS
All mobile home park site plans shall conform to the following standards:
(A) Park site:
(1) Shall be well drained and properly graded to prevent the
accumulation of storm of other waters.
(2) Shall have at least two points of ingress and egress for vehicles.
(B) Individual mobile home lots:
(1) Each mobile home lot shall contain at least 4,950 square feet of
land area for the exclusive use of the occupant.
Width: no less than forty—five (45) feet.
Depth: no less than one hundred ten (110) feet.
(2) Each mobile home lot shall have frontage on an approved roadway
54-4
and the corner of each mobile home lot shall be marked and each site
shall be numbered.
(3) A concrete slab or surface patio shall be constructed on the ground
beside each mobile home parking space. Such slab or patio shall be not
less than 160 square feet and shall be a minimum of 4 inches thick:
(C) Setbacks:
(1) A mobile home park site shall have a minimum setback from
adjacent properties of at least 30 feet and this area shall be landscaped.
Screening and buffer zones shall be established on the perimeter of the
mobile home park in compliance with the provisions of the zoning code.
(2) There shall be an unused area not less that 30 feet in depth along
each street or roadway and this area shall be sodded and landscaped.
(3) No mobile home shall be parked closer than 5 feet to the side lot
lines nor closer than 20 feet to the front lot line, or within 10 feet of the rear
lot line.
(4) There shall be an open space of at least 10 feet between the sides
of adjacent mobile homes.
(5) Off-street automobile parking spaces shall not be nearer than 5
feet from any side lot line.
(D) Off-street automobile parking:
(1) Each mobile home lot shall have off-street parking space for one
automobile.
(2) Each mobile home park shall maintain a hard surfaced off-street
parking lot for guests of occupants in the amount of one space for each
five mobile home sites.
(3) Access drives from roadways to all parking spaces and mobile
home sites shall be hard surfaced.
(E) Utilities:
(1) All mobile homes shall be connected to public water and sanitary
sewer system or a private water and sewer system approved by the State
Department of Health and the City Inspection Department.
(2) Disposal of surface storm water shall conform to the City Storm
Water Management Plan and shall be approved by the Council.
(3) All utility connections shall be as approved by the city.
(4) The source of fuel for cooking, heating, or other purposes at each
mobile home site shall be as approved by the city.
(5) All Utilities shall be underground including those for street and
54-5
exterior lighting purposes. There shall be no overhead wires or
supporting poles.
(6) No obstruction shall be permitted that impedes the inspection of
plumbing, electrical facilities, and related mobile home equipment.
(7) The method of garbage, waste, and trash disposal must be
approved by the city.
(8) Owner shall pay all required sewer connection fees to the City.
(9) Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout the park in such
locations and to such specifications as required by the Fire Marshall.
(F) Internal roadways, streets, and sidewalks:
(1) Roadways shall be hard surfaced to meet the standards for at least
a 5-ton street.
(2) All roads shall have hard surfaced, mountable, roll type curbs and
gutters.
(3) All streets shall have a roadbed of not less than 30 feet in width.
No parking shall be permitted on the street unless the roadbed shall be at
least 40 feet in width.
(4) All streets and roadways established by such mobile home park
conditional use permit are hereby declared public to the extent that they
shall be under the supervision and control of the police enforcement
powers of the City with respect to traffic laws and such other laws as shall
be applicable to public roadways and places.
(5) A cement sidewalk, not less than 30 inches wide shall be
constructed adjacent to the concrete curb of all streets. This sidewalk shall
be connected to each mobile home lot patio by a cement walk not less than
24 inches in width.
(G) Landscaping:
(1) Each individual mobile home lot shall be properly landscaped with
hedges, grass sodding, fences, windbreaks, and at least one tree of two
inches in diameter.
(2) A compact hedge, privacy fence, or landscaped area conforming
to the provisions of Chapter 50 shall be installed around each mobile
home park and be maintained at all times.
(3) All areas shall be landscaped in accordance with a plan approved
by the Council.
(H) Recreation: The owners of all mobile home parks shall improve, for the
use of occupants, at least 10 percent of the parks total land area for recreational
54-6
use (tennis courts, children’s play equipment, swimming pool, golf green, etc.).
(I) Lighting:
(1) Artificial light shall be maintained during all hours of darkness in all
public or community buildings.
(2) The mobile home park grounds shall be lighted as approved by the
Council form sunset to sunrise.
(J) Shelters: Each mobile home park shall include suitable storm and disaster
shelter facilities constructed below ground to accommodate the number of people
established by the following formula:
Shelter space (number of people) 0.75 x number of mobile home lots x 2.5.
54.07 GENERAL REGULATIONS
The owner of a mobile home park shall be responsible for assuring that the following
regulations are complied with by the park and its occupants.
(A) All areas of the park shall be adequately kept free from dust, and
maintained clean and free from refuse and debris.
(B) All individual mobile homes shall be owner occupied except that each
owner may lease his mobile home to a lessee for a period not to exceed five
months in any calendar year. The park owner shall maintain a record of all such
leases.
(C) The placement of more than one mobile home on any single lot shall not
be permitted.
(D) Mobile homes shall not be used for residential purposes if they:
(1) Do not conform to the requirements of the vehicle code of the State
of Minnesota.
(2) Are in an unsanitary condition or have an exterior in bad repair.
(3) Are structurally unsound and do not protect the inhabitants against
all elements.
(E) The operator of every mobile home park shall maintain a registry of the
park showing:
(1) The make, type, and license number of each mobile home,
(2) Forwarding address of all mobile homes leaving park.
(3) Date of arrival and departure of each mobile home.
(F) A map of the mobile home park shall be displayed near the entrance to
the park and be illuminated during all hours of darkness.
(G) No person shall be allowed to reside in a mobile home park except those
54-7
occupying mobile homes on established individual sites or a central office
or caretaker building.
(H) No mobile home may be inhabited by a greater number of occupants than
that for which it was developed.
(I) The area beneath each mobile home shall be enclosed except that such
enclosure must have access for inspection.
(J) No public address or loudspeaker system shall be permitted in such park.
(K) Dogs and animals shall not run at large within the mobile home park.
(L) Laundry and clothing shall be hung out to dry only on lines located in
(M) No boats, hauling trailers, or other equipment shall be stored upon the
streets of the park or upon the patios or open space of any individual
mobile home lot.
(N) The installation or construction of any structures or improvements within a
mobile home park shall require a building permit as provided under Chapter 90
of the Municipal Code. All plans for such installation or construction shall meet
the requirements of the State Department of Health.
54.08 ADMINISTRATION AND VIOLATIONS
(A) This ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Building
Inspector, who is hereby designated as enforcing officer. The Building Inspector
may institute in the name of the City and appropriate actions or proceedings
against a violator as provided by the law.
(B) Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(C) It is the intent, and it is hereby declared, that if any section of this Chapter
conflicts with any section of any other Chapter that the section of either Chapter
that places the greater restrictions shall prevail and he in force and effect.
56-1
CHAPTER 56
STREETS & DRIVEWAYS
56.01 Streets
Subd. 1. Street shall be logically related to the topography, so as to produce
usable lots and reasonable grades.
Subd. 2. Access shall be given to all lots and portions of the tract in a subdivision
and to adjacent unsubdivided parcels, unless the topography clearly indicated
that such connection is not feasible. Reserved strips and land-locked areas shall
not be created.
Subd.3. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for
the appropriate continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas.
Subd. 4. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, but may be subdivided, the
arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make provision for the proper
projection of streets into adjoining areas by carrying the new streets to the
boundaries of the new subdivision at appropriate locations. A temporary
turnaround facility may be required at the closed end, in conformance with culde-
sac requirements.
Subd. 5. Local streets shall be laid out to discourage their use by through traffic.
The arrangement of arterial and collector streets shall be considered in heir
relation to the reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic conditions, to runoff
of storm water, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation
to the proposed uses of the area to be served.
Subd. 6. Provisions for Resubdivision of Large Lots and Parcels. When a tract is
subdivided into larger than normal building lots or parcels, such lots or parcels
shall be so arranged as to permit the logical location and openings of future
streets and appropriate resubdivision, with provision for adequate utility
connections for such resubdivision.
Subd. 7. Half or partial streets will not be permitted, except where essential to
reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other requirements and
standards of these regulations and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for
dedication of the remaining part of the street can be secured.
Subd. 8. Wherever a tract to be (resubdivision adjoins an existing half or partial
street, the part of the street within such tract shall be platted.
Subd. 9. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit future
street extension into adjoining tracts with temporary cul-de-sacs, or when
designed as cul-de-sac streets.
Subd. 10. Private streets and reserve strips, except in the case of planned unit
56-2
developments, shall be prohibited and no public improvements shall be approved
for any private street. All streets shall be dedicated for public use. If any person
applies to subdivide or re-plat any land or parcels adjoining an existing private
street, the private street shall be required to be dedicated for public use and
scheduled for improvement to public street standards at the time of final plat.
Subd. 11. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or planned major
arterial or a railroad right-of-way, a Street approximately parallel to and on each
side of such arterial and right-of-way may be required for adequate protection of
residential properties and separation of through and local traffic. Such service
streets shall be located at a distance from the major arterial or railroad right-ofway
suitable for appropriate sue of the intervening land, as for park purposes in
residential districts, or for commercial and industrial purposes in appropriate
districts. Such distances also shall be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
Subd. 12. The street design shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of
adjoining property in platting their own land and providing convenient access to it.
Subd. 13. Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed
six hundred (600) feet in length, including a terminal turn-around, which shall be
provided at the closed end, with a right-of-way radius of not less than sixty (60)
feet. The length shall be measured along the centerline from the nearest
intersection to the center point of the cul-de-sac.
Subd. 14. Where a temporary cul-de-sac is required, the turnaround right-of-way
shall be placed adjacent to a plat boundary line and right-of-way of the same
width as the street shall be carried to said property line in such a way as to
permit future extension of the street into the adjoining tract. At such time as such
a street is extended, the acreage covered by the turnaround outside the
boundaries of the extended street shall revert in ownership to the property owner
fronting on the temporary turnaround.
Street Design Parameters
Local Street Minor Collector Industrial
Collector
R/O/W Width 60’ 60’ 70’
Mi Grade 32’ 42’ 44’
Cross Grade 6” Crown 6” crown 6” crown
Design Section 7 ton 9 ton 9 ton
Min. Angle Intersection 70 degrees 80 degrees 90 degrees
Min. Curb Radius 15’ 25’ 35’
Site Triangles 25’ 30’ 30’
Max. Grade 7.5% 7.5% 7.5%
Min. Centerline Radius 215’ 450’ 450’
Min. Vertical Sight Distance 200’ 325’ 325’
56-3
Subd. 15 Where a (re) subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of
inadequate width, sufficient additional width shall be provided to meet the above
standards.
Subd. 16. Additional right-of-way and roadway widths may be required to
promote public safety and convenience when special conditions require it.
Subd. 17. Restriction of Access. Access of local streets onto collector streets
shall be discouraged at intervals of less than five hundred (500) feet.
Subd. 18. Street Job. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred
fifty (150) feet shall not be allowed.
57-1
CHAPTER 57
EXCAVATING & FILLING
57.01 EXCAVATION
Subd. 1 Permit Required. No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation
or organization of any kind shall do any grading, filling, or extract sand, gravel,
rocks, peat, earth, or any other material form the earth and remove same from
said site without first obtaining a special use permit from the Council.
Subd. 2 Application. Said application for the special use permit shall include a
finished grading plan which will not adversely affect the surrounding land or
development of surrounding land. The Council may require that any excavation
be refilled and may further require that a bond or cash deposit in any amount that
is deemed sufficient to cover the expense of refilling said excavation be posted
with the Municipality as a condition precedent to the obtaining of the special use
permit, Said excavations shall not be refilled with any material except that of a
non--combustible nature, and if the Council requires refilling, Council approval of
the materials there in used must be first obtained. Said site cannot be refilled with
garbage or other combustible materials unless said site is approved by the
Council as a private or public dumping ground, subject to regulations thereto.
Subd. 3 Nuisance. Any grading of land that would leave an area in such a
condition that blowing sand or earth will create a public or private nuisance, must
be re-seeded or re-sodded or recovered in some manner to prevent said
nuisance. A special use permit must be obtained by any party intending to so
grade and the Council can require that a bond or cash deposit in an amount
sufficient to correct the situation be posted with the Municipality as a condition
precedent to issuing such special use permit.
Subd. 4 Exclusion. Any excavation that is necessary for the construction of a
structure when said structure will replace the excavated materials is not covered
by this Chapter.
Subd. 5 Administration. This Chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Building Inspector and he may institute in the name of the Municipality
appropriate actions or proceeding against a violator as provided by law.
CHAPTER 58
RELOCATION OF BUILDINGS
58.01 APPLICATION AND HEARING
Any person seeking to relocate an existing building in the Municipality shall apply to the
Clerk for a hearing date for a relocation permit.
58.02 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION
The applicant shall supply the following:
(A) Legal description of the land upon which the building is to be placed.
(B) The nature of the building to be moved, together with a picture of the
building.
(C) A certified abstract of all owners of the property located within 350 feet of
the proposed relocation site and the mailing addresses of each property owner.
(D) The payment of a $25.00 fee.
58.03 HEARING
The application together with the material requested above shall be referred to the
Council who shall set a time and place for a public hearing giving at least ten days
published notice of such hearing. Mailed notice shall go to all property owners within
350 ft. of the relocation site.
58.04 STATE BUILDING CODE
All of the provisions of Chapters 90,91,92, and 93 will be applicable to the building to be
moved and said building shall conform to the provisions of said chapters prior to moving
into the City or a new site.
58.05 MOVING OF BUILDING
If, under a permit from the State or County Highway Department, a building is to be
moved through, but not from or to the Municipality, the requirements of this chapter shall
not be imposed, but the person moving the building shall, before entering the City, notify
in writing the Building Inspector of his intentions to do so, setting forth in such notice the
number of the permit issued to him by the State or County Highway Department.
58.06 FEES
In addition to all fees provided by this code, the applicant shall pay all expenses of
inspection outside of the City including 25 cents per mile, mileage and $7.50 per hour
traveling time.
60-1
CHAPTER 60
HOUSE & BUILDING NUMBERS
60.01 PURPOSE
The provisions of this Chapter are adopted to protect the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the people. It establishes the rules and regulations relative to a
uniform system of addresses and house and building numbers with the Municipality.
60.02 HOUSE AND BUILDING NUMBERS REQUIRED
Every house and building located within the Municipality shall have posted on it address
numbers as assigned by the Municipal staff. Said numbers shall be so placed on the
house or building so that they are easily discernible from the street, highway, or
roadway servicing said structure. House numbers must be at a minimum size of 3 1/2 “
high and be placed on one side or the other of the front door or nearest area to it.
Additional corresponding numbers may be placed on the mailbox servicing the
structure, or such other device that conforms to the provisions of the Code.
60.03 NUMBER CHANGES
Whenever the Council by appropriate actions orders the change of an address or
number of a house or building, the owner, tenant, manager, or caretaker of the
premises shall execute the change required, at no expense to the Municipality, within
thirty (30) days from the effective date of the change.
60.04 PROCEDURE FOR CHANGE
Whenever it has been deemed to be in the public interest to order address or house and
building number changes, the Council shall, after a public hearing, order such changes
by the adoption of an ordinance. The public hearing shall be held at such time and upon
such notice as the Council may determine.
61-1
CHAPTER 61
DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
61.00 PURPOSE
It is the intent and purpose of this section to provide for orderly development of land to
safeguard life, health, safety, property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling
all development within the City. This section shall be in addition to the requirements of
any other provisions of the Municipal Code regulating such development.
61.01 APPLICATION OF DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
All proposed industrial, commercial, and residential developments and expansions of
existing facilities, except developments where public utilities and streets have previously
been installed and the erection of no more than two detached single-family dwellings
are planned, must be reviewed by the City Planning Commission and approved by the
City Council, as conforming to this section. The term development as used herein shall
mean all construction, public and private improvement, expansion or alteration of
facilities and land within the City.
61.02 DEVELOPMENT PLAN
(A) The owner or developer shall submit for review a development plan which
sets forth plans for utility service, drainage, streets, parking, landscaping,
screening and buffering, lighting, setbacks, exterior construction design and
materials, trash disposal, construction timetable, and such other matters as
the Council may require.
(B) The owner or developer shall submit with the development plan an Abstract of
Title, Registered Property Report, or such supporting Affidavits or documents
that establish ownership of any other parties of interest in the property
involved.
61.03 DEVELOPMENT CONTRACT
(A) A development contract which sets forth all of the terms, conditions,
requirements, agreements, guarantees and plans for the orderly development
of said land shall be entered into between the developer and the Municipality
prior to the final approval of any subdivision, rezoning, special use permits,
license, or any building permits required for the construction, alteration,
expansion, or improvement of said land.
(B) Before execution of the development contract, the owner or developer shall
submit certification from the County Department of Taxation that all taxes and
special assessments due on the property involved have been paid in full.
(C) Said development contract shall include provisions for supervision of details
of construction by the City and grant to the City authority to inspect all work
performed pursuant to said contract to assure satisfactory performance and
completion of the work.
61-2
61.04 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
The development contract shall require, as provided hereinafter, the developer to make
a cash deposit or in lieu thereof furnish a performance bond in an amount based upon
the total cost, as estimated by the City Engineer, of all public improvements, utilities and
other improvements pursuant to said contract to be constructed and installed by the
developer. The total cost shall include the cost of inspection by the City of all such
improvements. Upon the report of the City Engineer that special problems exist, which
potentially could make the development more costly or difficult than estimated, the
Council may require a cash deposit or performance bond greater than that provided
hereinafter but not to exceed 150 percent of the total cost. Said bond shall be subject to
approval of the City Attorney.
61.05 PAYMENT OF EXPENSES
The owner or developer shall pay, prior to issuance of any building permit for a
development, the expenses incurred by the City in the processing, review, and
evaluation of proposed developments and development contracts and in the inspection
of all work performed pursuant to said contracts. Such costs shall include, but not be
limited to, those for professional engineering. Legal and planning services, city staff
time, materials and other services. A deposit in an amount sufficient to pay such
expenses, as estimated by the Clerk, may be accepted by the City whenever exact
expenses have not been determined at the time the building permit is issued.
62-1
CHAPTER 62
ARCHITECTURAL CONTROLS
62.01 PURPOSE
(A) The City Council finds that the beauty of a community involves the aesthetic
quality of all one sees in moving around, and this goes far beyond the design
of individual architectural facades and signs. In modern American culture,
beautiful communities can be created only through a deliberate search for
beauty on the part of the community leadership, the architects, planners, the
building industry, and public officials. Good community appearance is the
product of orderly and harmonious relations established between man-made
objects and nature. A pleasing and attractive scene results from skillful
combinations and interrelations of these elements of contrasts and
similarities.
(B) Appearance has a direct bearing on the economic value of property. When
the appearance of public areas, business establishments, and the residential
community is good, shoppers, businessmen, homeowners, and industrial
developers are all attracted to the community. Poor appearance, congestions,
and lack of property maintenance bring about blight, decay, decreased
property values and loss of revenues.
(C) New building programs, along with improvement and preservation of the
existing are necessary in order to maintain good community appearance.
Expanding building programs and land developments has greatly reduced
open spaces in the community and an awareness of the importance of good
design and land use has resulted.
62.02 ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE REVIEW COMMISSION
An architectural appearance review commission is hereby established. Said
commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. Said
Commission shall consist of at least three members, and shall serve with no
compensation for such terms as set forth by the appointing authority. The Architectural
Appearance Review Commission shall henceforth be referred to as the “Commission”.
62.03 DEFINITIONS
The following shall have the meanings set forth herein:
(A) Appearance: The outward aspect visible to the public.
(B) Appurtenances: The visible, functional objects accessory to and part of
buildings.
(C) Architectural character: The composite of aggregate of the
characteristics of structure, form, materials, and function of a building,
group of building, or other architectural composition.
62-2
(D) Architectural concept: The basic aesthetic idea of a building, or group of
buildings or structures, including the site and landscape development,
which produces the architectural character.
(E) Architectural feature: A prominent or significant part of element of a
building, structure of site.
(F) Architectural style: The characteristic form and detail, as of building of a
particular histories period.
(G) Attractive: Having qualities that arouse interest and pleasure in the observer.
(H) Berm: A raised form of earth to provide screening or to improve the aesthetic
character.
(I) Cohesiveness: Unity of composition between design elements of a building, or
a group of buildings, and the landscape development.
(J) Compatibility: Harmony in the appearance of two or more building, structures,
and landscape developments in the same vicinity.
(K) Conservation: The protection and care, which prevent destruction or
deterioration of historical or otherwise significant structures, buildings, or natural
resources.
(L) Decorative screen: A wall or fence intended to partially or entirely cut off
visibility to the area behind it.
(M) Exterior building component: An essential and visible part of the entire
exterior of a building.
(N) External design feature: The architectural style and general arrangement of
such portion of a building or structure as is to be open to view from a public
street, place, or way, including the color, kind, and texture of the building
materials of such portion and the type of windows, doors, lights, attached or
ground signs, and other fixtures appurtenant to such portion.
(O) Graphic element: A letter, illustration, symbol, figure, insignia, or other
device employed to express and illustrate a message or part thereof.
(P) Harmony: A quality, which produces an aesthetically pleasing whole as in an
arrangement of varied architectural and landscape elements.
(Q) Landscape: Elements of nature, topography, buildings, and other man62-
3
made objects combined in relation to one another.
(R) Logic of design: Accepted principles and criteria of validity in the
solution of the problem of design.
(S) Mechanical equipment: Equipment, devices, and accessories, the use of which
relates to water supply, drainage, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, and
similar purpose.
(T) Miscellaneous structures: Structures other than buildings visible from public
ways. Examples are: memorials, stagings, antenna, water tanks, towers, sheds,
shelters, fences, walls, kennels, transformers, and drive-up facilities.
(U) Plant materials: Trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, grass, perennials,
annuals, and bulbs.
(V) Proportion: Relationship of parts of a building, landscape, structures of
buildings to each other and to the whole balance.
(W) Rules of procedure: Regulations adopted by the Commission for the
administration of duties delegated by the City Council.
(X) Scale: Harmonious relationship to the size of parts to one another and
to the human figure.
(Y) Screening: Structure or planting which conceals from view, from public
ways the areas behind such structures or plantings.
(Z) Shrub: A multi-stemmed woody plant other than a tree.
(AA) Site break: A structural or landscape device to interrupt long vistas and
create visual interest in a site development.
(BB) Street hardware: Objects other than buildings and structures.
Examples are: lampposts, utility posts, traffic lights, traffic signs,
benches, litter containers, planting containers, letter boxes, fire boxes,
and hydrants.
(CC) Streetscape: The scene as may be observed along a public street or
way composed of natural and man-made components, including
buildings, paving, planting, street hardware, and miscellaneous
structures.
(DD) Utilitarian structure: A structure or enclosure relating to mechanical or
electrical services to a building or development.
62-4
(EE) Utility hardware: Devices such as poles, cross-arms, transformers,
vaults, gas pressure regulating assemblies, hydrants, and buffalo
boxes that are used for water, gas, oil, sewer, and electrical services
to a building or a project.
(FF) Utility service: Any device, including wire, pipe, and conduit which
carry gas, water, electricity, oil, and communications into a building or
development.
62.04 CRITERIA FOR APPEARANCE
Subd. 1 The purpose of these criteria are to establish a checklist of those items
that affect the physical aspect of the City. Pertinent to appearance is the design of
the site, buildings, structures, planting, signs, street hardware, and miscellaneous
objects that are observed by the public.
Subd. 2 These criteria are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation, or
variety; but, rather to assist in focusing on design principles which can result in
creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory visual appearance within the City,
preserving taxable values and promoting the public health, safety, and welfare.
Subd. 3. Relationship of buildings to site.
(A) The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the
streetscape, and to provide for adequate planting, sage pedestrian
movement, and parking areas.
(B) Site planning in which setbacks and yards are in excess of zoning restrictions
is encouraged to provide an interesting relationship between buildings.
(C) Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements, building wall
extensions, plantings, berms, or other innovative means so as to
largely screen parking areas from view from public ways.
(D) Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning
district, the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with
its site and existing or anticipated adjoining buildings.
(E) Newly installed utility services and service revisions necessitated by exterior
alterations shall be underground.
Subd. 4 Relationship of buildings and site to adjoining area.
(A) Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be made compatible
by such means as screens, sight breaks, and materials.
62-5
(B) Attractive landscape transactions to adjoining properties shall be provided.
(C) Harmony in texture, lines, and masses is required. Monotony shall be
avoided.
Subd. 5 Landscape and Site Treatment
Landscape elements included in these criteria consist of all forms of planting and
vegetation, ground forms, rock groupings, water patterns, and all visible
construction except buildings and utilitarian structure.
(A) Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to beauty and utility
of a development, they shall be preserved and developed. Modification to
topography will be permitted where it contributes to good appearance.
(B) Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas shall
provide inviting and stable appearance for walking and, if seating is provided,
for siting.
(C) Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features,
strengthen vistas and provide shade. Spectacular effects shall be reserved for
special locations only.
(D) Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and
other materials and by correlation with adjacent developments.
(E) Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, and color
and for its ultimate growth. Plants that are indigenous to the area and others
that will be hardy, harmonious to the design, and good appearance shall be
used.
(F) In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrian or motor
traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other
devices.
(G) Parking areas and traffic ways shall be enhanced with landscaped spaces
containing trees or tree groupings.
(H) Where building sites limit planting, the placement of trees in parkways or
paved areas is encouraged.
(I) Screening of service yards and other places that tend to be unsightly shall be
accomplished by use of walls, fencing or planting, or the combination of
these. Screening shall be equally effective in winter or summer.
62-6
(J) In areas where general planting will not prosper, other materials such as
fences, walls, and paving of wood, brick, stone, gravel, and cobbles shall be
used. Carefully selected plants shall be combined with such materials where
possible.
(K) Exterior lighting, when used, shall enhance the building design and the
adjoining landscape. Lighting standards and building fixtures shall be of a
design and size compatible with the building and adjacent areas. Lighting
shall be restrained in design and excessive brightness avoided.
Subd. 6 Building Design and Style
Design and style are not restricted. The evaluation of appearance of a project shall
be based on quality of its design, style, and its relationship to its surroundings.
(A) Buildings shall have good scale and be in harmonious conformance with
permanent neighboring development.
(B) Materials.
I. Materials shall have good architectural character and be selected
for harmony of the building and adjoining buildings.
II. Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of buildings and
the design in which they are used. Buildings shall have the same
materials, or those that are architecturally harmonious, used for all
building walls and other building components wholly or partly visible
from public ways.
III. Materials shall be of a durable quality.
IV. In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the
structural materials shall be compatible within themselves and
harmonious to their surroundings.
(C) Building components such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets shall
have good proportions in relationship with one another.
(D) Colors shall be harmonious with only compatible accents.
(E) Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or buildings
shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the
buildings, or they shall be so located as not to be visible from any public
ways.
(F) Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards,
and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with building design.
62-7
(G) Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards, and external
work areas shall be screened from public view, using materials as stated in
criteria for equipment screening.
(H) Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided.
Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In
multiple building projects, variable siting or individual buildings may be used
to prevent a monotonous appearance.
Subd. 7 Signs
(A) Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its design and in its visual
relationship to buildings and surroundings.
(B) Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the
buildings and site to which it is principally related.
© The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and
harmonious with the buildings and site to which it principally relates.
(D) The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum
needed to convey the sign’s major message and shall be composed in
proportion to the area of the sign face.
(E) East sign shall be compatible with signs in adjoining premises and shall not
compete for attention.
(F) Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation “logos” shall
conform to the criteria for all other signs.
Subd. 8 Miscellaneous Structures and Street Hardware
(A) Miscellaneous structures and street hardware shall be designed to be part of
the architectural concept of design and landscaping. Materials shall be
compatible with buildings, scale shall be good, colors shall be in harmony with
buildings and surroundings and proportions shall be attractive.
(B) Lighting in connection with miscellaneous structure and street hardware shall
meet with the criteria applicable to site, landscape, buildings, and signs.
Subd. 9 Maintenance: Planning and Design Factors
(A) Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of
maintenance. The choice of materials and their use, together with the types of
finishes and other protective measures, must be conducive to easy
maintenance and upkeep.
62-8
(B) Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear. Proper
measures and devices shall be incorporated for protection against the
elements, neglect, damage, and abuse.
© Provision for washing and cleaning of buildings and structures and control of
dirt and refuse shall be included in the design. Configurations that tend to catch
and accumulate debris, leaves, trash, dirt, and rubbish shall be avoided.
Subd. 10 Factors for Evaluation
The following factors and characteristics that affect the appearance of a development
will govern the Commission’s evaluation of a design submission.
(A) Conformance to ordinances and the Appearance Code
(B) Logic of design
(C) Exterior space utilization
(D) Architectural character
(E) Attractiveness
(F) Material selection
(G) Harmony and compatibility
(H) Circulation – vehicular and pedestrian
(I) Maintenance aspects
(J) Aesthetic and economic impact on abutting property and the City as a whole
62.05 MAINTENANCE AND UPKEEP
Subd. 1
In general, maintenance and upkeep are required for all the parts and objects that
compose the City’s image. Lawns and plantings require considerable more upkeep
than do buildings. Nonetheless, both require maintenance in order to retain a good
image. Improper and inadequate maintenance decreases value and results in bad
appearance. Therefore, it is necessary than maintenance be a concern of the
Commission.
Subd. 2 Particular considerations
(A) Site
62-9
I. Landscape materials, other than plantings, which have deteriorated
or have been damaged or defaced, shall be properly repaired or
replaced.
II. Plant materials that have deteriorated or died shall be replaced with
healthy plantings or the area redesigned with other treatment to
provide an attractive appearance.
III. Plantings shall be kept watered, fed, cultivated, and pruned as
required to give a healthy and well-groomed appearance during all
seasons.
IV. Parking areas shall be kept in good repair, properly marked, and
clear of all litter and debris.
V. Vacant property shall be free of refuse, debris, and weeds; and
shall have the vegetation cut periodically during the growing period.
(B)Buildings and appurtenances
I. Buildings a appurtenances, including signs, shall be cleaned and
painted or repaired as required to present a neat appearance.
II. Deteriorated, worn, or damaged portions shall be rebuilt or
replaced.
III. Building and sign illumination elements shall be replaced as
required to maintain the affect for which designed.
© Public areas in or adjoining the development
I. Parkway planting areas shall be maintained by the adjacent
property owner or tenant in order to add to the overall aesthetic
enhancement of the private property and the attractiveness of the
streetscape.
II. Sidewalks, curbs and gutters, roadside berms, and other
public necessary.
III. Refuse containers of an aesthetically satisfactory design and color
shall be placed in locations that will encourage their use to avoid
litter of waste materials.
IV. Street hardware shall be erected and secured properly, and shall
be cleaned or painted regularly to present an orderly appearance.
Signs shall be treated similarly.
62.06 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
62-10
Subd. 1 Misdemeanor
Every person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day’s continuance
of a violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offence.
Subd. 2 Civil
In addition to the punishment specified in this section, the City may enforce this
chapter by any appropriate form of civil action and may enjoin the violation of the
chapter and compel obedience thereto by mandatory orders and writs, and cause
the abatement of everything existing in violation thereof. For the purpose of this
chapter violation of orders and regulations made pursuant to this chapter shall be
allowed in proceedings hereunder as in other actions.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 70 – Private Swimming Pools Page 1
70.00 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
70.00 PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations and procedures for
the construction and maintenance of swimming pools within the City with the goal of
protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City.
70.01 DEFINITIONS. Swimming Pool. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational
bathing that contains water over twenty-four (24) inches deep. This includes in-ground, above
ground, and on ground-pools, hot tubs, portable and non-portable spas, and fixed in place wading
pools.
70.02 CONSTRUCTION & MAINTENANCE. Construction of a swimming pool may not be started
without having the same fully enclosed with a fence, which may be temporary or portable, not
less than four (4) feet in height or other method to prevent uncontrolled access (permanent
installation will be done within 2 weeks of completion).
An application for a permit to construct a swimming pool shall be accompanied by plans and
specifications of sufficient detail to show:
1) The proposed location of the pool and its relationship to the property lines and all buildings
on the lot;
2) The size of the pool;
3) Fencing and other fixtures existing and proposed on the lot, including utility locations and
trees;
4) The location, size, and types of equipment to be used in connection with the pool,
including, but not limited to, filter unit, pump, fencing, and the pool itself; and
5) That all requirements of this section will be satisfied with the submission and approval of a
site plan.
70.03 SAFEGUARDS REQUIRED. All swimming pools for which a permit is required under this
Ordinance shall be provided with safety features to prevent uncontrolled access thereto.
This requirement may be accomplished with fencing or other means of enclosure to reasonably
prevent uncontrolled access. If fences are chosen they shall be at least four feet in height and the
bottom of the fence shall not be more than four inches from the ground, nor shall there any
opening in the fence large enough for a sphere four inches in diameter to pass through
unimpeded. Fences shall be constructed of a non-corrosive material, not easily climbable.
All fence openings or points of entry into the pool area shall be equipped with self-closing and
self-latching doors or gates. The locking device shall be located within a minimum of ten inches of
the top of the fence.
Prior to filling the pool, the approved fence (permanent or temporary) or other enclosure must be
installed, inspected and approved by the building official. A latchable cover may be used
providing it meets approval of the building official and is constructed of a material which cannot
be penetrated by toddlers/small children and shall be designed to support loads sufficient enough
to prevent entanglement/drowning.
70.04 LOCATION & SETBACKS. All swimming pools shall meet the required setbacks for an
accessory structure that would be located in said zoning district in which they are constructed.
Pools shall not be permitted in a front yard, a side yard, within a drainage or utility easement, or in
the street right-of-way. A variance may be applied for a pool to be installed in the front or side
yard.
70.05 EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall be effective after its passage and publication. All
pools constructed or altered prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall substantially comply
no later than May 1, 2006.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 70 – Private Swimming Pools Page 2
(Adopted: 9/05. Amended: _________)
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 80 – Parks, Playgrounds & Public Areas - 1 -
Chapter 80
Parks, Playgrounds and Public Areas
80.01 Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate public use and promote public enjoyment of
Chisago City parks, playgrounds and public areas in such a way as to leave Chisago City’s parks,
playgrounds and public areas unimpaired and minimize conflicts between users.
80.02 Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and subject to immediate removal from the park, playground or public area and to other
appropriate legal action, including revocation of any permits issued.
80.03 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined.
1. Alcoholic Beverage. Is defined as set forth in Minnesota Statute 340A.101.
2. Cache. Container that is hidden and includes a toy, trinket or similar and a logbook.
3. Geocaching. An outdoor recreational activity that involves the use of a Global Positioning
System (GPS) receiver to find an object or geocache placed at a pre-determined location. The
internet is often used to provide the direction and coordinates of the geocache.
80.04 Public Lands, Parks, and Playgrounds
1. Hours. All Chisago City Parks shall be closed to the public from 10:00 pm to 6:00 am, except
as authorized.
2. Camping. It is unlawful for any person or group of persons to:
(a) Camp in a park except in areas provided and designated for that purpose; or
(b) Camp without a permit issued by the City Administrator or designee; or
(c) Occupy camp sites in a park contrary to a permit or otherwise violate provisions of a
permit; or
(d) Operate any vehicle within a campground during posted curfew hours, except in
emergencies; or
(e) Camp overnight in a park, if under 18 years of age, unless accompanied by parent or legal
guardian, or by special permit issued by the City Administrator or designee.
(f) Camp in a park campground, or any combination of park campgrounds, for more than
seven (7) days in a thirty (30)-day period without written permission from the City
Administrator or designee.
3. Boat Launching. No person shall launch a boat unless a sign designates such actions.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 80 – Parks, Playgrounds & Public Areas - 2 -
4. Swimming. Swimming in designated areas in Chisago City Parks is permitted according to
items A to E.
(a) Lifeguards. Activities in and upon the beaches and swimming areas shall be under the
direction of the lifeguard if one is present.
(b) Designated Swimming Areas. No person shall swim in or enter a body of water in a City
Park not posted for swimming.
(c) Hours. No person shall enter the water before 6:00 a.m. or after10:00 p.m., unless
authorized by the City Administrator or designee.
(d) Containers. No person shall possess glass containers in an area designated for swimming
or bathing.
(e) Watercraft. No person shall enter the swimming area with a boat, canoe, or raft; fish; or
engage in an activity that is hazardous or could cause injuries to others.
5. Alcoholic Beverages.
(a) No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages in a public park within the City, unless
with written permission by the city.
(b) No person shall have in his/her possession or on his/her person while on any public street
or highway, public park, public parking lot, or any other parking place within the City, any
bottle, receptacle, canister, or other container containing alcohol, which has been open,
or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, unless with
written permission by the city.
(c) Intoxicating liquors are allowed for possession or consumption within a public facility
with an appropriate liquor license and city permits.
(d) Alcoholic beverages are not allowed for possession or consumption for persons camping
in City Parks with the exception of malt liquors containing five (5) percent of alcohol by
weight or less and wines. A permit must be obtained by the City Administrator or
designee and shall be maintained within the camp or cabin area.
(e) Upon application and approval of the City Administrator, the Council may issue a permit
to non-profit clubs and organizations for consumption of non-intoxicating malt liquor
upon a public park for a specific occasion. In granting such permit the City Council may
impose such conditions and restrictions, as they deem proper to preserve the public
peace and safety.
6. Special Events Permit. Any event requiring additional city staff, public works or police
Department assistance. A permit maybe required if the applicant requests the exclusive or
special use of portions of park areas, buildings, trails and for use of park areas and facilities
when they are closed to the public.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 80 – Parks, Playgrounds & Public Areas - 3 -
7. Erection of Structures. No person shall construct or erect any tent, building, or structures of
any kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run, or string any public service
utility into, upon, or across any public park or public land, except with a Special Events Permit
issued or as permitted by the City Administrator or designee.
8. Personal Conduct and Prohibitions.
(a) Disorderly Conduct. No person shall engage in disorderly conduct, as provided under
Minnesota Statues, Section 609.72.
(b) Noise. No person shall make noise reasonably tending to arouse alarm or resentment of
others by means of a public address system, radio, stereo, amplifier or power equipment,
or by any other means without prior written permission from the City of Chisago City.
(c) Disturbance. No person shall engage in brawling or fighting, or use of offensive, obscene,
or abusive language or engage in boisterous, noisy or threatening conduct reasonably
tending to arouse alarm, anger or resentment in others.
(d) Smoking. Smoking is prohibited in City Parks within five-hundred (500) feet of an
educational institution.
9. Playground and Other Recreational Equipment. No person shall use playground or
recreational equipment in a manner contrary to standard usage or in a manner that is
reckless or reasonably tending to cause damage to the equipment or arouse alarm, anger or
resentment in others.
10. Scavenging and Treasuring Hunting. No person shall engage in scavenging or treasure
hunting, with or without the aid of electronic or motorized devices, unless the object or
Geocache was placed at a pre-determined location and registered with Chisago City. The
displacement of earth or removal of objects from the parks without prior written permission
from the City of Chisago City shall be prohibited.
11. Geocaching.
(a) Geocaching is allowed in City parks and trails. Each cache requires a permit.
(b) A cache shall not be buried, nor may vegetation or cultural features be damaged in the
process of placing, accessing or maintaining the cache.
(c) A cache shall only be placed at locations where they do not negatively impact natural and
cultural resources, visitor safety, or other users.
(d) A cache shall be in a waterproof container and not exceed 8” x 12” x 4” or 400 cubic
inches in capacity.
(e) The cache container must be marked with the text “Geocache”, and the name of the
cache as it appears on the website and City permit form.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 80 – Parks, Playgrounds & Public Areas - 4 -
(f) Food and any hazardous materials or items are not allowed in the containers.
(g) Chisago City retains the right to remove, or have removed a cache for any reason at any
time. Geo caching in public parks is a privilege, not a right. The City will remove caches if
it feels is in an inappropriate location, is causing undo impact on forest resources or for
other reasons deemed inconsistent with any local, state or federal regulations.
12. Pets.
(a) Restraint and Attendance. In Chisago City Parks no person shall allow a dog, cat or other
pet animal, except a service animal, to enter a building or beach or any area designated
for swimming and bathing. A dog, cat, or other pet animal shall be restrained. Pet
animals shall be personally attended at all times and shall be effectively restrained by a
portable enclosure or by a leash not exceeding ten (10) feet in length, and animals shall
not disrupt other persons or deprive them from using an area.
(b) Pet Waste. Removal of pet waste from Chisago City Parks shall be in compliance with
Section 151.07 (e) 2 of the Chisago City ordinances.
13. Fires. No person shall build or maintain a fire in a Chisago City Park except in a grill, fireplace
or fire ring provided for that purpose. It is unlawful to disobey a Chisago City representative
or police officer when ordered to extinguish a fire in any location at any time. Hot coal
disposal anywhere in Chisago City Parks, except in special containers for that purpose or
other sites approved by Chisago City, is prohibited.
14. Refuse. No person shall place refuse anywhere within city parks or public land except where
receptacles provided. If no receptacle is available, the refuse shall be removed from the park.
It is unlawful to place refuse generated outside the park into park receptacles.
15. Vegetation. No person shall pick or cut any wild or cultivated flower or cut, break or in any
way injure or deface any tree, shrub or plant or otherwise disturb or disrupt the soil or
grounds of such public areas. No person shall plant or cause to be planted any wild,
cultivated or exotic tree, shrub or plant except in specifically designated areas with the
written permission of the City Administrator or designee. No person shall climb any tree, pick
any flowers, fruit or vegetables that are not self grown, or trample any flowers, tree
seedlings, flower beds, vegetable gardens or new turf seedlings. No person shall hitch any
animal or fasten, anchor or otherwise attach any wire, rope, cable, signs, posters or other
article to any tree, shrub or plant. No person shall remove any device, apparatus or material
installed for the protection, support or preservation of any tree, shrub or plant.
16. Wildlife. No person shall kill, pursue, injure, molest, disturb or have in possession any species
of wildlife including birds, waterfowl or other animals found within the confines of the park.
No person shall rob, disturb or molest the nest, eggs or young of any birds or other animals
found within the park.
17. Signs. No person shall place or erect any sign or advertisement on any park land, trees,
structures or equipment located therein, unless permission is granted by the city.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 80 – Parks, Playgrounds & Public Areas - 5 -
18. Picnicking. No person or group of persons shall unreasonably exclude others from a picnic
area, amphitheater or shelter, except when it has been reserved with the written consent of
Chisago City.
19. Motor Vehicles. Motorized vehicles, including but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, dune
buggies, motorcycles, mini bikes, golf carts, snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles (OHMs),
off-road vehicles (ORVs), and all terrain vehicles (ATVS) are prohibited in Chisago City Parks
without prior permission from Chisago City or Lakes Area Police Department.
20. Peddling and Soliciting. No person shall engage in or solicit business of any nature
whatsoever from parks visitors, or post signs, handbills, or advertisements, except for
authorized concessions, without the prior written consent of Chisago City.
21. Public Safety.
(a) Weapons. No person shall fire off, discharge, explode, use, display or carry any weapon,
including but not limited to a pistol, rifle, shotgun, air gun, air rifle, spring gun, slingshot,
bow and arrow, switchblade knife, knife with a blade 4” or longer in length, trap, or spear
in Chisago City Parks without prior written permission from Chisago City and/or a valid
state permit or license to carry and discharge such weapons.
(b) Fireworks. No person shall possess or explode fireworks of any kind in Chisago City Parks
without prior written permission from Chisago City.
RES-03-06-01 June 2003, Ord. No. 287 02/2011, Ord. No. 308 1/9/2018
CHAPTER 110
CIVIL DEFENSE
110.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE
Subd. 1
Because of the existing and increasing possibility of the occurrence of disasters
or unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from enemy attack,
sabotage, or other hostile action, or other natural causes, and in order to insure
that preparations of this Municipality will be adequate to deal with such disasters,
and generally, to provide for the common defense and to protect the public
peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of
this municipality, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:
(A) To establish a local civil defense agency
(B) To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during civil defense
emergencies
(C) To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this Municipality
and other political subdivisions of this state and of other states with
respect to the carrying out of civil defense functions
Subd. 2
It is further declared to be the purpose of the chapter and the policy of the
Municipality that all civil defense functions of this Municipality be coordinated to
the maximum extent practicable with the comparable functions of the federal
government, of this state, and of other states and localities, and of private
agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective preparations and use
may be made of the nation’s manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing with
any disaster that may occur.
110.02 DEFINITIONS
Subd. 1 Civil Defense
Means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other
than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent,
minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by enemy
attack, sabotage, or other enemy hostile action, or from fire, flood, earthquake, or
other natural causes. These functions include, without limitation; firefighting
services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, air
raid warning services, communications, radiological, chemical, and other special
weapons, defense, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency
welfare services, emergency transportation, existing or property assigned
functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and
other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental to preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing
functions.
Subd. 2 Civil Defense Emergency
Means an emergency declared by the Governor under Minnesota Statute Sec.
12.31.
Subd. 3 Civil Defense Forces
Means any personnel employed by the Municipality and any other volunteer or
paid member of the local civil defense agency engaged in carrying on civil
defense functions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any rule or
order there under.
110.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF CIVIL DEFENSE AGENCY
Subd. 1
There is hereby created a Civil Defense Agency, which shall be under the
supervision and control of a Director of Civil Defense, hereinafter call the
Director. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor for an indefinite term and
may be removed by him at any time. He shall be paid a salary to be set by the
Municipal Council plus his necessary expenses. The Director shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration, and operation of the Civil
Defense Agency, subject to the direction and control of the Mayor. The Civil
Defense Agency shall be organized into such divisions and bureaus, consistent
with state and local civil defense plans, as the Director deems necessary to
provide for the efficient performance of local civil defense functions during a civil
defense emergency. The Civil Defense Agency shall perform civil defense
functions within the Municipality as may be required pursuant to the provisions of
the Minnesota Civil Defense Act of 1951 as amended or this chapter.
Subd. 2
There is hereby created within the Civil Defense Agency a Civil Defense Advisory
Committee, hereinafter called the Committee. Members of the Committee shall
be appointed by the Mayor to represent Municipal departments and other groups
concerned with civil defense. The Mayor shall be chairman and the Director shall
be Secretary of the Committee. The Committee shall advise the Director and the
Council on all matters pertaining to civil defense. Each member shall serve
without compensation and shall hold office at the pleasure of the Mayor.
110.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR
Subd. 1
The Director, with the consent of the Mayor, shall represent the Municipality on
any regional or state organization for civil defense. He shall develop proposed
mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions within or outside the state
for reciprocal civil defense aid and assistance in a civil defense emergency too
great to be dealt with unassisted, and he shall present such agreements to the
Council for its action. Such arrangements shall be consistent with the state civil
defense plan and during a civil defense emergency, it shall be the duty of the
Civil Defense Agency and civil defense forces to render assistance in
accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid arrangements. Any mutual aid
agreement with a political subdivision of another state shall be subject to the
approval of the Governor.
Subd. 2
The Director shall make such studies and surveys of the manpower, industrial
resources, and facilities of the Municipality, as he deems necessary to determine
their adequacy for civil defense and to plan for their most efficient use in time of a
civil defense emergency.
Subd. 3
The Director shall prepare a comprehensive general plan for the civil defense of
the Municipality and shall present such plan to the Council for its approval. When
the Council has approved the plan by resolution, it shall be the duty of all
municipal agencies and all civil defense forces of the Municipality to perform the
duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be
modified in like manner from time to time. The Director shall coordinate the civil
defense activities of the Municipality to the end that they shall be consistent and
fully integrated with the civil defense plan of the federal government and the state
and correlated with the civil defense plans of other political subdivisions within
the state.
Subd. 4
In accordance with the state and Municipal civil defense plan, the director shall
institute such training programs and public information programs and shall take
all other preparatory steps, including the partial or full mobilization of civil defense
forces in advance of actual disaster, as may be necessary to the prompt and
effective operation of the Municipal civil defense plan in time of a civil defense
emergency. He may, from time to time, conduct such practice air-raid alerts or
other civil defense exercises, as he may deem necessary.
Subd. 5
The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies, and
facilities of existing departments and agencies of the Municipality to the
maximum extent practicable, The officers and personnel of all such departments
and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and
extend such services and facilities to the local Civil Defense Agency and to the
Governor upon request. The head of each department and agency, in
cooperation with and under the direction of the Director, shall be responsible for
the planning and programming of such civil defense activities as will involve the
utilization of the facilities of his department or agency.
Subd. 6
The Director shall, in cooperation with existing Municipal departments and
agencies affected, organize, recruit, and train air-raid wardens, auxiliary police,
auxiliary fireman, emergency medical personnel, and any other personnel that
may be required on a volunteer basis to carry out the civil defense plans of the
Municipality and that stat. To the extent that such emergency personnel is
recruited to augment a regular Municipal department or agency for civil defense
emergencies, it shall be assigned to such department or agency for purposes of
administration and command. The Director may dismiss any civil defense
volunteer at any time and require him to surrender any equipment and
identification furnished by the Municipality.
Subd. 7
Consistent with the civil defense plan, the Director shall provide and quip
emergency hospitals, casualty stations, ambulances, canteens, evacuation
centers, and other facilities, or conveyances for the care of injured or homeless
persons.
Subd. 8
The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and regulations issued by the
Governor with reference to civil defense.
Subd. 9
The Director shall direct and coordinate the general operations of all local civil
defense forces during a civil defense emergency in conformity with controlling
regulations and instructions of state civil defense authorities. The heads of
departments and agencies shall be governed by his orders in respect thereto.
Subd. 10
Consistent with the civil defense plan, the Director shall provide and equip at
some suitable place in the Municipality a control center and, if required by the
state civil defense plan, an auxiliary control center to be used during a civil
defense emergency as headquarters for direction and coordination of civil
defense forces. He shall arrange for representation at the control center by
municipal departments and agencies, public utilities, and other agencies
authorized by federal or state authority to carry on civil defense activities during a
civil defense emergency. He shall arrange for the installation at the control center
of necessary facilities for communication with and between heads of civil defense
divisions, the stations, and operating units of municipal services and other
agencies concerned with civil defense and for communication with other
communities and control centers, within the surrounding area and with the
federal and state agencies concerned.
Subd. 11
During the first 30 days of a civil defense emergency, if the legislature is in
session or the Governor has coupled his declaration of the emergency with a call
for a special session of the legislature, the Director may, when necessary to save
life or property, require any person, except members of the federal or state
military forces and officers of the state or any other political subdivision, to
perform services for civil defense purposes as he directs, and he may
commandeer, for the time being, any motor vehicle, tool, appliance, or any other
property, subject to the owner’s right to just compensation as provided by law.
110.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS ON CIVIL DEFENSE WORKERS
Subd. 1
No person shall be employed or associated in any capacity in the civil defense
agency who advocates or has advocated a change by force or violence in the
constitutional form of government of the United States or in this state or the
overthrow of any government in the United States by force or violence, or who
has been convicted of or is under indictment for information charging any
subversive act against the united States. Each person who is appointed to serve
in the civil defense agency shall, before entering upon his duties, take an oath in
writing before any officer of the State Department of Civil Defense, the Director,
or Ground Corps Supervisor. The oath shall be substantially in the form
prescribed by Minnesota Statute Sec. 12.43.
Subd. 2
Civil defense volunteers shall be called into service only in case of a civil defense
emergency or a natural disaster for which the regular municipal forces are
inadequate or for necessary training and preparation for such emergencies. All
volunteers shall serve without compensation.
Subd. 3
Each civil defense volunteer shall be provided with such suitable insignia or other
identification as may be required by the Director. Such identification shall be in a
form and style approved by the federal government. No volunteer shall exercise
any authority over the persons or property of others without his identification. No
person except an authorized volunteer shall use the identification. No person
except an authorized volunteer shall use the identification of a volunteer or
otherwise represent himself to be an authorized volunteer.
Sub. 4
No civil defense volunteer shall carry any firearm while on duty except on written
order of the Chief of the Police Department.
Subd. 5
Personnel procedures of the Municipality applicable to regular employees shall
not apply to the Director or to volunteer civil defense workers but shall apply to
paid employees of the civil defense agency.
110.06 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS
Subd. 1
Whenever necessary to meet a civil defense emergency or to prepare for such
an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the
Governor or the Council, the Mayor may by proclamation promulgate regulation,
consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation, respecting;
protection against air-raids; the sounding of air-raid alarms; the repair,
maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health,
fire and safety regulations, trial drills, or practice periods required for preliminary
training; and all other matters which are required to protect public safety, health,
and welfare in civil defense emergencies. No regulation governing observation of
enemy aircraft, air attack, alarms, or illumination during air attacks shall be
adopted or take effect unless approved by the State Director of Civil Defense.
Subd. 2
Every proclamation of emergency regulations shall be in writing and signed by
the Mayor, shall be dated, shall refer to the particular civil defense emergency to
which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the clerk, where a
copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business
hours. Notice of the existence of such regulations and its availability for
inspection at the Municipal offices or other headquarters of the Municipality and
at such other places in the affected area, as the Mayor shall designate in the
proclamation. Thereupon the regulation shall take effect immediately or at such
later time as may be specified in the proclamation. By like proclamation the
Mayor may modify or rescind any such regulation.
Subd. 3
The Council may rescind any such regulation by resolution at any time. If not
sooner rescinded, every such regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after
its effective date or at the end of the civil defense emergency to which it relates,
whichever occurs first. Any ordinance, rule or regulation inconsistent with an
emergency regulation promulgated by the Mayor shall be suspended during the
period of time and to the extent that such conflict exists.
Subd. 4
During a civil defense emergency, the Municipality is, notwithstanding any
statutory or charter provision to the contrary, empowered, through its governing
body, within or without the corporate limits of the Municipality, to enter into
contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat such disaster by protecting
the health and safety of persons and property, and providing emergency
assistance to the victims of such disaster. The Municipality may exercise such
powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the
time consuming procedures and formalities, prescribed by law pertaining to the
performance of public work, entering into contracts, incurring obligations,
employment of temporary workers, rental of equipment, purchase of supplies and
materials, limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of
public funds, for example, but not limited to, publication of ordinances and
resolutions, publication for alls for bids, provision of civil service laws and rules,
provisions relating to law bids, and requirements for budgets. 3
110.07 CIVILDEFENSE AGENCY PROCEDURE
Subd. 1
There is hereby established in the treasure a special fund to be known as the
Civil Defense Fund. Into this fund shall be placed the proceeds of taxes levied for
civil defense, money transferred from other funds, gifts, and other revenues of
the Civil Defense Agency. From it shall be made expenditures of the operation
and maintenance of the Civil Defense Agency and other expenditures for civil
defense. Regular accounting, disbursement, purchasing, budgeting, and other
financial procedures of the Municipality shall apply to the Civil Defense Fund
insofar as practicable but budgeting requirements and other financial procedures
shall not apply to expenditures from the fund during 1965 or in any case when
their application will prevent compliance with terms and conditions of a federal or
state grant of money or property for civil defense purposes.
Subd. 2
The Director shall, as soon as possible after the end of each fiscal year, prepare
and present to the Council for the information of the Council and the public, a
comprehensive report of activities of the Civil Defense Agency during the year.
110.08 CONFORMITY AND COOPERATION WITH FEDERAL AND STATE
AUTHORITY
Every officer and agency of the Municipality shall cooperate with federal and state
authorities and with authorized agencies engaged in civil defense and emergency
measures to the fullest possible extent consistent with the performance of their other
duties. The provisions of this chapter and of all regulations made there under shall be
subject to all applicable and controlling provisions of federal and state laws and of
regulations and order issued there under and shall be deemed to be suspended and
inoperative so far as there is any conflict therewith. The Council may appoint a qualified
person holding a position if any agency created under federal or state authority for civil
defense purposes as a special policeman of the Municipality, with such police powers
and duties within the Municipality incident to the functions of his position, not exceeding
those of a regular policeman of the Municipality as may be prescribed in the
appointment. Every such special policeman shall be subject to the supervision and
control of the Chief of Police and such other police officers of the Municipality as the
Chief may designate.
110.09 CIVIL DEFENSE AND GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION
All functions hereunder and all other activities relating to civil defense are hereby
declared to be governmental functions. The Municipality, and, except in cases of willful
misconduct, its officers, agents, employees, or representatives engaged in any civil
defense activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with the Minnesota Civil
Defense Act of 1951 as amended (Minnesota Statute Secs. 12.01 to 12.46) or with this
chapter or any rule, regulation or order made there under, shall not be liable for the
death of or any injury to persons, or damage to property as a result of such activity. The
provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to
which he would otherwise be entitled under this chapter or under the workers’
compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any such person to receive
any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.
110.10 PROHIBITED ILLUMINATION A NUISANCE
Any illumination with the Municipality contrary to the provisions of this or any other
ordinance pertaining to civil defense or of any regulation adopted there under or of any
federal or state law, regulation, or order shall be deemed a public nuisance. Any regular
(or auxiliary) policeman (or air-raid warden) may abate such nuisance summarily or may
take any other action necessary to enforce such provisions, including entry on private
property and the use of whatever reasonable force is necessary.
110.11 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTE OR POLITICS
The Civil Defense Agency shall not participate in any form of political activity nor shall it
be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a
legitimate labor dispute.
110.12 PENALTY
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of any regulation adopted there
under relating to act, omissions, or conduct other than official acts or Municipal officers
or employees shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
1
CHAPTER 125
SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY
125.01 General Operation
The City of Chisago City Municipal Surface Storm Water Runoff system shall
be operated as a public utility (hereunder called the surface water management
utility) pursuant to Minnesota Statute Section 444.075, from which revenues will
be derived subject to the provisions of this Section and Minnesota Statutes.
125.02 Definitions
A) Utility Factor
The utility factor is defined as to the ratio of runoff volume, in inches, for a
particular land use, to the runoff volume, in inches, for a 1/3 acre residential lot,
assume a 2" rainfall and Soil Conservation Service (SCS) "Type B" soil
conditions.
B) Surface Water Management Fee
The surface water management fee is defined as the quarterly charge
developed for each parcel of land pursuant to City regulations and zoning
classifications and shall be established from time to time by City Council
resolution.
C) Quarterly Surface Water Management Utility Budget
The quarterly surface water management budget is the estimated quarterly
expenditures for planning and inventories, capital expenditures, personnel and
equipment and operation of the surface water utility, in accordance with
established City policy. This budget shall be established from time to time by
City Council resolution.
250.03 Establishment and Calculation of Fees
Surface water management fees shall be established from time to time by City
Council resolution. The following steps shall be taken to determine the quarterly
fee to be charged to each property:
A) Zoning Area Acreage
A calculation is made of the total area, in acres, of the following zoning
classifications of property within the City:
2
SF – RB = Single Family Small Lot
SF – RA = Single Family Large Lot
TH = Townhouse
APT = Apartment
CBC = Central Business Commercial
HC = Highway Commercial
OS = Office Services
OR = Office Residential
LI = Light Industrial
OI = Office Park Industrial
A = Agricultural
A) Development
A determination is made whether each individual property within these zoning
classifications is developed or undeveloped.
B) Development Acres
The total number of developed acres of property within these zoning
classifications is calculated.
C) SF-RA As Base Unit
The total acreage of developed property zoned as SF-RB, single family
residential, small lot is divided by the total acreage calculated in step (C). This
yields the percentage of total developed property that is zoned SF-RB.
D) Quarterly Budget
The City Council establishes, by resolution, the quarterly budget for the
revenue to be generated.
E) SF-RA Potion of Budget
The portion of the quarterly budget to be charged against properties zoned SFRB
is calculated by multiplying the percentage found in step (D) by the budget
amount in step (E).
F) SF-RB Rate
The rate per acre for property zoned SF-RB is calculated by dividing the
revenue for SF-RB properties in step (F) by the total acreage of developed
properties found in step (C). This rate is the basis for all rates charged to any
other zoned properties within the City.
G) Volume of Runoff
The volume of storm runoff is calculated for all properties zoned SF-RA, SFRB,
TH, APT, CBC, CC, OS, OR, LI, OI and A. The methods used for these
calculations follow the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation
Service Guidelines for soil types common to Chisago City, Minnesota. A curve
number is chosen for each zoning classification which is an approximate
3
measure of the percentage of impervious surface on the property. The volume
of runoff for each zoning classification is calculated using the following
equation:
Q = (P-0.2S)2
P+0.8S
Where Q = Runoff, cfs
S = (1000/cn)-10, dimensionless
P = 2, inches
H) Base Runoff Rate
The runoff value calculated in step (H) for SF-RB properties is considered the
base rate. The runoff value for each of the other zoning classifications is then
divided by the base rate to yield a utility factor for each zoning classification.
This utility factor is a measure of the additional runoff created from the property
as compared to a single family small lot. The utility factors for each zoning
classification are listed in the following section of this ordinance.
I) Utility Rate
The rate per acre for all zoning classifications, except SF-RB, are calculated by
multiplying the utility factor found in step (I) by the base rate determined in step
(G).
125.04 Factors for Determining Fees for Various Land Uses
The utility factors for various land uses used to determine the surface water
management fees are assigned as follows:*
Zoning Districts Land Use Utility Factor
SF-RA Single Family Residential-Small Lot 1.00
SF-RB Single Residential-Large Lot 1.00
TH Townhouse 1.30
APT Apartment 2.70
CBC Central Business Commercial 2.70
CC Convenience Commercial 2.70
OS Office Services 2.70
OR Office Residential 2.70
LI Light Industrial 3.50
OI Office Park Industrial 3.50
A Agricultural .50
*Government Property 2.10
125.05 Adjustment of Fees
The City Council may, by resolution, adopt policies for adjustment of the
surface water management fees. Information to justify a fee adjustment must
be supplied by the property owner. Surface water management fees will be
adjusted under the following conditions:
4
A) Revision of Quarterly Surface Water Revenue Budget
The estimated expenditures for the management of surface water shall be
reviewed at least annually. The fees will be adjusted accordingly and will follow
established City procedures for this adjustment of utility (water and sewer)
rates.
B) Changes in Developed Conditions of Parcels
C) Storm Water Retention
If it can be demonstrated that an individual parcel retains all or a portion of the
rainfall that it receives, the surface water management fee will be reduced by a
percentage equal to that percent of the parcel which produces no external
runoff. A fee reduction of 20 percent or greater must be demonstrated.
125.06 Undeveloped Land
Undeveloped properties, without regard to zoning classification, shall be
assessed at one-half the rate, charged to developed property zoned as SF-RA.
125.07 Exemptions
The following land uses are exempt from the surface water management fee:
A) Public Right-of-Way;
B) Lakes; and
C) Parks.
125.08 Mailing Statement of Charges
Statements for the preceding quarterly Surface Water Management fees shall
be mailed to each property owner in accordance with procedures developed by
the City.
125.09 Fee Appeal
If a property owner or person responsible for paying the surface water
management fee believes that a particular assigned fee is incorrect, such a
person may request that the fee be recomputed. Appeals will be heard by
Council once a year in accordance with established City policy.
125.10 Penalties for Delinquent Payments of Fees
In addition to any other penalty available under the City's Ordinances or State
law, a penalty equal to 10% of the amount due shall be added to accounts not
paid in full on or before the 1st day of the second month following the billing
periods and to each quarterly billing thereafter until the amount of the
delinquent account plus accrued penalty is paid in full or otherwise certified to
the Chisago County Auditor as a delinquent account pursuant to Section
125.11 below.
5
125.11 Annual Certification of Delinquent Accounts
Each year the City Administrator shall prepare a list of delinquent surface water
management service charge accounts, include accrued penalties thereon, in
the form of an assessment roll. On or before October 1, of each year, the City
Council shall review the delinquent surface water management service charge
assessment roll and adopt an appropriate resolution directing that the
assessment roll be certified to the Chisago County Auditor as a lien against the
premises served and directing the Chisago County Auditor to collect the
assessment as part of the ensuing year's tax levy. All delinquent surface water
management service charge assessments shall bear interest, at a rate
determined by the City Council, from the date on which the delinquent surface
water management service charge assessment resolution is adopted until
December 31 of the following year.
125.12 Effective Date
This ordinance shall take full effect and be in full force from and after its
passage and publication according to law.
CHAPTER 140
REGULATIONS
OF THE USE OF HIGHWAYS, STREETS AND ROADS
WITHIN THE MUNICIPALITY
140.01 HIGHWAYS, STREETS AND ROADS
The regulatory provisions of Minnesota Statutes 1945, Chapter 168, 169, and
171 as amended from time to time, including amendments enacted by the
regulatory ordinances relative to the use of highways, streets and alleys and of
motor vehicles and drivers, and all other vehicles within the Municipality are
hereby incorporated in and made a part of this Code as completely as if set out
herein full.
140.02 ACCELERATION
No person shall operate a vehicle on a public highway, street, parking lot, alley
or other public property or allow the motor to backfire, except when an
emergency creates the necessity for such operation.
140.03 IRREGULAR OR ERRATIC DRIVING
No person shall drive a vehicle on a public highway, street, parking lot, alley, or
other public property at irregular or erratic and changing speeds or in such a
manner as to cause said motor vehicle to skip or slide upon acceleration or
stopping or in a manner that simulates a temporary race, or that causes the
vehicle to turn abruptly or sway, except when an emergency creates the
necessity for such operation.
140.03 PENALTY
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, unless otherwise provided by law as a petty misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 141
PARKING REGULATIONS
141.01 DEFINITIONS
A) Motor Vehicle
Any vehicle propelled by motor and engine and commonly used upon the
streets and highways.
B) Park Stand or Standing
The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging of passengers.
C) Person
Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association, or corporation.
D) Street
Street or highway means the entire width between boundary lines of any
way or place when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a
matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
141.02 CITY CLERK
Subd. 1
The City Clerk acting upon the advice and recommendations of the City Police
Chief, is hereby authorized to establish zones and regulations for the parking of
vehicles upon the streets of the Municipality and is further authorized to change,
add to, amend, or abandon the regulations so formed.
Subd. 2
The City Clerk with the advice and recommendations of the City Police Chief is
hereby authorized to form reasonable rules and regulations governing time
periods for the use of the parking areas so formed and is further authorized to
adopt methods of posting such areas and times.
141.03 PARKING REGULATIONS
Subd. 1
No vehicle of 9,000 lbs. gross weight or more, or truck, tractor, or truck trailer
shall be left standing or parked on the City streets, alleys, or public ways
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day of the week except in
those zones where specifically authorized by the police chief and where notice of
such authorization has been posted.
Subd. 2
No person shall park, or allow to stand, any motor vehicle upon any street or
highway within the corporate limits of the City between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. from November 1st through April 15th. I t shall be prima facie
evidence that any violation of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the person
who owns the legal title to the motor vehicle involved.
141.04 IMPEDING SNOW REMOVAL
Subd. 1
Any vehicle parked or left unattended upon any street, parking lot, or public area;
which constitutes an obstruction to traffic or to the removal of snow, may be
removed. The City Police or City Administrator may provide for the removal of
such vehicle to a convenient place of storage. The owner thereof may redeem
his vehicle from such place of storage upon proof of ownership and paying the
costs of removal and storage.
Subd. 2
There will be no parking of any vehicle on any street after a snowfall until the
street has been cleared of snow from curb to curb.
CHAPTER 150
PUBLIC NUISANCES
ORDINANCE #98-1 0-01 -ORD
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF CHISAGO CITY BY
REPEALING CHAPTER 150 ENTITLED, “PUBLIC NUISANCES” AND ADOPTING A NEW
CHAPTER 150, ENTITLED, “PUBLIC NUISANCES’
The City of Chisago City hereby ordains as follows:
Section I. Chapter 150, entitled, “Public Nuisances” of the City code is hereby repealed.
Section II. A new Chapter 150 is added, entitled, “Public Nuisances”.
CHAPTER 150
150.1 AUTHORITY. This title and subsequent chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to
Minnesota municipalities through M.S.41 2.221, 429.021, and 463.152 -463.261.
150.2 PURPOSE. The intent of this title and its subsequent chapters is to encourage a clean, healthy
and satisfying environment for its citizens, one free from nuisances, eyesores, and unhealthy or
devaluating conditions. To these ends, the City of Chisago City seeks to regulate, identify and
provide a means to enforce the regulations, to protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents
and property owners.
150.3 CONFLICTING ORDINANCE. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this title are
inconsistent with its provisions, specifically including previous ordinance of the City or
amendments thereto, are hereby repealed or superseded to the extent necessary to give this
ordinance full force and effect.
150.4 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following phrases shall are defined as
follows:
A. Public Nuisance. A nuisance shall mean any act, substance, matter, emission or thing
which creates a dangerous or unhealthy condition or which threatens the public peace,
health, safety or sanitary conditions of the City or which is offensive or has a blighting
influence on the community and which is found upon, in being discharges or flowing from
any street, alley, highway, railroad, right of way, vehicle railroad car, water, excavation,
building erection, lot grounds or other property located within the City of Chisago City.
Nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, those enumerated below:
1. Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or endangers the
safety, health, comfort or repose of members of the public;
2. Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage, any public road or right of
way, street, alley or highway or waters used by the public;
3. Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law to be a public nuisance and for
which no sentence is specifically provided;
4. In any way renders any other person insecure in life or the use of property;
5. Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to
depreciate the value of the property of others.
B. Engine Retard Breaking. Dynamic Brake, Jake Brake, Jacobs Brake, C Brake, Paccar
Brake, transmission brake or other similar engine retarding brake system which alters the
normal compression of the engine and subsequently releases that compression.
150.5 NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
A. Public Nuisances Affecting Health, Safety, Comfort, or Repose. The following are hereby
declared to be public nuisances affecting health, safety, comfort, or repose:
1. All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks twelve (12) hours after the
snow and ice has ceased to be deposited thereon.
2. All ponds or pools of stagnant water except retention ponds designated wetlands
and/or lakes.
3. All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public.
4. Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24-hours after death,
excluding game animals.
5. Accumulations of manure or rubbish.
6. Privy vaults, garbage cans and garbage receptacles, which are not fly-tight.
7. The affluence from any cesspool, septic tank, drain field or sewage disposal
system discharging upon the surface of the ground.
8. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or body of water
by sewage, industrial waste, or other substances.
9. All noxious weeds as defined in Minnesota Statutes Sections18.76,et seq., as
amended from time to time and the rules and regulations promulgated
hereunder, tall grasses defined as anything over eight (8”) inches in height and
other rank growths in the front (street facing) or side yards of the property.
10. Any accumulation of cans, bottles, trash or debris of any nature or description,
and the throwing, dumping or depositing of any dead animals, manure, garbage,
waste decaying matter, ground, sand, stones, ashes, rubbish cans, glass food
containers or other material any kind on private property.
11. Trades and business, as defined by statute or ordinance, not licensed as
provided by law.
12. Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders in quantities as to render
the occupancy of property uncomfortable to a person.
13. The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs unless such samples are
placed in the hands of an adult person by someone properly licensed.
2
14. The keeping, maintaining, or harboring of live wild animals or dangerous animals,
both as defined in City Ordinance Chapter 151, whether native to Minnesota or
not, which in their wild state pose a threat to humans or domestic animals.
15. The keeping, maintaining, or harboring of any combination of animals and/or fowl
kept in such numbers or under such conditions that unreasonably annoy, injure,
or endanger the health, safety, comfort, repose, or welfare of the public.
16. The failure to maintain basic repairs and upkeep on a vacant residence or
building, including but not limited to, snow removal, lawn maintenance, and
exterior maintenance.
17. Ownership of a “hazardous building” defined as, “Any building which because of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, physical damage, unsanitary condition or
abandonment constitutes a fire hazard or a hazard to public safety or health.”
18. All other acts, omissions of acts, occupations and uses of the property which are
deemed to be a menace to the health of the inhabitants of the City or a
considerable number thereof.
B. Public Nuisances Affecting Morals and Decency: The following are hereby declared to
be public nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
1. All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards not lawfully allowed by
Minnesota State Statute
2. Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in such operations.
3. All places where intoxicating liquors are manufactured, sold, bartered or given
away in violation of the law or where persons are permitted to resort for the
purpose of drinking intoxicating liquors as a beverage contrary to law or where
intoxicating liquors are kept for sale, barter or distribution in violation of the law
and all liquor, bottles, kegs, pumps, bars and other property kept at and used for
maintaining such a place.
4. Any vehicle used for the illegal transportation of intoxicating liquor and/or illegal
controlled substances.
5. The looking into or peeping through doors, windows, or openings of private
homes by methods of stealth and without proper authority and by surreptitious
methods or what is commonly known as “window peeping”.
6. All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse,
gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses.
C. Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety: The following are declared to be
nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
1. All trees and hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons from
having a clear view of street signs and/or a clear view of all traffic approaching an
intersection.
3
2. All limbs of trees, which are less than eight feet (8’) above the surface of any
public street or alley.
3. The outside piling, storing or keeping of old machinery, junk, furniture, household
furnishings or appliances or component parts thereof, rusting metal
inoperable/unusable equipment, or other debris visible on private or public
property.
4. The placing or throwing on any street, alley, road, highway, sidewalk, or other
public property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substances which may
injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over the
same.
5. The depositing of, maintaining, permitting or failing to remove, garbage, trash,
rubbish, bottles, cans and other refuse on any property within the City, including
large quantities of organic debris and materials, which accumulated by other than
natural means, except properly maintained compost piles.
6. Property in a residential district not seeded, sodded or otherwise planted with a
ground cover more than 240 days after any disturbance to the property caused
by construction, grading, or other activity; or any time prior to the 240 days if the
property is causing erosion or drainage problems on the same or nearby
properties, including public streets.
7. The accumulation of any pile of wood which are not stacked or secured in a
stable manner so as to avoid collapse.
8. Ownership of a “hazardous building” defined as: “Any building which because of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, physical damage, unsanitary condition or
abandonment, constitutes a fire hazard or a hazard to public safety or health.”
Subject to the above, Nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, violations of
the following requirements:
(a) No part of any exterior surface shall have deterioration, holes, breaks,
loose or rotten boards or timbers.
(b) Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as paint applied
shall be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish. No wall
or other exterior surface shall have pooling, cracked, chipped or
otherwise deteriorated surface finish on more than twenty percent (20%)
of:
i. Any one wall or other flat surface, or
ii. All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters and similar
projections on any one side or surface.
(c) All wires which are strung less than fifteen feet (15’) above the surface of
any public street or alley.
(d) All exterior doors and shutters shall be hung properly and have an
operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place.
(e) All cornices, moldings, lintels, bay or dormer windows, and similar
projections shall be kept in good repair and free from cracks and defects
which make them hazardous or unsightly.
(f) Roof surfaces shall be tight and have no defects that admit water. All
roof drainage systems shall be secured and hung properly.
4
(g) Chimneys, antennae, air vents and other similar projections shall be
structurally sound and in good repair. Such projections shall be secured
properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or exterior roof.
(h) All foundations shall be structurally sound and in good repair.
9. All buildings, walls and other structures that have been damaged by fire, decay
or otherwise to an extent exceeding one-half (1/2) of their fair market value or
which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public.
10. Any structure or portion thereof, in a residential district whose exterior is not
completed in accordance with City-approved construction plans within 180 days
after the date the City building permit was issued.
11. Any construction materials including piles of dirt, sand and sod, left on the
property more than sixty (60) days after construction has been completed or a
certificate of occupancy has been issued, whichever occurred first.
12. All buildings and all alterations to buildings made or erected in violation of
Minnesota State Building Code concerning manner, materials or construction.
13. Any vehicle that deposits mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or other material on
any street or highway.
14. Any discarded construction material or other litter at a construction site which is
not placed in an adequate waste container and thereafter removed from the site
or which is buried on or under the construction site or which is allowed to blow
around or off the site.
15. All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances or materials
stored or accumulated in any manner or in any amount other than provided by
law or ordinance.
16. Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use of the public streets,
alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, except under such conditions as provided by
ordinance and any other excavation left unprotected or uncovered indefinitely or
allowed to exist in such a manner as to attract people.
17. All use or display of fireworks, except as provided by law or ordinance.
18. Radio aerials strung or erected in any manner except that provided by law or
ordinance.
19. Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public
street or sidewalk, which causes large crowds or people to gather, obstructing
traffic and the free use of public streets or sidewalks.
20. All hanging signs, awnings, and other similar structures over public streets or
sidewalks or so situated as to endanger public safety not constructed and
maintained as provided by law or ordinance or without proper permit.
21. The allowing of rain, water, ice or snow to fall from any building on any public
street or sidewalk or to flow across any public sidewalk.
22. All dangerous, unguarded machinery, equipment or other property in any public
place or so situated or operated on private property so as to attract the public.
23. The distribution of handbills, except as provided by law or ordinance.
5
24. Throwing, dropping or releasing printed matter, paper or any other material or
object over the City from an airplane, balloon or other aircraft or in such manner
as to cause such material to fall or land in the City.
25. Placing entrance culverts or doing any act which may alter or affect the drainage
of public streets or alleys or the surface or grade of public streets, alleys or
sidewalks, without proper permit.
26. Making repairs to motor vehicles or tires in public streets or alleys, except for
emergency repairs when it will not unduly impede or interfere with traffic.
27. The placement of mailboxes and other delivery receptacles on public right-ofway,
except those, which are in compliance with United States Postal Service
requirements for location and type.
28. The placement, erecting or painting of unauthorized traffic signs or advertising
signs in streets or alleys or on sidewalks.
D. Noise Violations. The making or causing of loud, unnecessary, or disturbing noise is
prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise which either annoys, disturbs or affects the comfort,
repose, health or peace of others.
1. Loud or disturbing noises enumerated restrictions: The following acts set forth in
the following paragraphs are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises in violation of this Chapter, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to
be exclusive:
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge the exhaust or permit the
discharge of the exhaust from any motor vehicle except through a muffler
that effectively prevents abnormal or excessive noise and complies with the
MN Rule 6102.0040.
b. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck to intentionally use an engine
retarding brake on any public highway, street, parking lot or alley within the
City which causes abnormal or excessive noise from the engine because of
an illegally modified or defective exhaust system, except in an emergency.
c. All off-highway motorcycles must follow the sound emissions as regulated in
the MN State Statute 84.789.
d. Prohibited noises made by sound producing or reproducing equipment: No
person shall use or operate or permit the use or operation of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or
other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a distinctly and
loudly audible manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any
person nearby. This includes operation of any such set, instrument,
phonograph, machine or other device between the hours of 10:00 pm and
8:00 am in such a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the
structure or building in which it is located, in the hallway or apartment
adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a
structure or building.
e. Nighttime noise in Residential Areas. Noisy Parties or Gatherings:
(1) No person shall between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., on any
weekday or weekend day participate in any loud party or gathering of
people from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume as to disturb
the peace, quiet or repose of persons residing in any residential areas.
6
(2) Loud noises between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of such
volume as to be plainly audible at a distance of one hundred feet (100’)
from the residential premises wherein such loud party or gathering is
located shall be prima facia evidence of a violation of this Chapter.
(3) No persons shall visit or remain within any residential dwelling unit
wherein such loud party or gathering is taking place, except the owner,
persons residing in that unit or persons who are there for the sole
purpose of abating the disturbance.
f. Loud sound amplification systems. No person operating or occupying a
motor vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, driveway or
public/private property shall operate or permit the operation of any sound
amplification system (“SAS”) from within the vehicle so that the sound is
plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet or more from the vehicle.
(1) “Sound amplification system” (“SAS”) means any radio, tape player,
compact disk player, loudspeaker, or other electronic device used for the
amplification of sound.
(2) “Plainly audible” means any sound produced by an SAS from within the
vehicle that clearly can be heard at a distance of 50 feet (50’) or more.
Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based upon
direct line of sight Words or phrases need not be discernible and bass
reverberations are included. The motor vehicle may be stopped,
standing, parked or moving on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, or
driveway on either public or private property.
(3) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the SAS
and that any of the following apply:
(a) The SAS was being operated to request medical or medical or
vehicular assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition;
(b) the vehicle containing the SAS was an emergency or public safety
vehicle;
(c) the SAS was owned and operated by the City, or a gas, electric,
communications, or refuse company and said system was being
used for a bona fide function of said entity;
(d) the SAS was being used for the purpose of giving instructions,
directions, talks, addresses, lectures or transmitting music to any
persons or assemblages of persons in compliance with the
ordinances of the City;
(e) the SAS was used for a bona fide public activity including but are not
necessarily limited to parades, fireworks, sports events, musical
productions and other activities for which a permit has been issued
or for which has otherwise been licensed or been expressly
approved by the City Council.
2. Hourly restriction on certain operations: Certain operations shall be
restricted during certain hours as follows:
(1) Recreational vehicles. Hours of operation for snowmobiles, All
terrain vehicles, off-road vehicles and Motorcycles shall follow
the regulations set forth in the Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 302.
7
(2) Domestic power equipment. No person may operate a power
lawn mower, power hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden
tiller, edger, drill or other similar domestic power maintenance
equipment except between the hours of 8:00 am and 10:00 pm.
Snow removal equipment is exempt from this subsection.
(3) Construction activities. No person may erect, excavate,
demolish, alter or repair any building between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and 6:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. on Saturdays and all day Sunday except where single
individuals or families work on single- family residences for their
own occupancy owned by them. The City Administrator or their
designee in case of emergency may grant permission to repair
at any time when he finds such repair work will not affect the
health and safety of persons in the vicinity.
3. Receiving land use standards; maximum noise levels. No person may
operate or cause or permit to be operated any source of noise in such a
manner as to create a noise level exceeding the limit set in Table I for
the receiving land use category specified when measured at or within the
property line of receiving land use.
Table I. Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use Districts.
Day
(8:00 a.m.--10:00 p.m.)
Night
(10:00 p.m.--8:00 a.m.)
Land Use
Districts
L10
Standard
L50
Standard
L10
Standard
L50 Standard
Residential
65 dBA 60 dBA 55 dBA 50 dBA
Commercial
70 dBA 65 dBA 70 dBA 65 dBA
Industrial 80 dBA 75 dBA 80 dBA 75 dBA
For noise relative to period less than L-10 Standard, the following
conditions apply: No indoor sound level shall be raised more than six dbc
over existing background, and no outdoor sound level shall be raised
more than ten dbc over existing background noise level. The limits of the
most restrictive district shall apply at the boundaries between the
different land use categories. The determination of land use shall be by
its zoned designation.
150.6 SALES ON PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY PROHIBITED – EXCEPTIONS. No person shall sell, buy,
barter or offer to sell, buy, barter for any goods, wares, merchandise, or otherwise engage in any
type of business or sales transaction on any public sidewalk, street or right-of-way within the City,
including, but not limited to the sale or barter of the following goods:
a. Motor vehicles;
b. Boats; and
c. Trailers
This section shall not apply when the activities prohibited in this chapter are expressly permitted
in a defined area for a specified period of time by resolution of the City Council.
150.7 PENALTY. Any person, occupant, property owner or owners, firm partnership or corporation
violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of misdemeanor and punished according to
law. Each date that a violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
8
150.8 VEHICLES CONSTIUTING A PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any Violation of Chapter 303 of the City
Code regarding abandoned, junk, and unauthorized vehicles is declared a public nuisance.
150.9 ENFORCEMENT. It shall be the duty of the City Council to enforce the provisions of this
ordinance and the City Council may, by resolution, delegate to other officers or agencies power to
enforce particular provisions of this section, including the power to inspect private premises, and
the officers charged with the enforcement of this ordinance shall take all reasonable precautions
to prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisance.
The City Administrator or designee is authorized to enter upon any property if necessary to
determine whether the provisions of this code or any applicable state statute has been violated, to
make any examinations or surveys, or to conduct any tests as be reasonably necessary in the
performance of their duties. All inspection and testing must be done in a reasonable manner.
a. Abatement. Whenever, in the judgment of the officer charged with enforcement, it is
determined upon investigation that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists within the
City, such officer shall notify in writing the person committing and maintaining such a public
nuisance and require him to terminate and abate said nuisance and remove such conditions
or remedy such defects. Notice to the owner shall be satisfied by notice to the person listed
as the taxpayer on the county’s tax records if the premises are not occupied, the address of
the owner is unknown and no other responsible party can be reasonably identified, notice
may be served on the property by posting a comp of the notice on the premises. Said notice
shall require the owner or occupant of such premises or both, to take reasonable steps
within a reasonable amount of time to be designated in said notice, but the maximum time
of the removal of said notice after service of said notice shall not in any event exceed 30
days. If the owner, occupant or other responsible party does not comply with the notice
within the time specified, the City Council may, after notice to the owner and occupant or
other responsible party and an opportunity to be heard, provide for abating the nuisance by
the City. The notice shall be served in the same manner as notice by the enforcing officer
and shall be given at least ten days before the date stated the notice when the Council will
consider the matter. If notice is given by posting, at least 30 days shall elapse between the
day of posting and the hearing.
b. Summary Abatement. The enforcing officer may provide for abating a public nuisance
without following the procedure required above when:
1. There is an immediate threat to the public health or safety.
2. There is an immediate threat of serious property damage.
3. A public nuisance has been caused by private parties on public property, or if the
enforcing office abates the nuisance pursuant to this section, the officer must
reasonably attempt to notify the owner, occupant or other responsible party if the
intended action and the attempt to notify the owner, occupant or other responsible
party of the intended action and the right to appeal the abatement and any cost at
the next regular scheduled City Council meeting.
c. Cost Recovery. The owner of property in which a nuisance has been abated by the City, or
a person who has caused a public nuisance on property not owned by that person shall be
personably liable to the City for the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. As
soon as the work has been completed and the cost determined, the clerk-administrator or
their designee shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner or other responsible
party. Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the
clerk-administrator.
9
d. Assessment. If the cost, or any portion of it, has not been paid under paragraph 3, within 30
days after the date of the bill, the unpaid cost may be certified against the property to which
the cost is attributable. Before certification against the property, reasonable notice of the
impending certification against the property, reasonable notice of the impending certification
and an opportunity to be heard by the City Council must be given to the taxpayer of record.
Failure of the taxpayer to receive the notice shall not invalidate the certification, however.
Thereafter the unpaid cost may be certified to the County Auditor for collection along with
current taxes in the following year or in such annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the
City Council may determine in each case.
e. Other Remedies. The City is also authorized to use any remedy provided by Minnesota
Statute including but not limited to Minn. Stat 463.16-463.152, regarding the right to correct
or remove, “hazardous buildings”.
f. Penalty. Any person in violation of any of the provisions in this Chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
150.10 This Ordinance shall take full effect and be in full force from and after its passage and publication
as provided by Minnesota Statute.
CITY OF CHISAGO CITY
By: _______________________
Donald Taylor, Mayor
ATTEST:
_______________________________
John D. Pechman, City Administrator
Amended: Ord. # 97-06-03-ORD (6/24/97), Ord.#. 98-10-01-ORD (10/27/98), Ord 285
(1/26/10)
10
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 1 | P a g e
CHAPTER 151
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO ANIMAL LICENSING AND CONTROL
The City of Chisago City hereby ordains as follows:
151.01 DEFINITIONS: As used in this chapter except as otherwise provided, the
following terms shall be defined to mean:
A. Animal: Any non-human mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including
all fowl and poultry), or other member commonly accepted as part of the
animal kingdom. Animals shall be classified as follows:
1. Animal - Domestic: Animals commonly accepted as Domesticated
household pets. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include
fish, dogs, cats, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits,
household birds, non-poisonous, non-venomous and non-constricting
reptiles or amphibians, and other similar animals.
2. Animal - Non-Domestic: Animals that are commonly considered to be
naturally wild and not naturally trained or domesticated, or which are
commonly considered to be inherently dangerous to the health,
safety, and welfare of people. Unless otherwise defined, such
animals shall include:
a. Any member of the large cat family (family feline) including lions,
tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards, and jaguars, but excluding
commonly domesticated housecats.
b. Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canine)
including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but
excluding commonly accepted domesticated dogs.
c. Any crossbreed such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a
dog, unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a
domesticated house pet.
d. Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk
(whether or not descended), raccoon, squirrel, or ferret, but
excluding those members otherwise defined or commonly
accepted as domesticated pets.
e. Any poisonous venomous, constricting or inherently dangerous
member of the reptile or amphibian families including
rattlesnakes, boa constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and
alligators.
f. Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which
can be reasonably defined by the terms of this subpart, including
but not limited to bears, deer, monkeys, and game fish.
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 2 | P a g e
3. Animal – Farm: Any animals commonly associated with a farm or
performing work in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined,
such animals shall include members of the equestrian family (horses,
mules, donkeys), bovine family (cows, bulls), sheep, alpaca, llama,
fowl (chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese), swine (including Vietnamese
pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees and other animals associated with a
farm, ranch, or stable.
a. Bovine shall include animals of the cattle family including,
buffalo, bison and ox.
b. Equestrian family includes horses, mules, donkeys
c. Fowl: includes chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese
d. Pigeons: includes any and all varieties of pigeons
e. Swine: includes pigs, hogs, boars and potbellied pigs.
B. At Large: Any animals which are off the premises of the owner and not
under the custody and control of the owner or other person, either by
leash, cord, chain, or otherwise restrained or confined.
C. Cat: Any domesticated feline species, male or female whole or neutered,
commonly accepted as domesticated household pets.
D. Colony: An aggregate of honeybees consisting principally of workers, but
having, when perfect, one (1) queen and at times drones, brood, combs,
and honey.
E. Coop: Any structure of the keeping of any pigeon or fowl.
F. Dangerous Dog or Animal: Dangerous dog is subject to the meaning set
forth in MN State Statute 347.50. Dangerous animal means any animal
that has committed any of the acts set forth below:
1. Without provocation, inflicts substantial bodily harm
on a human being on public or private property; or
2. Killed a domestic animal without provocation; or
3. Been found to be a potentially dangerous animal, and after the owner
has been notified that the animal is potentially dangerous, the animal
aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
G. Dog: Any canine species, male or female, whole or neutered, commonly
accepted as domesticated household pets, other domesticated animals of
a dog kind.
H. Enclosure: Any structure, except a dwelling, designated to securely
enclose and prevent an animal from escaping there from, and/or
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 3 | P a g e
designed to provide the animal with shelter and protection from the
weather.
I. Hive: The receptacle inhabited by a colony that is manufactured for that
purpose.
J. Honeybee: All life stages of the common domestic honeybee, Apis
mellifera species of European origin.
K. Owner: Any person or persons, firm, corporation, organization, or
department, possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in, or
having temporary or permanent custody or control of an animal.
L. Potentially Dangerous Dog or Animal: Potentially Dangerous Dog is
subject to the meaning set forth in MN State Statute 347.50. Potentially
Dangerous Animal means any animal that has committed any of the acts
set forth below:
1. When unprovoked, bites a human or domestic animal; or
2. When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the public
street, sidewalks, or any other public property in an apparent attitude
of attack; or
3. Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of
humans or domestic animals.
M. Restrained: On a leash of not more than six (6) feet in length, and in the
custody of a person of sufficient age to adequately control thee animal, in
a vehicle, or confined to the owner’s property by enclosure or fencing.
N. Substantial Bodily Harm: Substantial Bodily Harm shall have the meaning
set forth in MN State Statute 609.02.
151.02 REGULATIONS:
A. Except as herein provided, the owner of any animal within the City shall
cause such animal to be contained to the individual’s property by
adequate fencing, enclosure, or leash.
B. The owner of any female dog or cat in heat shall cause such dog or cat to
be confined in such a manner so as not to come in contact with any other
dog or cat during such time as the dog or cat is in heat, except for
intentional breeding purposes.
C. The owner of any domestic animal within the City of Chisago City shall
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 4 | P a g e
cause such animal to be restrained by a leash, chain, or cord of sufficient
strength, or electronic device to effectively restrain and control such
domestic animal, and in the custody of a person capable of adequately
controlling such domestic animal at all times when such domestic animal
is in or upon a public place.
D. The owner of any domestic animal shall take steps to ensure that any
domestic animal does not create a nuisance by allowing the following:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a domestic animal that
habitually yaps, wails, barks, or cries. The habitual yaps, wails, barks,
or cries shall exist from a location outside of the building or premises
where the domestic animal(s) are located and which animal noise
occurs repeatedly over at least a 5-minute period of time, with less
than 30 seconds between each animal noise. Such yap wail,
barking, or cry must also be audible off of the owner’s or caretaker’s
premises. It shall not be a violation of this section if the domestic
animal was barking, crying, or making other noise due to harassment
or injury to the dog animal or a trespass upon the premises
whereupon the dog animal is located.
2. It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit a domestic animal(s) to
damage any lawn, garden, or their property.
3. The owner of any domestic animal or person having the custody or
control of any animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces of
the animal and disposing of such feces in a sanitary manner whether
on their own property or not.
4. Any animals kept contrary to this Section are hereby declared a public
nuisance and may be abated according to the law.
E. A complaint in writing regarding a domestic animal that is a public
nuisance may be submitted to a district court judge in accordance with
MN Statute 347.04 and as amended.
151.03 HUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS:
A. The owner of any animal within the City of Chisago City shall provide
such animal with sufficient wholesome food and water on a daily basis, as
well as proper and sufficient shelter form the weather, and veterinary care
when needed to prevent suffering of any sick or injured animal.
B. No person shall beat, torment, tease, or otherwise abuse an animal, or
permit an animal fight.
C. No person shall allow any property to be used for maintaining more than
three (3) dogs or four (4) domestic animals including cats over six (6)
months of age. Any person who desires to exceed this limitation shall first
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 5 | P a g e
register for a Kennel License as prescribed in Section 151.10.
151.04 KEEPING OF FARM ANIMALS: Every person who raises Farm Animals for the
sale, profit, or pleasure must be kept confined on the premises at all times,
except for the purpose of when honey bees are pollinating, farm animals are
being transported, racing and used in ceremonies. This section of the ordinance
does not apply to the keeping of dogs, cats and other domestic animals
customarily kept as pets, or Kennel license as regulated in Section 151.10. Any
persons keeping Farm Animals within the city limits shall follow the guidelines
within this chapter.
A. The following animals are allowed on parcels of five (5) acres or larger.
One (1) animal unit is permitted per two acres. Pigeons and fowl maybe
combined to equal one (1) animal unit. Any other animal not listed below
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the City
Council.
The animal units are as follows:
1 Bovine = 1 animal unit
1 Horse = 1 animal unit
2 Swine = 1 animal unit
2 Bee Hives = 1 animal unit
5 Alpaca or llama = 1 animal unit
5 Sheep/Goat = 1 animal unit
20 Fowl = 1 animal unit
B. The following animals are allowed on parcels of five (5) acres or less.
1. Horses. Horses are permitted in the City on properties three (3)
acres or more. One (1) horse is equivalent to one (1) animal unit.
One (1) animal unit is permitted per two acres.
2. Pigeons and other Fowl. Pigeons and other fowl are permitted in
the City on properties that are less than one (1) acre. They shall be
protected from the weather and predators in a shelter or coop and
have access to the outdoors. Properties one (1) acre or less shall
provide a run area that is enclosed or fenced. Shelters, chicken
coops and run area shall be placed in the rear yard and be at least
twenty-five (25) feet from any residential dwelling on any other
premises. The following are limitations on Pigeons and other fowl
within the City.
a. No person shall keep roosters on any property less than two
(2) acres.
b. All premises on which the pigeons and fowl are kept or
maintained shall be kept clean from filth, garbage, and any
substances which attract rodents. The shelter, coop and its
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 6 | P a g e
surrounding must be cleaned frequently enough to control
odor. Manure shall not be allowed to accumulate in a way that
causes an unsanitary condition or causes odors detectible on
another property. Failure to comply with these conditions may
result in a violation of this section.
c. Pigeons and other fowl are not allowed on properties with
three (3) or more dwelling units.
d. Other fowl are allowed on properties less than one (1) acres.
The following animals are allowed:
Pigeons or Other Fowl
5 Pigeons or Other Fowl Less than one (1) acre
10 Pigeons or Other Fowl Greater than one (1) acre, but less than two (2)
acres
20 Pigeons or Other Fowl Greater than two (2) acres
3. Honey Bees. Keeping, maintaining, and raising of honey bees may
be allowed on properties one (1) acre or greater. Any person
keeping, maintaining, and raising honey bees shall comply with the
following restrictions:
a. Any Africanize strain species of honeybees is prohibited.
b. The bee hives shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet
from any property line, as measured from the nearest point on
the hive to the property line.
c. The beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at
least six (6) feet in height. The flyway barrier may consist of a
wall, fence, dense vegetation or a combination thereof, such
that honeybees will fly over rather than through the material to
reach the colony. The flyway barrier must be in proximity to
the hive to ensure the honeybees fly up and above head
height. A flyway barrier is not required if the property adjoining
is undeveloped, or is used for agriculture or industrial; this
does not include properties with horses or pedestrian trails. A
flyway barrier is not required if the hives are located on the
roof of a structure containing at least one (1) full story if all
hives are located at least five (5) feet from the side of the
structure and at least fifteen (15) feet from any adjacent and
occupied structure.
d. No person is permitted to keep more than the following
numbers of hives on any lot within the city:
Bee Hives
1 Animal Unit = 2 Hives
# of units Lot Size
1 Animal Unit Larger than 1 acre, but less than 3 acres
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 7 | P a g e
2 Animal Unit Larger than 3 acres, but less than 5 acres
1 Animal Unit for every 2 acres Greater than 5 acres
e. Any person keeping, maintaining, or raising of honeybees shall
comply with the following standards of practice:
i. Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable
frames, which shall be kept in sound and usable condition.
ii. Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of
water is available to the colony prior to and so long as
colonies remain active outside of the hive.
iii. Each beekeeper shall ensure that no wax comb or other
material that might encourage robbing by other bees is left
upon the grounds of the apiary lot. Such materials once
removed from the site shall be handled and stored in
sealed containers, or placed within a building or other
insect-proof container.
iv. Each beekeeper shall maintain his beekeeping equipment
in good condition, including keeping the hives painted, and
securing unused equipment from weather, potential theft or
vandalism and occupancy by swarms. It shall be a
violation of this section for any beekeeper’s unused
equipment to attract a warm, even if the beekeeper is not
intentionally keeping honeybees.
f. If a beekeeper serves the community by removing a swarm or
swarms of honeybees from locations where they are not
desired, a beekeeper shall not be considered in violation of the
portion of this section limiting the number of colonies while
temporarily housing the swarm on the apiary lot in compliance
with the standards of practice established pursuant to this
section if the swarm is so housed for no more than thirty (30)
days.
151.05 DOGS AND CATS:
A. No person may own a dog if the person has been convicted of any of the
offenses listed in Minnesota Statutes, Section 347.542.
B. Manner of Keeping.
1. Confinement areas for dogs and cats must be cleaned and
disinfected as often as it is necessary to maintain a clean and
sanitary condition.
2. Enclosures must be of sufficient size to allow each dog or cat to turn
8about fully and to stand, sit, and lie in a comfortable normal
position. Confinement areas must be maintained at a temperature
suitable for the animal involved. The enclosure must be constructed
so as to prevent injury to the dog or cat.
3. Housing facilities must be structurally sound and maintained in good
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 8 | P a g e
repair. Indoor housing facilities must be adequately ventilated and
have ample light, either natural or artificial.
4. Dogs and cats kept outside must be provided with access to shelter
to protect them from the sun, wind, rain, and snow.
5. If dogs or cats are confined by chains, the chains must be so
attached that they cannot become entangled with the chains of
other animals or any other objects. Chains must be of a size
commonly used for the size of a dog or cat involved and must be
attached to the dog or cat by means of a well-fitted collar. Chains
must be at least three times the length of the dog or cat as
measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail.
6. Clean potable water must be made available to all dogs and cats
and must be fed at least once a day with clean, wholesome food
sufficient to meet the normal daily nutritive requirements for the
dog’s or cat’s age, size, and condition. All feeding and watering
receptacles must be kept clean and sanitary.
C. License and Registration: All dogs owned and/or kept within the City of
Chisago City shall be licensed, with the following exceptions:
1. Dogs under the age of six (6) months.
2. Dogs whose owners are temporarily in the city for a period of time
not exceeding thirty (30) days.
3. Dogs that are brought into the city for the purpose of performance,
an animal show, circus, or similar appearance.
4. Service animals properly trained to assist disabled or handicapped
persons.
D. Vaccination Required: It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat owner to
keep or maintain any dog or cat older than six (6) months of age, unless it
has been vaccinated with an anti-rabies vaccine by a licensed
veterinarian. No license shall be issued except upon compliance with this
section.
E. Licensing and Vaccination Procedures:
1. Application: Except as herein provided, within thirty (30) days of
acquiring possession of a dog which has not been licensed by the
City of Chisago City, the owner of the dog shall make application for
a dog license. The application shall be on forms provided to the City
prior to the issuance of a license or renewal of a license.
2. License Fee: The license fee for each dog must be submitted with
the license application. The fee will be established by Council
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 9 | P a g e
resolution.
3. Duration of License: A license shall be issued during any calendar
year from January 1 through December 31, but at no time shall a
license exceed the expiration date of the vaccination.
4. Issuance of Licenses: Upon completion of the application form,
receipt of the license fee(s), and receipt of proof of vaccination, the
City shall cause a dog license to be issued to the applicant for a
particular dog.
5. Receipt and Tags: The City shall cause a license fee receipt to be
issued to the applicant, along with a metallic tag. The applicant shall
cause the tag to be affixed permanently by a metal fastening device
to the collar of the licensed dog in such manner that the tag is easily
observed. If a tag is lost, a duplicate may be issued by the City upon
presentation of a receipt showing payment of the initial license fee
and upon payment of an additional fee for each duplicate tag.
6. Change of Address: An applicant who has obtained a dog license
shall notify the City of applicant’s address change within corporate
limits of the City within thirty (30) days of any address change.
7. Counterfeit Tags: No person shall counterfeit, attempt to
counterfeit, or attach any counterfeit tag to any dog in the City.
8. Transfer of Tags: No person shall transfer a dog tag from one dog
or cat to another.
F. Stray Dogs and Cats: Upon written notice of the Chief of Police that
private property of another is attracting or providing shelter to dogs or
cats that are not owned or cared for by any known person, the owner of
such property shall be responsible for removing such stray dogs or cats in
a humane manner within thirty (30) days of such written notice.
151.06 FECES DISPOSAL:
A. The owner of any animal shall be responsible for the sanitary disposal of
any feces material deposited by such animal in the following manner:
1. During the period of November 1st through April 30th all feces
material shall be removed from the owner’s premises and/or stored
in a sanitary manner within seventy-two (72) hours.
2. During the period of May 1st through October 31st, all feces material
shall be removed from the owner’s property and/or stored in a
sanitary manner within forty-eight (48) hours.
3. Objectionable feces odor and/or flies detectable at the adjoining
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 10 | P a g e
property line shall be deemed a violation of this section.
B. The owner of any animal shall not permit such animal to be on public
property or the property of another without having in the owner’s
immediate possession a device for the immediate removal of feces
material deposited by the animal, as well as a container for the transport
of such material to an appropriate disposal receptacle located on the
property of the owner. The owner of such animal shall be responsible for
removing such material from public property or private property of another
to a proper disposal receptacle located on the property of the owner.
151.07 SEEING EYE OR HEARING AIDE DOGS PERMITTED IN PUBLIC PLACES.
A. Whenever any blind or hearing-impaired person accompanied by a
“Seeing Eye” or “Hearing Aide” dog presents himself for accommodation
or service on any public conveyance vehicle or to any café, restaurant,
store, or other place of business open to the public, it shall be unlawful for
the owner, proprietor, manage, or operator of such vehicle or place of
business to refuse admission to the dog or service to the blind or hearingimpaired
person.
151.08 REGISTRATION FOR KENNEL LICENSE:
A. No person shall be allowed to maintain more than three (3) dogs or up to
four (4) dogs and cats over six (6) months of age any place in the City.
Any person who desires to exceed this limitation shall first apply for a
kennel license with the City on a form prescribed by the City
Administrator.
1. Requirements: Any person obtaining a Kennel License pursuant to
this section shall comply with the standards as listed in Section
151.08.
2. Application Content:
a. The name and address of the owner and the operator of the
Kennel License.
b. A site plan for review,
c. Any required secure enclosure details,
d. The number of dogs or cats proposed to be kept.
151.09 IMPOUNDING AND CONFINEMENT:
A. Any animal found in violation of this Chapter may be seized by officers or
a person designated by the City Council to enforce this Chapter,
impounded in a shelter, and there confined in a humane manner.
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 11 | P a g e
B. Immediately upon impoundment of any animal wearing a current
registration, the City will make reasonable efforts to notify the owner of
such animal, of the animal’s confinement and the procedures to be
followed for reclamation of such animal.
C. An animal which is not redeemed by the owner within five (5) days,
excluding holidays, after such impoundment may be placed for adoption,
or euthanized and disposed of in a humane manner by the appropriate
animal shelter facility.
D. Owner title of any animal may be transferred to the animal shelter facility
upon expiration of the legal detention period and the animal has not been
claimed by the owner.
151.10 IMPOUNDMENT FEES: Any animal impounded hereunder may be reclaimed by
the owner of such animal within five (5) days, excluding holidays, after such
impoundment. Before the owner shall be permitted to retake possession of such
animal, the owner shall pay all required fees and costs of such impoundment to
the Lakes Area Police Department or designee.
151.11 RABIES CONTROL:
A. The Minnesota Health Laws and Regulations are hereby adopted in
cases of rabid animals, which have bitten any person, or animals
suspected of being rabid.
B. It shall be the duty of every physician to report to the Police Department
the names and addresses of any person treated for bites inflicted by an
animal, together with any other information deemed helpful in the control
of rabies.
C. It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal to immediately, but in all
cases no later than twenty-four (24) hours, to report to the Police
Department all bites inflicted by the owner’s animal to any person. The
owner of any such animal shall be required to provide to the police written
proof of vaccination and pertinent insurance information when warranted
or requested by the police.
D. It shall be the duty of any veterinarian to report to the City his diagnosis of
any animal observed by him to be rabies suspect.
E. The police or animal control officer are hereby authorized to take into
possession any animal suspected of having rabies following a bite
inflicted to any person, and have the animal destroyed in a humane
manner for the purpose of determining whether the animal is, in fact, a
rabies carrier. The City and/or its agents shall not be held liable for the
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 12 | P a g e
destruction of such animal when the animal has inflicted injury upon any
person and the City and/or its agents act in good faith to protect the
public.
151.12 BITING ANIMALS TO BE QUARANTINED: Whenever an animal has bitten a
person, or whenever a suspected or known rabid animal is picked up by an
animal control officer or police officer, such animal shall be confined for a
minimum period of ten (10) days as follows:
A. Upon proof of current rabies vaccination, the animal control officer or
police may authorize the confinement of the animal at the owner’s place
of residence, provided that the animal shall not be permitted to come in
contact with other animals or persons, and provided further that the
animal be muzzled and on a leash not exceeding six (6) feet when
removed from the place of confinement.
B. If no proof of current vaccination is provided, or if the animal control
officer or police do not consent to confinement at the owner’s place of
residence, the animal shall be confined at the animal control facility at the
owner’s expense.
C. An animal under confinement may not be removed from such
confinement without written permission of the animal control officer or the
Chief of Police.
D. The owner of any animal confined at the owner’s residence shall, at all
times, permit the inspection of such animal during the confinement period
upon oral request of animal control officers or the police. The owner shall
further be responsible for immediately reporting any change in the
animal’s health or behavior to the appropriate animal control officer during
the confinement period.
E. A quarantined animal shall be confined to an enclosure constructed of
materials suitable to prevent the animal from escaping. All openings to
the enclosure shall be locked with a secure locking device, and the
animal shall not be removed from the enclosure unless muzzled and on a
leash not exceeding four (4) feet in length, and under the control of a
competent person.
F. An animal control officer and/or police officer may enter upon private
property of another for the purposes of removing such quarantined animal
to an animal shelter when it has been determined that such quarantined
animal is not being maintained by the owner in a manner consistent with
the provisions of this section.
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 13 | P a g e
151.13 DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS AND ANIMALS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any animal to inflict substantial bodily harm to any
person or other animal whether or not the owner is present, or commit
any of the acts set forth in Section 151.01.E of this Chapter. If such act is
committed the animal shall be considered a dangerous dog or animal and
shall be registered as guided in MN State Statute 347.51.
B. A police officer or animal control officer may immediately seize any
Dangerous or Potentially Dangerous Dog or animal and/or issue a citation
or summons to the owner of any dangerous dog or animal if:
1. Within 14 days after the owner has received notice that the animal is
dangerous, the animal is not validly registered and micro chipped as
required by this Chapter.
2. The dog or animal is not maintained in a proper enclosure.
3. The animal is outside the proper enclosure and is not muzzled and
restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under the physical
restraint of a responsible competent person.
4. 14 days after the owner has received notice that the animal is
Dangerous or Potentially Dangerous, the owner does not secure the
proper liability insurance or surety bond as required by this Chapter.
5. After the owner has been notified that the animal is Dangerous or
Potentially Dangerous, the animal bites or attacks a person or
domestic animal.
C. Upon report to the police that such animal has committed such an act as
set forth in Section 151.01.E, the Chief of Police or Animal Control Officer
shall notify the owner of such animal of his intent to classify such animal
as dangerous. The owner of such animal may appeal within fourteen (14)
days after a dog or animal is declared dangerous to the Chief of Police or
Animal Control Officer contesting the classification of the animal as
dangerous. Such appeal shall be placed in writing by the owner.
D. The appeal shall be referred to the City Council for an appropriate
hearing. The City Administrator shall notify the owner of such animal as to
the time and date of the hearing, but in all cases, at least fourteen (14)
days’ notice shall be given to the owner.
E. The owner shall be informed of his right by the City Administrator
represented by legal counsel during such hearing, as well as the right to
provide oral and written testimony as to why the City Council should not
declare the animal dangerous.
F. If the City Council declares the animal to be dangerous, the City
Administrator shall notify the owner in writing and then have fourteen (14)
days to comply with the provisions of Minnesota’s State Statute, Chapter
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 14 | P a g e
347.51.
G. If the owner of a dog that has been declared dangerous fails to comply
with the fourteen (14) day reporting requirement, the animal control
authority and/or police may seize such dog and cause such dog to be
housed at the appropriate animal shelter facility at the owner’s expense.
All seized dogs shall be housed at the animal shelter facility for a
minimum period of seven (7) days, excluding holidays. If the owner of the
dog fails to comply with the reporting requirements of the dangerous dog
statute within seven (7) days, excluding holidays, the dog shall be
destroyed at the owner’s expense.
H. Any animal that is classified as a potentially dangerous animal as outlined
under Section 151.01.K. The procedures set forth under Section 151.15
shall also apply procedurally to the classification and hearing process of
potentially dangerous animals.
151.14 WILD ANIMALS: No person shall own, keep, harbor, offer for sale, or maintain
any wild animal within the corporate limits of the City of Chisago City. This
section does not apply to service animals, and for those animals brought into the
city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research laboratory,
show, or exhibition.
151.15 ENFORCEMENT: The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the
following:
A. The primary law enforcement agency of the City.
B. Community Service Officers, Animal Control Officers, Humane Agents or
other Officers to assist the primary law enforcement agency of the City.
C. The animal control facility contracted with by the City.
151.16 INTERFERENCE: No person shall, in any manner, interfere with or hinder any
person authorized by the Council to capture dogs, cats or other animals and
convey them to the pound while engaged in such operation. Nor shall any
unauthorized person break open the pound, or attempt to do so, or take or
attempt to take from any agent any animal taken up by him or her in compliance
with this Section, or in any manner to interfere with or hinder such officer in the
discharge of their duties. For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by
this chapter, an animal control officer or law enforcement officer is empowered to
enter upon private property of another without permission, with or without a
warrant.
151.17 EXEMPTIONS: The following provisions of this chapter shall not apply in the
following circumstances:
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 15 | P a g e
A. Unless specified herein, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
animals used or confined to hospitals, clinics, or businesses operated by
licensed veterinarians.
B. Section 151.08.D, relating to vaccination requirements, shall not apply to
any animal belonging to a non-resident of the city and kept within the
city not longer than thirty (30) days, provided that all such animals kept in
the city shall at all times be properly restrained while in the city.
C. Section 151.15, relating to dangerous animals and potentially dangerous
animals, shall not apply to police dogs under the control of a licensed
peace officer during the performance of authorized police activities.
D. Section 151.16 shall not apply to raptors possessed by licensed falconers
holding valid state and federal falconry permits, so long as the conditions
of the permits are satisfied.
151.18 SUMMARY DESTRUCTION:
A. The Chief of Police may authorize to permit an animal to be euthanized
and disposed of in any manner provided by law when the following
occurs:
1. Any animal that has a history indicating propensity to attack humans
or other animals; or has a documented history of attacks and bites
on humans or other animals; or is suspect of any disease that can
be transmitted to humans; or other animals will not be placed for
adoptions but will be humanely euthanized.
2. Within seven (7) days of impoundment period upon notice from the
appropriate animal shelter facility that an animal is sick and/or
injured in an effort to end the suffering of such animal.
B. Whenever an animal control officer or police officer determines that any
animal presents an immediate threat to the safety of any member of the
public, after making a reasonable attempt to impound such animal, said
officer is hereby authorized to destroy such animal in the interest of public
safety.
151.19 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER: Any violation of this Chapter
shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable to the extent possible under
Minnesota Statutes. Each day a violation of this Chapter is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation and shall be punishable
as such under this Chapter.
Ch. 151 Pet Licensing and Control 16 | P a g e
This ordinance shall become effective upon its passage and publication according to law.
Amended: 09/06/2012, Ord. #307 (06/27/2017)
CHAPTER 152
OPEN BURNING
152.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is to establish permitted categories of
open burning within the City of Chisago City and provide for a permitting process,
except when such open burning is defined as a “camp or recreational fire”.
152.02 MINNESOTA STATUTES AND RULES. Minnesota statutes 88.01 to 88.22,
88J5, 88.76 and the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter.
152.03 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this section, the terms in this section have
the meaning given them:
A. Open Burning or Open Fire - means a fire burning in matter, whether
concentrated or disbursed, which is not contained within a fully enclosed fir’s
box, structure or vehicle and from which the products of combustion are
emitted directly to the open atmosphere without passing through a staff, duct
or chimney.
B. Camp Fire or Recreational Fire - means a fire set for cooking, warming or
ceremonial purposes.
C. Snow-covered - means that the ground has a continual, unbroken cover of
snow, to a depth of three (3) inches or more, surrounding the immediate area
of the fire sufficient to keep the fire from spreading.
D. Wood - means dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, “presto
logs”, charcoal, cordwood or untreated dimensional lumber. “Wood” does not
include wood that is green, with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked or
treated with paint, glue, or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for camp
or recreational fires when cut into three (3) foot length.
152.04.1 NO PERMIT REQUIRED. No permit is required for the following fires:
A. A fire started when the ground is snow covered.
B. A camp fire or recreational fire which is otherwise in compliance with
Section152.05.
C. A fire contained in a charcoal grill, camp stove or other devise for the purpose
of cooking or heating.
D. A fire to burn dried vegetative materials or other materials allowed by
Minnesota Statutes or Official State Rules and Regulations in a burner of a
design which has been approved by the commissioner in which there is no
combustible material within five (5) feet of the base of the burner and is in use
only between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the following day, when
the ground is not snow covered.
E. A fire set by the city Fire Department for the purposes of instruction and
training of fire fighting personnel
152.05 CAMP OR RECREATIONAL FIRE REQUIREMENTS.
A. Site Requirements. The following site requirements apply to camp or
recreational fires which must:
1. Be contained in an area of no more than a three (3) foot diameter
circle as measured from the inside of the fire ring or border;
2. Be completely surrounded by non-combustible and non-smoke or
odor producing material, either of natural rock, cement, brick, tile
or block of ferrous metal only.
3. Be in an area depressed below ground, on the ground or on a
raised bed including permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces;
and
4. Not be located closer than twenty (20) feet to any structure.
B. Burn Requirements. The following burn requirements apply to the starting
and burning of camp or recreational fires which must:
1. Be ignited with a safe and customarily approved starter fuel using
dry clean wood;
2. Produce little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the property
line of the property on which the camp or recreational fire has
been constructed;
3. Be conducted with an adult tending the camp or recreational fire at
all times until completely extinguished; and
4. Be extinguished completely before being left unattended.
C. No Nuisance. All camp or recreational fires shall be conducted so as to
respect the weather conditions, the fire’s effect on or concerns from
neighbors, burning bans and air quality so that nuisance, health and safety
hazards will not be created.
152.06 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPENING BURNING. No person shall start or allow
any open burning on any property in the City of Chisago City without first having
obtained an open burning permit, except that a permit is not required for any fire
which is provided in Section 152.04. Open burning shall be obtained by making
application on a form prescribed by the DNR and obtained from the local State
Fire Warden. Permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed three (3) days.
Permits for open burning shall be granted or denied based upon the guidelines
set forth below. A permit may be issued to dispose of vegetated matter for
managing forests, prairies, wildlife habitat and in the development and
maintenance of land and right-of-ways, clipping, composting, land spreading or
other alternative methods that are not practical only with the approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
152.07 GUIDELINES FOR OPEN BURNING. It is not the intent of this Chapter to
promote open burning. Alternative methods such as composting and recycling
should be given consideration. The following guidelines govern the issuance or
denial of open burning permits:
A. Prohibited Materials. No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning
of oils, rubbers, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other materials
which produce excessive or nuisance smoke including, but not limited to,
tires, railroad ties, chemically treated lumber, composite shingles, tarp paper,
insulation, composition board, sheet rock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.
B. Prohibited Burning of Waste. No person shall conduct cause or permit open
burning of hazardous waste as defined in Minnesota Statute 116.06 or solid
waste generated from an industrial or manufacturing process or from a
service or commercial structure.
C. Prohibited burning of Demolition Debris. No person shall conduct, cause or
permit opening burning of burnable building material generated from
demolition of commercial or institutional structures. A farm building is not a
commercial structure.
D. Prohibited Burning for Salvage Operations. No person shall conduct, cause
or permit salvage operations by open burning.
E. Motor Vehicles. No person shall conduct, cause or permit the processing of
motor vehicles by open burning.
F. Garbage. No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of
discarded material resulting from the handling, processing, storage,
preparation, serving or consumption of food, unless specifically allowed under
Minnesota Statutes 17.135.
G. Smoldering Fires. Fires must not be allowed to smolder with no flames
present.
H. Fire Hazard. Open burning will be prohibited when, in the discretion of the
local State Fire Warden, there is a substantial risk of creating a fire hazard to
other property.
152.08 BURNING BAN. No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning during a
burning ban put into effect by any local authority, county, or state department or
agency.
152.09 PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY. Prior to starting an open burn, the permit
holder shall be responsible for confirming that no burning ban or air quality order
is in effect. Every open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit
holder or his/her competent representative. The open burning site shall have
available appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment if required
by the City Fire Department. The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished
before the permit holder or his/her representative leaves the site. It is the
responsibility of the permit holder to have the permit as required by this section
available for inspection at the site by the City Police Department, City Fire
Department or DNR Forest/Conservation Officer. The permit holder is
responsible for compliance with and implementation of all general conditions,
special conditions, and any burn plan established in the permit issued. The
permit holder shall be responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the burn
including but not limited to, fire suppression and administrative fees.
152.10 REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT. The open burning permit is
subject to revocation at the discretion of the City Police department, City Fire
Department, or the DNR Forest/Conservation Office. Reasons for revocation
include, but are not limited to: a fire hazard exists or develops during the course
of the burn, and of the conditions of the permit are violated during the course of
the burn, pollution or nuisance conditions develop during the burn, or a fire is
smoldering with no flames present.
152.11 PENALTY. Any person violating nay of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$700.00 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
152.12 EFFECTIVE DATE. The provisions of this Ordinance repealing Chapter 152 shall
be effective immediately. The remaining provisions of this Ordinance shall take
effect upon its passage and publication as provide by Minnesota Statute.
1
CHAPTER 153
RUBBISH REMOVAL
153.01 Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the City of Chisago City (the “City) by enacting a
rubbish removal ordinance which:
(a) Establishes minimum standards and a system for the collection and
disposal of rubbish and garbage from City residences and
commercial establishments.
(b) Establishes a license procedure and license agreement for both
commercial and residential refuse haulers.
(c) Requires residential refuse hauler licensees to provide recyclable
collection service.
(d) Requires that all licensed haulers use county supported landfill and
/or transfer stations.
153.02 License Required. No person shall collect or haul garbage or refuse within the
City without first having received a license as hereinafter provided except that
no license is required for the intermittent collection of refuse from construction
projects. The City may issue the following licenses: (1) not more than two (2)
exclusive licenses to persons or firms that give that person or firm the right to
collect refuse from all commercial properties within the City. (2) not more than
three (3) exclusive licenses to persons or firms to collect refuse from all
residential properties within the City. The number of haulers maybe reduced to
two if the route area or accounts are sold to one of the remaining licensed
haulers. Licenses are not automatically renewable and all licensees must apply
for renewal at the expiration of the license term in the manner described below.
Licenses may not be transferred, sold or assigned by the licensee without the
written consent of the City which consent may be withheld for any or no reason.
153.03 License Application. Licenses shall be granted by resolution of the City
Council on or before the end of the current license year, provided that the City
may extend this deadline for good and sufficient cause. All applications for
licenses are due by September 1st of any year prior to the expiration of a license
term on a form provided by the City Administrator. Applications shall be
submitted to the City Administrator by such date together with all required
supporting documentation and nonrefundable fee for processing such
application as set from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Failure to
2
submit the application by the due date or the submission of an incomplete
application is grounds for denial of a license. The City reserves the right to alter
the application process at any time by resolution of the City Council. The
applicant shall submit required documentation with the application which may
include, but not limited to the solicitation of bids, requests for proposals,
evidence of acceptable insurance, and workers compensation insurance.
153.04 Fees. No license shall be issued or if issued shall be valid under this Chapter
until the appropriate annual license fees have been paid in full. Annual fees
shall be set from time to time by the City Council by resolution. The license fee
shall be $500 annually and may be amended from time to time. No portion of
the fee for such license will be refundable upon the termination of the license or
license agreement for any licensee.
153.05 License Term. Unless revoked by the City pursuant to Section 155.06 or
otherwise provided herein, the term for an exclusive license and the term of any
license agreement required by Section 153.07 of this Ordinance shall run for a
period of five (5) years on a calendar year basis. The initial term for existing
exclusive licenses and for the corresponding license agreements for such
existing licenses shall run from January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2019.
Provisional licenses and the corresponding license agreements for such
provisional licenses granted pursuant to 153.02 of this Chapter shall have a term
which will expire at the end of the then issued exclusive licenses. Licenses and
the License Agreement shall remain in force until such time as: (1) the term of
such license shall expire without the City's granting a request to review such
license; or (2) either the City or the licensee gives ninety (90) days written
notice of their intent to withdraw from said license agreement; or (3) upon
thirty (30) days written notice from the City to the licensee of a violation of the
license agreement and the failure of the licensee to correct the violation within
the thirty (30) days.
153.06 Basis For Denial or Revocation of License. The City may deny or revoke a
license under this Chapter to any applicant for an exclusive or provisional
license for any one or more of the following grounds:
Subd. 1. The unavailability of an exclusive or provisional license because such
license has been issued to and is currently held by a licensee;
Subd. 2. The applicant has been convicted within the past five (5) years of any
violation of a Federal, State or local law, ordinance or other regulation relating
to the collection, transportation or disposal of commercial or residential solid
waste including, but not limited to, collection or disposal of hazardous waste.
Subd. 3. The applicant has had a license to collect refuse issued by the City,
County, State or any other agency revoked within the preceding twenty-four
3
(24) months preceding the date of the application or at any time during the
license term.
Subd.4. The applicant has failed to provide the information and documentation
required of applicants under this Chapter or has provided false or misleading
information or documentation or has failed to inform the City of any license
revocation referred to in Subd. 3 above.
Subd. 5. The licensee has failed to abide by or comply with the terms and
conditions of the license agreement required hereunder.
Subd. 6. The applicant fails to execute the license agreement required by
Section 153.07 within the time period provided therein.
Subd. 7. The City determines in its reasonable discretion that the issuance of a
license to such applicant would be contrary to the spirit and intent of this
Chapter or not in the best interests of the City or its residents. If a license is
mistakenly issued or renewed it may be revoked by the City upon the discovery
that the licensee was ineligible for the license under this Chapter.
153.07 License Agreement. Within two (2) weeks of the City's approval of a license,
an exclusive or provisional licensee agrees to execute a license agreement
provided by the City containing at least the following provisions:
Subd. 1. Garbage and trash shall be collected in a covered and odor free truck
and disposed of at East Central Solid Waste facility in Mora Minnesota or its
approved transfer stations.
Subd. 2. Refuse at residential properties shall be collected from the
boulevard adjoining the curb of the individual property a minimum of once
every week, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday. Saturday pick up will be allowed on a limited basis from 8am to 4
pm excluding holidays and inclement weather.
Commercial property may be collected Monday through Friday starting at
4am in area that located with a commercial district. No commercial route
shall begin before 6 am on Saturdays.
Subd. 3. Residential refuse hauler licensees shall provide recyclable collection
service to its residential customers as follows:
(a) The recyclable collection service shall include the collection of all
recycling from residential dwelling units serviced by such licensee within
the City whether pursuant to a provisional or exclusive license.
4
(b) The licensee shall designate and shall collect the recyclable materials a
minimum of once every two (2) weeks and between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., only on Monday through Friday.
(c) Recyclable materials shall be collected by the licensee from the
boulevard adjoining the curb on the designated day of collection.
(d) Recyclable materials shall include materials approved and agreed to by
the City and the licensee, but shall not include compost or hazardous
wastes.
Subd. 4. During the period of the license agreement the licensee shall carry
automobile liability insurance, public liability insurance and property damage
insurance all with a combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 and shall deliver to
the City of Chisago City a Certificate of Insurance naming the City as an
additional insured thereon “as its interest may appear" and requiring at least
thirty (30) days notice to the City of revocation or termination of such
insurance.
Subd. 5. The licensee shall take all precautions to protect the public against
injury and to hold the City harmless from all damages and claims that may arise
by reason of the negligence of the licensee, its agents, or employees while
engaged in the performance of the license agreement and will indemnify the
City of all claims, liens, expenses, and against all loss by reason of failure of the
licensee to fully perform all obligations of the license agreement.
Subd. 6. The licensee shall comply with all federal, state, county, and local
laws and regulations.
153.08 Design of Equipment. All trucks, motor vehicles or trailers used by the
licensee shall be watertight so as not to allow the leakage of liquids or refuse
while hauling such materials and shall be covered with a metal covering to
prevent the scattering of its contents upon the public streets or public or private
properties in the City. Any equipment related fluids that are deposited on to city
right or way by negligence or malfunction shall be the sole cost of the licensee
to reimburse for clean up.
153.09 Enforcement. The City will, to the extent allowed by law, enforce the
exclusivity of any license or licensee agreement. Without limiting any other
remedy available under applicable law, the City may revoke the license of any
licensee who fails to maintain compliance with this Chapter.
153.10 Effective Date. The provisions of this Chapter 153 shall take effect upon its
passage and publication as provided by Minnesota Statute.
Municipal Sewer Ordinance
Chapter 160
Page 1 of 13
CHAPTER 160
MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM
160.01 FINDINGS DECLARATION POLICY PURPOSES.
(A) The City of Chisago City has financed in part the construction of a sewer system, which reasonably serves
the needs of the residents of Chisago City, and those extra-territorial users currently connected. This
sewer system has been financed by service charges on current users and general levies on property
within the City at the time of construction and bond retirement.
(B) Because the City of Chisago City and surrounding areas are now undergoing strong growth and
development pressure, increased numbers of requests for sewer system hook-ups are being received by
residents of the areas served by the water system facilities appear unavoidable.
(C) Since the need for new or substantially modified facilities is almost entirely created by future hook-ups to
the sewer system, it seems only just to make provisions for financing this sewer system expansion largely
by those who are creating a need for it.
(D) A sewer system hook-up charge, hereafter referred to as the hook-up charge or sewer access charge
(SAC), along with area trunk charges in the judgment of the City Council, offers the best means of
assuring that additional necessary capacity will be within the financial means of this City and that users
who have already paid for a sewer system sufficient for their needs will not be charged for capacity
provided to serve others.
160.02 DEFINITIONS. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the terms used in this Ordinance
shall have the meaning herein designated.
(A) ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act also referred to as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33.
U.S.C. 1251, et seq.
(B) ASTM: American Society for Testing Materials.
(C) BOD5 OR BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND: The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at 20 degrees Centigrade
in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), as described in “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, current edition.
(D) BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the
discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning two (2) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
(E) BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal
also referred to as a service connection.
(F) CITY: The area within the corporate boundaries presently established or as amended by ordinance or
other legal actions at a future time. The term “City” when used herein, shall refer to the City of Chisago
City, and to the City Council and its authorized representative.
(G) CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of
organic matter as determined by standard laboratory procedures, and as expressed in terms of milligrams
per liter (mg/l).
(H) COMMISSION: When used in the text will refer to the Chisago Lakes Joint Sewage Treatment
Commission.
Municipal Sewer Ordinance
Chapter 160
Page 2 of 13
(I) COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, and fecal coliform
bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES/SOS Permit if the treatment facilities are
designed to treat such pollutants to a degree, which complies with effluent concentration limits
imposed by the permit.
(J) CONTROL MANHOLE: Means any manhole installed at an industry to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of waste.
(K) EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
(L) FECAL COLIFORM: Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of man and animals whose
presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of pollution.
(M) FLOATABLE OIL: Means any oil, that has a density less than that of water which causes it to float on the
sewage and which tends to coat surfaces and cause maintenance problems.
(N) GARBAGE: animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of
food.
(O) INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible pollutant (Letter I,
Chapter 160.01) including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.
(P) INDUSTRY: Any nongovernmental or nonresidential user, of a publicly owned Treatment works which is
identified in the Standard Industrial Classifications Manual, latest edition, which is categorized in Divisions
A, B, 0, E and I.
(Q) INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Gaseous, liquid, and solid wastes resulting from Industrial or manufacturing
processes, trade or business, or from the development, recovery, and processing of natural resources, as
distinct from residential or domestic strength wastes.
(R) INFILTRATION: Water entering a sewer system (including building drains and pipe), from the ground,
through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls.
(S) INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I): The total quantity of water from both Infiltration and inflow.
(T) INFLOW: Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system, including (building drains) from such
sources as, but not limited to roof leaders, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, drains from
springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers, catch basins, surface
runoff, street wash water, or drainage.
(U) INTERFERENCE: The inhibition or disruption of the Commission’s wastewater disposal system processes
or operations which causes or significantly contributes to a violation of any requirement of the
Commission’s NPDES and/or SDS Permit. The term includes of sewage sludge use or disposal by the City
in accordance with published regulations providing guidelines under Section 405 of the Act or any
regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act, or more stringent State criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the
City.
(V) MPCA: Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
(W) NATIONAL CATEGORIAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: Federal regulations establishing
pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly owned wastewater treatment facilities,
which are determined to be not susceptible to treatment by such treatment facilities, or would interfere with
the operation of such treatment facilities, pursuant to Section 307(b) of the Act.
Municipal Sewer Ordinance
Chapter 160
Page 3 of 13
(X) NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPQES) PERMIT: A permit issued by
the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally discharge into navigable waters of the
United States pursuant to Sections 402 and 405 of the Act.
(Y) NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, which leads directly or indirectly to the natural environment without first
going through the public sewer system.
(Z) NON-CONTRACT COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant added, is heat.
(AA) NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE: Wastewater that is primarily introduced by residential
users with a BOD5 concentration not greater than 200 mg/l, a suspended solids XTSS)
concentration not greater than 250mg/l.
(AB) PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group.
(AC) PH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in terms of grams per liter
of solution.
(AD) PLANT OPERATION: The utilities superintendent or a deputy, agent or representative thereof.
(AE) PRETREATMENT: The treatment of wastewater from industrial sources prior to the introduction of
the waste effluent into a publicly owned treatment works. (160.02, Letter U).
(AF) PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27 cm) in
any dimension.
(AG) SEWAGE: The spent water of a community. The preferred term is wastewater.
(AH) SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
1) Collection Sewer -a sewer whose primary purpose is to collect wastewater from individual
point source discharges and connections.
2) Combined Sewer - a sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a storm-sewer.
3) Force Main -a pipe in which wastewater is carried under
4) Interceptor Sewer -a sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewater from collection
sewers to a treatment facility.
5) Private Sewer -a sewer, which is not owned and maintained by a public authority. It shall include
the entire service line including that beneath the public right-of-way to the point of connection
with the lateral or other public sewer line.
6) Public Sewer -a sewer owned, maintained and controlled by a public authority.
7) Sanitary Sewer -a sewer intended to carry only liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial building, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground,
storm, and surface waters, which are not admitted intentionally.
8) Storm Sewer or Storm Drain -a drain or sewer intended to carry storm waters, surface runoff,
ground water, subsurface water, street wash water, drainage, and unpolluted water from any
source.
(AI) SHALL: Is mandatory; MAY: Is permissive.
Municipal Sewer Ordinance
Chapter 160
Page 4 of 13
(AJ) SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: Any industrial user of the wastewater treatment facility, which has a
discharge flow (1) in excess of 25,000 gallons per average work day, or (2) has exceeded five percent
(5%) of the total flow received at the treatment facility, or (3) whose waste contains a toxic
pollutant in toxic amounts pursuant to Section 307 (a) of the Act, or (4) whose discharge has a significant
effect, either singly, or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater disposal
system, the quality of sludge, the system’s effluent quality, or emissions generated by the treatment
system.
(AK) SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent, or in
quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five
times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation, and which adversely
affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
(AL) STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT: Any permit (including any terms, conditions and
requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 115.07 for a disposal
system as defined by Minnesota Statutes 115.O1, Subdivision 8.
(AM) SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) OR TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): The total suspended matter
that either floats on the surface of, or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids, and is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater”, latest edition, and referred to as non-filterable residue.
(AN) TOXIC POLLUTANT: The concentration of any pollutant or combination of pollutants, which upon
exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause adverse effects as defined in standards
issued pursuant to Section 307 (a) of the Act.
(AO) UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or
water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards, and would not be
benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities. (See “Noncontact
Cooling Water”, Section 21.)
(AP) USER: Any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the City’s
wastewater disposal system.
(AQ) WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community and referred to as sewage. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with any ground water, surface
water and storm water that may be present.
(AR) WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS OR TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of any
devices, facilities, structures, equipment, or processes owned or used by the City (Commission) for
the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal
sewage, domestic sewage or industrial wastewater, or structures necessary to recycle or reuse
water including interceptor sewers, outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power, and other
equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and
alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water supply such as standby
treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works including land, which is an integral part of
the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment.
(AS) WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or
intermittently.
(AT) WPCF: The Water Pollution Control Federation.
Municipal Sewer Ordinance
Chapter 160
Page 5 of 13
SECTION 160.03 CONTROL BY THE PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR (PWD) The PWD shall have control
and general supervision of all public sewer and service connections in the City and shall be responsible for the
administration of this ordinance to the end that a proper and efficient public sewer is maintained.
SECTION 160.04 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. Generally accepted gardening and agricultural practices are
not prohibited hereby.
(B) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, any wastewater or other polluted waters except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Ordinance and
the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit.
(C) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage without approval of the City.
(D) The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation,
other than trunk and lateral service lines, capable of service connection or other purposes from which
wastewater is discharged, and which is situated within the City and adjacent on any street, alley, or right-ofway
in which there is now located or is proposed to be located any public sanitary sewer of the City shall be
required at the owner(s) expense to install suitable connection to the public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance. Hook up is required within nine (9) months of the date said public sewer is
operational, provided access to said public sewer is accessible from the structure generating the wastewater.
All future buildings constructed on property adjacent to the public sewer shall be required to immediately
connect to the public sewer. If sewer connections are not made pursuant to this section, an official ninety (90)
day notice shall be served instructing the affected property owner to make said connection.
(E) In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public sewer in compliance with a notice given under article
III, Section 4 of the Ordinance, the City shall undertake to have said connection made and shall assess the
cost thereof against the benefited property. Such assessment, when levied, shall bear interest at the rate
determined by the City Council, and shall be certified to the Auditor of the County of Chisago, Minnesota and
shall be collected and remitted to the City addition to any remedial or enforcement provisions of this ordinance.
(F) Parcels consisting of 5 acres or more, not adjacent to protected waters or having a septic system at least
500 feet from protected waters, and with a properly operating septic system may be permitted to defer
connection to an available municipal sewer system until such a time as the current system fails or is no longer
up to code, the parcel is subdivided, or the use of the parcel is expanded by an additional structure and/or the
addition of bedrooms for increased occupancy.
(G) Chisago City recognized that each situation and neighborhood may present unique circumstances where
a deviation from connection requirements may be justified. The following criteria or findings of fact should be
evaluated when considering any deviation allowing continued use of private septic systems. Some of the
same criteria may be used when evaluating any new systems to be installed.
1. Lot sizes should be 1 plus acre
2. Lot should not be within 500 feet from protected waters.
3. No drainage of area into protected waters.
4. If sewer lines are installed at no expense to the city.
5. If no sewer service is anticipated for at least five years.
6. If area is expected to continue to be somewhat rural in nature.
7. If soils are more than adequate for traditional installation (no mound or holding tanks).
8. The percentage of petitioners requesting sewer service. (if the minority requests service,
they may be required to pay full cost).
Municipal Sewer Ordinance
Chapter 160
Page 6 of 13
9. If the installation of the sewer line is in the best interest of the city, but adjoining neighborhoods
have no benefit/need.
10. Age of existing systems.
SECTION 160.05 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL
(A) Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of Article III, Section 4, the buildings sewer
shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this Article.
(B) Prior to commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner(s) shall first
obtain a written permit signed by the Building Official of the City. The application for such permit shall be made
on a form furnished by the City which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other
information as are deemed necessary by the City.
(C) Operation of a private wastewater disposal system shall not be allowed until the installation is completed
to the satisfaction of the City or its authorized representative. The City or its representative shall be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
City when work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection
shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice, if reasonably practicable.
(D) The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all
requirements of the Chisago County individual on-site sewer ordinance. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
(E) The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at
all times at no expense to the City. The routine maintenance of onsite systems is essential to protect the
community health and welfare. An inspection report from all on site systems shall be required at a minimum of
3-year intervals.
(F) No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that
may be imposed by the MPCA or the Department of Health of the State of Minnesota.
160.06 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
(A) Any new connection(s) to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited unless sufficient capacity is
available in all downstream facilities including, but not limited to capacity for flow, B0D, and Suspended Solids.
(B) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into; use; alter; or disturb
any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City.
(C) Applications for permits shall be made by the owner or their authorized agent and the party employed to
do the work, and shall state the location, name of owner, street number of the building to be connected, and
how occupied. No person shall extend any private building drain beyond the limits of the building or property
for which the service connection permit has been given.
(D) There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and for commercial service,
and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the City. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing
its wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type of activity.
(E) All costs and expense and liabilities incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall
be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
Municipal Sewer Ordinance
Chapter 160
Page 7 of 13
(F) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where one
building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed
to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building
may be extended to the rear building, and the whole considered one building sewer. Subdivision of such lots
shall not be permitted until separate sewer lines are installed. The City does not and will not assume any
obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such connection aforementioned.
(G) Old building sewers may be used to connect buildings only when they are found, on examination and
testing as required by the City to demonstrate that it meets all requirements of this Ordinance.
(H) The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the State of Minnesota Building and Plumbing Code and rules and regulations of the City. In
the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, State Plumbing Code, and Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
(I) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement
floor, in all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building
sewer.
(J) No person shall make or maintain connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains, surface sump pumps, runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or indirectly to the Wastewater
Disposal System.
(K) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State
of Minnesota Building and Plumbing Code and applicable rules and regulations of the City or the procedures
set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall
be made gastight and watertight, and verified by proper testing to prevent the inclusion of infiltration/inflow.
Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the City prior to installation.
(L) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and inspection shall be made under the
supervision of IGU or authorized representative thereof.
(M) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as
to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City.
(N) Any person desiring to make a service connection to the public sewer shall comply with the conditions set
forth by the City.
(O) No person shall make a service connection to the public sewer until a bond to the City is filed with the
PWD conditioned that the person will indemnify and save harmless the City from all suits, accidents, and
damage that may arise by reason of any opening in any street, alley, or public ground, made by the person or
by those in the person’s employment for any purpose whatever, and that the person will replace and restore
the street and alley over such opening to the condition existing prior to installation, adequately guard with
barricades and lights and will keep and maintain the same to the satisfaction of the IGU, and shall conform in
all respects to the rules and regulations of the IGU relative thereto, and pay all fines that may be imposed on
the person by law.
(P) The Council may suspend or revoke any permit issued under this article and may take such other action
as it may deem reasonable in order to facilitate compliance for any of the following causes:
Municipal Sewer Ordinance
Chapter 160
Page 8 of 13
1. Giving false information in connection with the application for a permit.
2. Incompetence of the permit holder.
3. Willful violation of any provisions of this article or any rule or regulation pertaining to the
mixing of service connections.
160.07 USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWER
(A) No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any unpolluted water such as storm water, surface
water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
(B) Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the City. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet on approval of the City and the issuance
of a discharge permit by MPCA.
(C) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes to
any public sewers.
1. Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be,
sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be
injurious in any other way to the wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system.
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene,
toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates,
bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides.
2. Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other
interference with the proper operation of the Wastewater Treatment Facility such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground garbage grinders. Solids shall have a
maximum allowable diameter of three (3) inches.
3. Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the
wastewater disposal system.
4. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard
to humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater disposal
system. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be, limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to
Section 307(a) of the Act.
(D) The following described substances, materials, water, or wastes shall be limited in discharges to
municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either sewers, the wastewater
treatment works treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream and/or soil, vegetation and ground water, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public
property, or constitute a nuisance. The City may set limitations lower than limitations treatment
established in the regulations below if, in their opinion, such more severe are necessary to meet the
above objectives. In forming their opinion as to the acceptability of wastes, the City will give
consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in reaction to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of limitations the sewage process, the
Commission’s NPDES and/or SDS permit, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.
The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the
sanitary sewer, which shall not be violated without approval of the City, are as follows:
Municipal Sewer Ordinance
Chapter 160
Page 9 of 13
1. Any wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees wastewater,
the influent at the wastewater treatment plant to have a temperature exceeding. 104 F (40
C), or having heat in amounts, which will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater
treatment, works resulting in interference therein.
2. Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in
excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (150 F) (0 C and 65 C), and any wastewater containing oil and grease
concentrations of mineral origin of greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not.
3. Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a “slug” as defined
herein. (See Article I, Section 39).
4. Any garbage not properly shredded, as defined in Article I, Section 34. Garbage
grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage
originates from the preparation of food on the premises or when served by caterers.
5. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction
with other wastes are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewer for their maintenance and repair.
6. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but
not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
7. Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted storm, drainage, or groundwater.
8. Wastewater containing inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth,
lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to,
sodium chloride and sodium sulfate) in such quantities that would cause disruption with
the wastewater disposal system.
9. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed
limits established by the Commission in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
10. Any waters or wastes containing the following substances: arsenic, cadmium, copper,
cyanide, lead, mercury, nickel, silver, total chromium, zinc or phenolic compounds to a
degree that the materials received prevent adequate treatment of the waste.
11. Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the wastewater disposal system,
which violates any statute, rule, regulation, or ordinance of any regulatory agency, or
state or federal regulatory body.
12. Any waters or wastes containing BOD5 or suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the
wastewater treatment works, except as may be permitted by specific written
agreement subject to the provisions of Section 16 of this Article.
(E) If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which
contain substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 4 of this Article, and/or which in the
judgment of the Commission have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment facility processes,
equipment, or receiving water and/or soil, vegetation and ground water, or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the City may:
Municipal Sewer Ordinance
Chapter 160
Page 10 of 13
1. reject the wastes;
2. require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
pursuant to section 307(b) of the Act and all addendums thereof;
3. require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or;
4. require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating and disposing of
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer service charges.
If the City permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of
the facilities and equipment shall be made at owner’s expense, and shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Commission pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA.
(F) No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any manner, attempt to dilute a discharge as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
Sections 3 and 4 of this Article, or contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any state
requirements.
(G) Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation at their own expense.
(H) Grease, oil and sand interceptors or extra septic tanks shall be provided and installed by the owner when,
in the opinion of the City they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable
grease in excessive amounts as specified in Section 4(b), any flammable wastes, as specified in Section 3 (a),
sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters
or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be to the type to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. In the maintaining of these, interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal
and disposal of the captured materials by appropriate means, and shall maintain a record of dates and means
of disposal, which are subject to review by the City. Any removal and hauling of the collecting materials not
performed by the owner’s personnel must be performed by a currently licensed waste disposal firm.
(I) Where required by the City, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall install a suitable structure, or control manhole with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of wastes. Such
structure shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with the plans
approved by the City. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his/her expense and shall be maintained
by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(J) The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes at the discretion of the
City is required to provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analysis of waters and wastes to illustrate
compliance with this Ordinance and any special conditions for discharge established by the City or regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of sampling and laboratory,
analysis to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the City. The industry must supply a complete
analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the Federal, State, and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analysis to
the City at such times, and in such manner as prescribed by the City. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analysis and reporting required by the City. At such times deemed necessary, the City
reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an independent laboratory.
(K) All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is
made in this ordinance shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater”, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling
methods, location, times, duration and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to
approval by the City.
Municipal Sewer Ordinance
Chapter 160
Page 11 of 13
(L) Where required by the City, the owner of any property serviced by a sanitary sewer shall provide
protection from an accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this
ordinance. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the Owner’s expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures
to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City for review and approval prior to construction of the
facility. Review arid approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve any user from the
responsibility to modify the user’s facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance. Users shall
notify the City and the Commission immediately upon having a slug or accidental discharge of substances of
wastewater in violation of this ordinance to enable countermeasures to be taken by the IGU and the
Commission to minimize damage to the wastewater treatment works.
Such notification will not relieve any user of any liability for any expense, loss or damage to the wastewater
treatment system or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the City on account thereof under any
State and Federal law. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge
are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(M) No person, having charge of any building or other premises, which drains into the public sewer, shall
permit any substance or matter, which may form a deposit or obstruction to flow or pass into the public sewer.
Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of written notice from the City, the owner shall install a suitable and
sufficient catch basin or waste trap, or if one already exists, shall clean out, repair or alter the same, and
perform such other work, as the City may deem necessary. Upon the owner’s refusal or neglect to install a
catch basin or waste trap or to clean out, repair or alter the same after the period of fifteen (15) days, the City
may cause such work to be completed at the expense of the owner or representative thereof.
(N) Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, broken or out of order, or detrimental to
the use of the public sewer, or unfit for the purpose of drainage, the owner shall repair or cause such work to
be done as the City may direct. Each day after fifteen (15) days that a person neglects or fails to so act shall
constitute a separate violation of this section, and the City may then cause the work to be done, and recover
from such owner or agent the expense thereof by an action in the name of the City.
(O) The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or servicing facility shall provide and maintain in
serviceable condition at all times, a catch basin or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent grease,
oil, dirt or mineral deposit from entering the public sewer system.
(P) In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of any
provision of or in any other manner deemed appropriate by the City.
(Q) No statement contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the industrial concern,
providing that National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and/or State Disposal System Permit limitations
are not violated.
160.08 PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE. No person shall maliciously, willfully, or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment, which is a part of the wastewater. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate
arrest under charges of a misdemeanor.
160.09 USER RATE SCHEDULE FOR CHARGES
(A) Each user of sewer service shall pay the sewer access charge(s) applicable to the type of service, and in
accordance with the provisions set, forth in Ordinance No. 120. The sewer access charge shall be a one-time
fee. The fee may be reviewed and set from time to time by council resolution.
Municipal Sewer Ordinance
Chapter 160
Page 12 of 13
(B) A base sewer service fee per 30,000 gallons shall be charged to all sewer connections. The base fee
shall be reviewed and set from time to time by city council resolution.
(C) A charge for sewer usage shall be based on water usage for the first quarter of the year with the following
exceptions:
1. Seasonal residential property is based on average individual usage.
2. If the current water usage is less than the first quarter of the year, the sewer rate will be adjusted
down. Commercial property sewage shall be based on actual use per quarter.
160.09. POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
(A) The duly authorized representative or other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observations, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to the discharges to the City’s sewer system in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
(B) The duly authorized representative or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain
information concerning industrial processes, which have a direct bearing on the type and source of discharge
to the wastewater collection system. An industry may withhold information considered confidential however;
the industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an
advantage to competitors.
(C) While performing necessary work on private properties, the duly authorized representative or duly
authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City employees and the City shall
indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by City employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the
gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain safe conditions as required in Article VI, Section 9 of this ordinance.
(D) The duly authorized representative or other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds an
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to
the private property involved. In addition to other penalties for refusal to permit inspections under this section,
all subsequent sewer bills shall be charged triple the regular rate until inspection if freely permitted by the
refusing service recipient.
160.10 PENALTIES
(A) Any person violating any provision of this ordinance or any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance
thereof, or any other provision of any code adopted in the ordinance by reference, shall, upon conviction be
subject to a fine of not more than $700.00 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or both, plus, in
either case, the costs of prosecution.
(B) Separate Violations. Unless otherwise provided, each act of violation and every day on which a violation
occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense.
(C) Application to City personnel. The failure of any officer or employee of the City or the Commission to
perform any official duty imposed by this ordinance shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty
imposed for violation unless a penalty is specifically provided for such failure.
Municipal Sewer Ordinance
Chapter 160
Page 13 of 13
(D) In addition to other penalties imposed for violation of this Ordinance, any person violating any of the
provisions of this Ordinance shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by
the City by reason of such violations.
160.11 VALIDITY
(A) This ordinance shall be in full force and take effect from and after its passage and approval and
publication as provided by law.
(B) Separability. If any part of this ordinance is held invalid or suspended, such invalidity or suspension shall
not apply to any other part of this ordinance or any other ordinance unless it is specifically provided otherwise.
(C) All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or in conflict with any part of this 0rdinance
are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict.
Amended 4/08/03, ORD. 264, ORD. 272. Revised 4/20/06.
CIGARETTES/TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Ordinance # 97-04-O1-ORD; Chapter 175
P a g e | 1
Chapter 175
Ordinance # 97-04-O1-ORD
CIGARETTES/TOBACCO PRODUCTS
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF CHISAGO CITY BY
REPLACING CHAPTER 175, CIGARETTES/TOBACCO PRODUCTS, WITH A NEW
CHAPTER 175, CIGARETTES/TOBACCO PRODUCTS, PROVIDING FOR THE
REGULATION OF THE SALE, POSSESSION AND USE OF TOBACCO, TOBACCO
PRODUCTS AND TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES WITHIN THE CITY, AND TO PROHIBIT
THE ILLEGAL SALE, POSSESSION AND USE OF SUCH ITEMS TO AND BY MINORS.
PURPOSE
BECAUSE THE CITY RECOGNIZES THAT MANY PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF
EIGHTEEN PURCHASE OR OTHERWISE OBTAIN, POSSESS AND USE TOBACCO,
TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES, AND BECAUSE STUDIES
HAVE SHOWN THAT MOST SMOKERS BEGIN SMOKING BEFORE THEY HAVE REACHED
THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN AND THAT THOSE PERSONS WHO REACH THE AGE OF
EIGHTEEN WITHOUT HAVING STARTED SMOKING ARE SIGNIFICANTLY LESS LIKELY
TO BEGIN SMOKING; AND BECAUSE SMOKING HAS BEEN SHOWN TO BE THE CAUSE
OF SEVERAL SERIOUS HEALTH PROBLEMS WHICH SUBSEQUENTLY PLACE A
FINANCIAL BURDEN ON ALL LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT; THE CITY COUNCIL ADOPTS
THE FOLLOWING ORDINANCE TO REGULATE THE SALE, POSSESSION AND USE OF
TOBACCO, TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES FOR THE
PURPOSE OF ENFORCING AND FURTHERING EXISTING LAWS, TO PROTECT MINORS
AGAINST THE SERIOUS EFFECTS ASSOCIATED WITH THE ILLEGAL USE OF TOBACCO,
TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES AND TO FURTHER THE
OFFICIAL PUBLIC POLICY OF THE STATE OF MINNESOTA IN REGARD TO PREVENTING
YOUNG PEOPLE FROM STARTING TO SMOKE, AS PROVIDED IN MN STATUTE 144.391.
The City Council of the City of Chisago City hereby ordains as follows:
Chapter 175 of the City Code of the City of Chisago City is hereby deleted in its entirety
and the following new Chapter 175 is adopted in its place.
CIGARETTES/TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Ordinance # 97-04-O1-ORD; Chapter 175
P a g e | 2
175.01 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS. Except as may otherwise be provided or
clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. The
singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular. The masculine shall
include the feminine and neuter and vice-versa. The term “shall” The following words and terms
when used in this section shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
A. Tobacco or Tobacco Products. “Tobacco” or Tobacco products” shall mean any
substance or item containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to: cigarettes’ cigars’
pipe tobacco; snuff; fine cut or other chewing tobacco; cheroot; stogies; perique,
granulated, plug cut, crimp but, ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff flowers;
cavendish; shorts, plug and twist tobaccos; dipping tobaccos; refuse scraps, clippings,
cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf prepared
in such manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing or smoking.
B. Tobacco Related Devices. “Tobacco related devices” shall mean any tobacco
product as well as a pipe, rolling papers or other device used in a manner which enables
the chewing, sniffing or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products.
C. Self-Service Merchandising. “Self-Service Merchandising” shall mean open displays
of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices in any way where any person
shall have access to the product without the assistance or intervention an employee of
the premise maintaining the self-service merchandising. Self-service merchandising
shall not include vending machines.
D. Vending Machine. “Vending Machine” shall mean any mechanical, electric or
electronic or other type of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco
related devices upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly
into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco product or
tobacco related device.
E. Individually Packaged. “Individually packaged” shall mean the practice of selling any
tobacco or tobacco product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco
and tobacco products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette packs, single
cigars, single bags, or cans of loose tobacco in any form and single cans or other
packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than
a single pack or other container as described in this paragraph shall not be considered
individually packaged.
F. Loosies. “Loosies” shall mean the common terms used to refer to a single or
individually packaged cigarette.
G. Minor. “Minor” shall mean any natural person who has not yet reached the age of
eighteen (18) years.
H. Retail Establishment. “Retail Establishment” shall mean any place of business where
tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices are available for sale to the
general public. Retail establishments shall include, but not be limited to, grocery stores,
CIGARETTES/TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Ordinance # 97-04-O1-ORD; Chapter 175
P a g e | 3
convenience stores, restaurants and similar establishments.
I. Moveable Place of Business. “Movable Place of Business” shall refer to any form of
business operated out of a truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or
transportable shelter and not a fixed address, storefront or other permanent type of
structure authorized for sales transactions.
J. Sale. A “Sale” shall mean any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other
consideration.
K. Compliance Checks. “Compliance Checks” shall mean the system the city uses to
investigate and ensure that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products and
tobacco related devices are following and complying with the requirements of this
Chapter. “Compliance Checks” shall also mean a system approved by the City Council
used by an educational or research institution to study the sale of tobacco in retail
establishments.
L. Applicant. An applicant is any person, entity, or organization that applies for a license
to sell tobacco or tobacco products. If the applicant is a business organization such as a
corporation, limited liability company, or partnership, an “applicant” includes all persons
who are officers, partners, shareholders, and/or partners of said organization.
175.02 LICENSE. No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco
related device without first having obtained a license to do so from the city.
A. Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco
related devices shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city and executed by
the proposed licensee. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the
applicant(s)’ residential and business address(s), date(s) of birth and telephone
number(s), the name(s) of the business for which the license is sought and any
additional information the city deems necessary.
If the applicant is a corporation, limited liability company, association, or partnership, the
application shall contain the names, residential addresses, date(s) of birth, and
telephone numbers of all officers, directors, and partners of the organization. Upon
receipt of a completed application, the city clerk shall forward the application to the city
council for action at its next regularly scheduled council meeting. If the clerk shall
determine that an application is incomplete, the application shall be returned to the
applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete.
B. Action. The council may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action for
such reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation of the
application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the council approves the license, the
clerk shall issue the license to the applicant. If the council denies the license, notice of
the denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant’s right to
appeal the council’s decision.
C. Term. All licenses issued under this Chapter shall be valid for the current calendar
year in which the license is issued.
CIGARETTES/TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Ordinance # 97-04-O1-ORD; Chapter 175
P a g e | 4
D. Revocation or Suspension. Any license issued under this Chapter may be revoked or
suspended as provided in the Violations and Penalties Section of this Chapter.
E. Moveable Place of Business. No license shall be issued to a moveable place of
business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this
Chapter.
F. Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public
on the licensed premises.
G. Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this Chapter shall be processed in
the same manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at
least thirty (30) days but no more than sixty (60) days before the expiration of the current
license.
175.03 LICENSE RESTRICTIONS. A license shall be issued subject to the following
restrictions:
A. No license shall be issued to any applicant for the sale of tobacco, tobacco products
or tobacco related devices at any place other than the applicant’s established place of
business.
B. No license shall be issued for the sale of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco
related devices at a moveable place of business.
C. No license shall be issued for the sale of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco
related devices at more than one place of business.
D. No person shall sell or dispense any tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related
devices through the use of a vending machine except as provided in Subd. 7.
E. No individually packaged tobacco product shall be offered for sale by means of selfservice
merchandising.
F. Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of its employees while on the
licensed premises and any sale or other disposition of tobacco products in violation of
this ordinance by an employee to a person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be
considered an act of the licensee for purposes of imposing an administrative fine, license
suspension or revocation. Notwithstanding this provision, an employee of the licensee
may also be fined as an individual for selling or disposing tobacco products to a person
under eighteen (18) years of age).
175.04 FEES. No license shall be issued under this Chapter until the appropriate license fee
shall be paid in full. Fees shall be set from time to time by the City Council by resolution and
may be amended from time to time. The annual license shall be effective for up to one year by
approval of the City Council, expiring on December 31st of each year, upon which time it will be
available for renewal. Application for renewal of said license shall be submitted on an annual
basis prior to the expiration of said license.
CIGARETTES/TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Ordinance # 97-04-O1-ORD; Chapter 175
P a g e | 5
175.05 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE. The following shall be grounds for denying the
issuance or renewal of a license under this Chapter:
A. The applicant is under the age of 18 years.
B. The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any violation of a
Federal, State, or local law, ordinance provision or other regulation relating to tobacco,
tobacco products or tobacco related devices.
C. The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related
devices revoked within the preceding twelve months of the date of the application.
D. The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application or provides
false or misleading information.
E. The applicant is prohibited by Federal, State, or other local law, ordinance or other
regulation from holding such a license.
F. Except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular ground
for denial does not mean that the city must deny the license. If a license is mistakenly
issued or renewed it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the licensee was ineligible
for the license under this Chapter.
175.06 PROHIBITED SALES AND TRANSACTIONS. It shall be a violation of this Chapter for
any person to sell, offer to sell, give away, or deliver any tobacco product or tobacco related
device:
A. To any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. Retailers must verify that
purchasers are eighteen (18) or older by requiring proof of age of the purchaser by
checking: (1) a valid driver’s license or identification card issued by Minnesota, another
state, or a province of Canada; (2) a valid military identification card issued by the United
States Department of Defense; of (3) in the case of a foreign national, from a nation
other than Canada, by a valid passport. The retailer or his employee must so verify the
age of any person he believes to be twenty-six (26) years of age or younger unless the
exact age of such person is known to the retailer or his employee as a result of a
previous verification of the age of such person as required hereunder.
B. By means of any type of vending machine.
C. By means of self-service merchandising as defined in 175.01 (d) of this Chapter
whereby the customer is not required to make a verbal or written request to an employee
of the licensed premises in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco
related device.
D. By means of loosies as defined in 175.01 (f) of this Chapter of ‘kiddie packs”.
E. Containing opium, morphine, jimson week, bella donna, strychnos, cocaine,
marijuana, or other type of deleterious, hallucinogenic, or toxic or controlled substance
except nicotine and not naturally found in tobacco or tobacco products.
CIGARETTES/TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Ordinance # 97-04-O1-ORD; Chapter 175
P a g e | 6
F. By distributing free samples of tobacco or tobacco products to any person.
G. By any other means, or to any other person prohibited by Federal, State or other local
law, ordinance, provision or other regulation.
175.07 VENDING MACHINES. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this Chapter
to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices by means of a vending
machine.
175.08 TOBACCO DISPLAY AND STORAGE. All tobacco products and tobacco related
devices as defined in part 175.01(a) and (b) shall be stored behind a counter or other area not
freely accessible to customers or in a case or other storage unit not left open and accessible to
the general public.
175.09 LICENSEE RESPONSIBILITY. All licensees under this Chapter shall be responsible for
the actions of their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco
related devices on the licensed premises and the sale of such an item by an employee shall be
considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as
prohibiting the city from also subjecting the employee to whatever penalties are appropriate
under this Chapter, State law or other applicable law or regulations.
175.10 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS. The City Council may authorize or
delegate to the city police department, other city officials, and educational or research
organizations to conduct compliance checks and inspections. All licensed premises shall be
open to inspection during regular business hours. Such compliance checks shall be made
during regular business hours. From time to time, but at least once per year, the city shall
conduct compliance checks by engaging minors to enter the licensed premises to attempt to
purchase tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices. Minors used for the purpose of
compliance checks shall be not less than fifteen (15) nor more than seventeen (17) years of age
and shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products or related devices
when such items are obtained as part of the compliance check. No minor used in compliance
checks shall attempt to use false identification misrepresenting the minor’s age and all minors
lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the minors age asked
by the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce any identification for which the minor is
asked.
175.11 OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS. Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a
violation of this Chapter.
A. Illegal Possession. It shall be a violation of the Chapter for any minor to have in the
minor’s possession any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device. This
subdivision shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check on behalf of
the city or an educational research organization or who have only temporary possession
during a legal sales transaction.
B. Illegal Use. It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any minor to smoke, chew, sniff or
otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device.
C. Illegal Procurement. It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any minor to purchase or
CIGARETTES/TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Ordinance # 97-04-O1-ORD; Chapter 175
P a g e | 7
attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related
device. It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise
obtain such items on behalf of a minor. It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any
person to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related
device to any minor or to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegal purchase or
otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device. This
subdivision shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check on behalf of
the city.
D. Use of False Identification. It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any minor to
attempt to disguise the minor’s true age by the use of a false form of identification,
whether the identification is that of another person or one on which the age of the person
has been modified or altered, to represent an age older than the actual age of the
person.
E. Redemption of Coupons. It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any retail
establishment to redeem coupons for any minor for free or discounted tobacco products.
It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any retail establishment to redeem coupons for
any person by mail-order.
F. Tobacco Advertising. After August 28, 1997, in compliance with the Federal rules as
adopted by the Federal Drug Administration (FDA)) it shall be a violation of this Chapter
for any person to permit or place outdoor tobacco advertisements or billboards within
1000 feet of elementary and secondary schools and public playgrounds or to permit or
place outdoor tobacco advertisements or billboards beyond 1000 feet of elementary and
secondary schools and public playgrounds unless said advertisement or billboard
consists of black text on a white background. After August 28, 1997, it shall be a
violation of this Chapter for any retail establishment that permits persons under the age
of eighteen (18) to be present in or enter its premises at any time to permit or place any
tobacco advertisement inside its establishment unless said advertisement consists of
black text on a white background.
G. Sale and Distribution of Non-tobacco Items and Services. It shall be a violation of this
Chapter for any person to disseminate or give away and non-tobacco items or service
that identifies it with tobacco products, including, but not limited to, the following items:
tee shirts, caps and sporting goods.
H. Mandatory Compliance With all Federal and State Statutes. Rules and Regulations. It
shall be a violation of this Chapter for any person to violate any federal or state statute or
regulations regarding the sale of tobacco products.
175.12 ADMINISTRATIVE FINES. Any violation of the restrictions attached to a tobacco product
license shall be cause for a fine, suspension or revocation of such license or any combination
thereof Separate fines may be assessed against both the licensee and an employee of the
licensee for each violation. Without limiting the possible suspension or revocation of licenses
under this Chapter, if the violator is both a licensee and an employee/clerk, he/she shall be fined
as a licensee. The first violation for a licensee shall result in an administrative fine of $100.00
payable to the city. The first violation for an employee shall result in an administrative fine of
CIGARETTES/TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Ordinance # 97-04-O1-ORD; Chapter 175
P a g e | 8
$50.00 payable to the city. Failure of the licensee or employee to pay the fine for a first violation
within thirty (30) days from the date of invoice shall result in a two (2) day license suspension. A
second violation for a licensee within twelve months shall result in a fine of $250.00 payable to
the city and five (5) day license suspension. A second violation for an employee shall result in a
fine of $100.00 and a five (5) day license suspension. A third violation by either a licensee or an
employee within any twelve (12) month period or any violation or sale during a license
suspension, shall result in a license revocation and prosecution as a misdemeanor.
Licensees whose licenses have been revoked shall not be eligible for another tobacco product
license for one year from the date of revocation. The city council may attach reasonable
conditions to the reinstatement of a suspended or revoked license.
The accused violator whether a licensee or employee, may at any time withdraw from the
administrative penalty process and elect to have the case heard in court under a misdemeanor
prosecution with the applicable penalty for such misdemeanor violation to be determined by the
court and not governed by this Chapter, except for the suspension or revocation of licenses
allowed hereunder. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the violator may be issued a
citation by the city police and given notice of the violator’s right to be heard on the accusations.
Said notice shall set forth the nature, date and time of violation, the name of the officer issuing
the notice and the amount of the scheduled penalty.
175.13 ADMINISTRATIVE REVOCATION HEARING. Any person contesting an administrative
offense or penalty pursuant to this Chapter may request a hearing before the Hearing Examiner.
Such request shall be filed in writing at the City Clerk’s office within twenty (20) days of the
offense. The City Clerk shall notify the hearing Examiner, who will notify the licensee or
employee of the date, time, place and nature of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted no
more than twenty (20) days after the Hearing Examiner receives notice of the request, unless a
later date is mutually agreed to by the Hearing Examiner, the licensee and/or the licensee’s
employee, and the City. Within ten (10) days after such hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall
affirm, repeal, or modify the charge against the licensee and/or employee. Any person
aggrieved by the decision of the Hearing Examiner may appeal the decision to the City Council
by filing notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within twenty (20) days of receiving notice of
the Hearing Examiner’s decision. At its next regular scheduled meeting following the filing of the
notice of appeal, the Council shall review the decision and findings of fact of the Hearing
Examiner and shall affirm/repeal modify the decision. The position of Hearing Examiner is
hereby created and shall be an individual trained in the law but does not have-to be currently
licensed to practice law in the State of Minnesota. The City Administrator may, at his discretion,
and with the approval of the City Council, contract with third parties for the furnishing of all
services of the Hearing Examiner as contained in this Chapter and set the rate of compensation
therefore.
175.14 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION. Any person, occupant, property owner or owners, firm,
partnership or corporation found to be in violation of this Chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to law. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
CIGARETTES/TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Ordinance # 97-04-O1-ORD; Chapter 175
P a g e | 9
175.15 EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the providing of
tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related device to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized
religious, spiritual or cultural ceremony. It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this
Chapter for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law.
175.16 SEVERABILITY AND SAVINGS CLAUSE. If any subdivision or portion of this Chapter
shall be found unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent
jurisdiction, that finding shall not serve as an invalidation or affect the validity and enforceability
of any other subdivision or provision of this Chapter.
175.17 EFFECTIVE DATE. The provision of Section 175.06(b) through 175.06(g), Section
175.07, Section 175.08 and Sections 175.11(e) through 175.11(g) shall be effective on August
28, 1997. All other provisions of this ordinance take effect upon its passage and publication as
provided by Minnesota Statutes.
PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CHISAGO CITY, MINNESOTA
THIS 8th DAY OF APRIL 1997.
ATTEST:
Amy Oehlers, Deputy Clerk Charles Gramling, Mayor
Fee Requirement for 2020 Amount Information/Comments
ADMINISTRATION RATE ADDITIONAL INFORMATION OR DEPOSITS
Sign Permit Application $50.00 Plus architectural fee
Variance Application $750.00
Conditional Use Permit $750.00
Interim Use Permit $750.00
Re-zoning Application 40 acres or less $500.00
more than 40 acres $1,000.00
Vacation (street, Utility, Drainage) $500.00
Sub-division Application $500.00
Lot Split Application - more than 3 $500.00 (preliminary plat)
Lot Split Application - 3 or less $150.00
Petition for Annexation 5 acres and under $175.00 Plus the state filing fee costs
Petition for Annexation over 5 Acres $250.00 Plus the state filing fee costs
Notary Public Fee $2.00 PER DOCUMENT
Copy machine copies $0.25 Per page
Faxes $0.25 Per page
Color Zoning Map $3.00
Copy of Comprehensive Plan (text) $25.00
large maps of Comprehensive Plan $15.00
Request for Packets mailed $100.00 Per year - per each board requested
Assessment Search $20.00
Pet Licenses first time registration $10.00
Pet License renewals $5.00
Pet License replacement tags $2.00
Kennel License $25.00 Plus each animal needs to be licensed
Paradise Park Pavilion Rental $75.00 Chisago City-resident 10% reduced
$25.00 Per additional mobile shelter (food tent)
Moberg Park/Rotary Park Shelter $25.00
Beer Permit for Paradise Park $25.00
Chuckie Lundquist Ice Rink $20.00 per hr 2 hour minimum and $50 damage deposit
Plus cost associated with public works, admin time
Special Event Permit $10.00 police coverage if required is covered by applicant
Park/Land Dedication RATE
0 - 1.9 units per acre 9%
2.0 - 3.5 units per acre 10%
3.9 - 5.9 units per acre 11%
6 - 10 units per acre 12%
10+ units per acre Additional 0.5% for each unit over 10
Commercial 7% Of net land area
Cash Cost in Lieu of Land RATE
Single Family Residential - per unit $1,925.00
Duplexes - per unit $1,925.00
Townhouses - per unit $1,925.00
Multi-Family - per unit $1,925.00
Industrial/Commercial 7%
Of net land area w/in dev or $ amt = to net land are O
base upon recent tax statement
Residential Trail/sub-division $450.00 Per residential dwelling unit (may be waived by City)
Plan Review RATE
Park Consultant $ 1 00.00 As set by City Council - Billable rate
Planning Consultant $ 1 25.00 $150.00
City Engineering $ 1 50.00 As set by City Council - Billable rate
Public Works Director Superintendent $ 6 5.00 Per hour
Public Works Employee $ 6 0.00
City Attorney $ 1 50.00 As set by City Council - Billable rate
Administrator $ 8 0.00 Per hour
Clerk /Planner/Accountant/Progam $ 5 5.00 Per hour
Finance Director $ 7 0.00 Per hour
Architectural Review $ 8 0.00 Per hour
Preliminary Plat/sub-division $ 5 00.00 Due at the time of application submittal
Final Plat Application $ 1 50.00 Due when Prelim Plat is to Council/agreement signed
Commercial Development Application N/C
Water Access Trunk $ 2,300.00 Per developable acre
Sewer Access Trunk $ 3,100.00 Per developable acre
Inquiry/complaints (research done is 2.5 times the
Research rate of the pay of the researcher plus the cost of
$ 1 00.00 paper, tapes, etc. as needed
General Miscellaneous "invoiced"
Plan Appeal Based upon notification and review costs
Chisago City residents and employees will receive a 10% discount before taxes.
Ojiketa Rentals RATE MN Sales Tax Must be Collected on all Rentals
Reservation policy:
Rental of All Camp Buildings for the weekend $5,600.00 50% of fee Non-refundable + $1000.00 damage
2020 2021 2022 deposit (refundable upon inspection)
5,700.00 5,800.00 5,800.00
All Cabins and Campsites
Aspen $110.00 / night 2-NIGHT MINIMUM
Basswood, Elm, Walnut @ $45.00 /night
Black Walnut $40.00 / night
Dogwood $65.00 / night
Evergreen Guest House $85.00 / night 2-NIGHT MINIMUM
Red Oak, Sugar Maple, Sumac @ $40.00 /night
Red Pine $85.00 / night 2-NIGHT MINIMUM
Spruce $40.00 / night Part of Chapel rental
Tamarack $65.00 / night
Trillium $65.00 / night
White Pine Guest House $110.00 / night 2-NIGHT MINIMUM
Campsites - Tent $15.00 / night
Strom Hall Weekend Rate Fri. @ 3 p.m. - Sun.@ Noon
2020 2021 2022 Reservation policy: extended hours $100.00 per hour
2200.00 2400.00 2400.00
50% of fee (Non-refundable) + $200.00 refundable damage deposit
(refunded upon inspection)
Winter Weekend Rate: 3rd weekend in Nov. thru 3/31 -
50% of summer weekendrate
Zonta Lodge
2020 2021 2022 Weekend Rate Fri. @ 3 p.m. - Sun.@ Noon
1,200.00 1,250.00 1,250.00 Reservation policy: extended hours $100.00 per hour
50% of fee (Non-refundable) + $200.00 refundable damage deposit
(refunded upon inspection)
Birchwood Chapel Weekend Rate Fri. @ 3 p.m. - Sun. @ 11 a.m.
With Spruce (bride ready room) cabin $400.00 wknd Reservation policy: extended hours $100.00 per hour
50% of fee (Non-refundable) + $200.00 refundable damage deposit
(refunded upon inspection)
Marina Slips Seasonal $650.00 May 10 - October 15 Weather dependent
Marina Slips Day Use $25.00/Day
Amphitheater or Fire Rings $25.00/each
Hillside, Zonta Grounds, Strom Grounds, Memorial
Garden
Linens Strom Hall and Zonta Lodge:
Table Cloths $10.00 each
Chair Covers & Sashes 1.50 each
Up-lights $15.00 each
Cupcake Stands $10.00 each
Stages $25.00 each Staff sets up
Kayak $25.00/Day
Canoe $25.00/Day
Campfire wood bumdle $ 5 .00
Liquor/Tobacco Licenses RATE
Tobacco License $100.00 Per year
Wine License $500.00 Per year
Intoxicating Liquor License On-Sale $2,500.00 Per year
Non-Intoxicating Liquor License Off-Sale 3.2 $25.00 Per year
Intoxicating Liquor License On-Sale Sunday $200.00 Per year
Intoxicating liquor license Off-Sale $150.00 Per year
Non-Intoxicating Liquor License Off-Sale 3.2 $25.00 Per year
Non-Intoxicating Liquor License On-Sale 3.2 $250.00 Per year
Brewer Tap Room License $250.00 Per year
Small Brewer Off-Sale License $150.00 Per year
Cocktail Room $250.00 Per year
Microdistillery Off-Sale License $150.00 Per year
Duplicate License $5.00
Police Background Invest. Liquor (New) $500.00 non refundable
Police Background Invest. Tobacco (New) $50.00 non refundable
Police Background Check Liquor Annual $50.00
Police Background Check Tobacco Annual $-
Permits RATE
Peddlers (door to door) $100.00 Per month
Solicitors (donations/take orders) $100.00 Per month
Transient Merchant (sell from vacant lot) $25.00 Per day/weekdays
Transient Merchant (sell from vacant lot) $40.00 Per day/weekends
Green House Permit $50.00 Season
Street Excavation Permit RATE
All street restoration inc. labor/equipment $78.00 Per hour
Restoration by City $156.00 Base fee
Gravel surface $26.00 Cu. Yd.
Concrete $80.00 Cu. Yd.
Bituminous $52.00 Ton
Bituminous $52.00 Tpm
Restoration by contractor $676.00 Base fee + deposit
Right Of Way Encroachment
Driveways (permit) $50.00
Water Systems RATE
Water Access Charge $2,385.00
Sewer Access Charge $3,900.00
Water Meter - 3/4" $375.00
Larger meters priced per cost expense plus Varies
installation charge Varies
City Installed Tap $364.00
Permanent disconnect $110.00
Restore disconnect $110.00 For non-payment - 110.00
Seasonal disconnect/reconnect $30.00
OWNER/RENTER DUPLICATE BILL $5.00 PER QUARTER
Water Tower Maintenance Fee $24.35 PER CONNECTION PER QUARTER
Sewer System - Municipal RATE
Minimum inspection $50.00
Disconnect inspection $50.00
Water Usage Charge RATE
Residential and commercial base fee $14.50
0-5,000 gallons $2.25
5,001-10,000 gallons $2.45
10,001-15,000 gallons $2.63
15,001-25,000 gallons $2.80
25,001-30,000 gallons $3.00
30,001-50,000 gallons $3.22
>50,000 gallons $3.40
Sewer Usage Charge RATE
Residential and commercial base fee Per ea. 30,000 - 5P4.e7r5 ea. 30,000 - 58.10
0-5,000 gallons $4.00
5,001 - 10,000 gallons $4.14
10,001 - 15,000 gallons $4.27
15,001 - 25,000 gallons $4.60
25,001 - 30,000 gallons $4.93
>30,000 gallons $5.40
Surface Water Mgmt Utility rates-with utilities RATE Quarterly Charges
R2: Single Fam Reside-Small lot $2.00 Per unit
R1: Single Fam Reside-Large lot $2.00 Per unit
R3: Townhouse $2.00 Per unit
R4: Apartment $16.20 Per unit
CB: Central Business Commercial $16.20 Per unit
LI: Light Industrial $21.00 Per unit
OPI: Office Park Industrial $21.00 Per unit
Government - PSP $16.20 Per unit
LICENSE BUREAU RATE
Motor vehicle - Long Application per state statute Per transaction
Motor vehicle - Renewals per state statute Per transaction
Driver's license per state statute Per transaction
DNR - Long Application per state statute Per transaction (titled boats)
DNR - Renewals per state statute Per transaction (titled boats)
DNR - Long Application per state statute Per trans (non-titled boats, ATVs)
DNR - Renewals per state statute Per trans (non-titled boats, ATVs)
DNR - Snowmobile all types per state statute Per transaction
Passport Photo $15.00
SERVICES CONTRACTED WITH CHISAGO COUNTY BUILDING AND SEPTIC
BUILDING PERMITS RATE
Mechanical permits Per county fee schedule
Plumbing permits Per county fee schedule
Fireplace permits Per county fee schedule
ALL ZONING PERMITS $25.00
Roofing Tear Off Per county fee schedule
Siding Per county fee schedule
Window Per county fee schedule
Multi permit Per county fee schedule
Septic Permit Per county fee schedule
Other Inspections Per county fee schedule
Commercial plumbing, mechanical or roof Per county fee schedule
ISTS (Septic) FEES
Design Change - Redesign $50.00
Design Change - Relocate $100.00
Site Verification of Perc test (prior to or w/o permit app. $100.00
Expired permit renewal $100.00
Repair only(lateral replacement,convert to hold tank) $50.00
ISTS Permit-Residential - new home or trench $300.00
ISTS Permit - Replacement mound $347.00
ISTS Permit - Tank Only $150.00
ISTS Permit - addition of pretreatment $150.00
Midsized SSTS Permit - tank only 150 plus any assoicae engineering fees
Midsized SSTS Permit up to 4,999 gpd 500 plus any assoicate engineering fees
Midsized SSTS Permit 5,000 - 9,999 gpd 500 plus any assoicate engineering fees
Midsized System hookup (w/o individual tanks) $50.00
Operating Permit - Single Family/Reside $n t i a l 25.00 pretreatment spyestre ymeas r; are for life of system
Operating Permit - Commercial up to 4,999 gpd $50.00 Per year
Operating Permit - Commercial 5,000 to 9,999 gpd $100.00 Per year +
Plus any associated engineering fees
Land Application site 50 acres or less (5 year permit) $150.00
Land Application site greater than 50 acres (5 year permit) $250.00
Land application site - permit renewal $50.00
Compliance Inspection $200.00
Compliance Inspection - Tank Only
Winter Compliance inspections $250.00
Re-inspection $47.00 per trip
On -site meeting (requested by perc tester/applicant) $100.00
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 190 – Local Lodging Tax 1 | P a g e
CHAPTER 190
LOCAL LODGING TAX
SECTION:
190.01: Definitions
190.02: Imposition of Tax
190.03: Collections
190.04: Exemptions
190.05: Advertising No Tax
190.06: Payments and Returns
190.07: Examination of Return, Adjustments, Notices and Demands
190.08: Refunds
190.09: Failure to File a Return
190.10: Penalties
190.11: Administration of Tax
190.12: Examination of Records
190.13: Violations
190.14: Use of Proceeds and Annual Report
190.15: Appeals
190.16: Effective Date
190.01: DEFINITIONS.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have meanings given to them by this
section:
A. CITY: The city of Chisago City.
B. DIRECTOR: The Finance Director of the City Clerk or Designated Person.
C. LODGER: The person obtaining lodging from an operator.
D. LODGING: The furnishing for consideration of lodging by a hotel, motel, rooming house,
campgrounds, air B&B, tourist court, or resort, except where such lodging shall be for a
continuous period of 30 days or more to the same lodger.
E. OPERATOR: A person who provides lodging to others, or any officer, agent or employee of such
person.
F. PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate, receiver, trustee,
executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate or any other combination of individuals. Whenever
the term "person" is used in any provision of this chapter prescribing and imposing a penalty,
the term as applied to a corporation, association, or partnership, shall mean the officers or
partners thereof as the case may be.
G. RENT: The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging whether paid in money or
otherwise, but shall not include any charges for services rendered in connection with furnishing
lodging other than the room charge itself.
190.02: IMPOSITION OF TAX.
There is hereby imposed a tax of three-percent (3%) on the rent charged by an operator for
providing lodging to any person. The tax shall be stated and charged separately and shall be
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 190 – Local Lodging Tax 2 | P a g e
collected by the operator from the lodger. The tax collected by the operator shall be a debt owed by
the operator to the city and shall be extinguished only by payment to the city. In no case shall the
tax imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax which the operator is
authorized and required by this chapter to collect from a lodger.
190.03: COLLECTIONS.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the time rent is paid. The tax
collections shall be held in trust by the operator for the city. The amount of tax shall be separately
stated from the rent charged for the lodging.
190.04: EXEMPTIONS.
An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose occupancy it is beyond the
power of the city to tax. No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefore made at the
time the rent is collected and such a claim shall be made in writing under penalty of perjury on
forms provided by the city. All such claims shall be forwarded to the city when the returns and
collections are submitted as required by this chapter.
190.05: ADVERTISING NO TAX.
It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or any customer,
directly or indirectly, that the tax or any party thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator,
or that it will not be added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded.
Operator must collect. In computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than one-cent
($0.01) shall be considered an additional cent ($0.01).
190.06: PAYMENTS AND RETURNS.
The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the operator to the city not later than 25-days
after the end of the month in which the taxes were collected. At the time of payment, the operator
shall submit a return upon such forms and containing such information as the city may require. The
return shall contain the following minimum information:
A. The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period covered by the return.
B. The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period.
C. The signature of the person filing the return or that of an agent duly authorized in writing.
D. The period covered by the return.
E. The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging tax.
F. A copy of the "Minnesota State Sales and Use Tax Return" submitted by the operator for the
period covered by the return.
The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect to any reporting period, the amount
of taxes imposed by this chapter previously paid as a result of any transaction the consideration for
which became uncollectible during such reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of
such consideration which became uncollectible.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 190 – Local Lodging Tax 3 | P a g e
190.07: EXAMINATION OF RETURN, ADJUSTMENTS, NOTICES AND DEMANDS.
The Director may rely upon the "Minnesota State Sales and Use Tax Return" filed by the operator
with the state in determining the accuracy of a return filed under this chapter. However, the
Director shall be authorized to make any investigation or examination of the records and accounts
of the person making the return, if the Director reasonably determines that such steps are
necessary for determining the correctness of the return. The tax computed based on such
examination shall be the tax to be paid. If the tax due is found to be greater than that paid, such
excess shall be paid to the city within ten days after receipt of a notice thereof, given either
personally or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return. If the tax paid is greater
than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be refunded to the person who paid the tax to the city
within ten days after determination of such refund.
190.08: REFUNDS.
Any person may apply to the Director for a refund of taxes paid for a prescribed period more than
the amount legally due for that period, provided that no application for refund shall be considered
unless filed within one year after such tax was paid, or within one year from the filing of the return,
whichever period is the longer. The Director shall examine the claim and make and file written
findings thereon denying or allowing the claim in whole or in part and shall mail a notice thereof by
registered mail to such person at the address stated upon the return. If such claim is allowed in
whole or in part, the Director shall credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes due under
this chapter from the claimant and the balance of said allowance, if any, shall be paid by the
Director to the claimant.
190.09: FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.
A. If any operator required by this chapter to file a return shall fail to do so within the time
prescribed, or shall make, willfully or otherwise, an incorrect, false, or fraudulent return, the
operator shall, upon written notice and demand, file such return or corrected return within
five days of receipt of such written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax due on the
basis thereof. If such person shall fail to file such return or corrected return, the Director
shall make a return or corrected return, for such person from such knowledge and
information as the Director can obtain, and assess a tax on the basis thereof, which tax, less
any payments theretofore made because the tax for the taxable period covered by such
return shall be paid within five days of the receipt of written notice and demand for such
payment. Any such return or assessment made by the Director shall be prima facie correct
and valid, and such person shall have the burden of establishing its incorrectness or
invalidity in any action or proceeding in respect thereto.
B. If any portion of a tax imposed by this chapter, including penalties thereon, is not paid
within 30-days after it is required to be paid, the city may institute such legal action as may
be necessary to recover the amount due plus interest, penalties, the costs and
disbursements of any action.
C. Upon a showing of good cause, the Director may grant an operator one 30-day extension of
time within which to file a return and make payment of taxes as required by this chapter
provided that interest during such period of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the
rate of 10% per annum.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 190 – Local Lodging Tax 4 | P a g e
190.10: PENALTIES.
If any tax imposed by this chapter is not paid within the time herein specified for the payment, or
an extension thereof, there shall be added thereto a specific penalty equal to ten-percent (10%) of
the amount remaining unpaid. The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty
provided by this section, shall bear interest at the rate of ten-percent (10%) per annum from the
time such tax should have been paid until it is paid. Any interest and penalty shall be added to the
tax and be collected as part thereof.
190.11: ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
The Director shall administer and enforce the assessment and collection of taxes imposed by this
chapter. The Director shall cause to be prepared blank forms for the returns and other documents
required by this chapter and shall distribute the same throughout the city and furnish them on
application, but failure to receive or secure them shall not relieve any person from any obligation
required of him or her under this chapter.
190.12: EXAMINATION OF RECORDS.
The Director and those persons acting on behalf of the Director, authorized in writing by the
Director, may examine the books, papers and records of any operator in order to verify the
accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in this
chapter. Every such operator is directed and required to give to the Director, or such other
authorized agent or employee, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations and
investigations as are hereby authorized.
190.13: VIOLATIONS.
Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return required by this chapter; or who shall fail to pay
the tax after written demand for payment; or who shall fail to remit the taxes collected or any
penalty or interest imposed by this chapter, after written demand for such payment; or who shall
refuse to permit the city to examine the books, records and papers under his or her control; or who
shall willfully make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
190.14: USE OF PROCEEDS AND ANNUAL REPORT.
95% of the proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant to this chapter shall be used in
accordance with Minnesota Statutes Section 469.190, as the same may be amended from time to
time, to fund a local visitors’ bureau for the purpose of marketing and promoting the city as a
tourist or convention center. Commencing on the first regular meeting of each year the Chisago
Lakes Visitors Association shall, for its most recent calendar year, provide an annual year-end
report of its operations and its financial condition to the Chisago City Council in writing and by oral
presentation at a City Council meeting.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 190 – Local Lodging Tax 5 | P a g e
190.15: APPEALS.
A. Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination made by the Director under
this chapter may file a petition for review of such notice, order or determination detailing
the operator's reasons for contesting the notice, order or determination. The petition shall
contain the name of the petitioner, the petitioner's address and the location of the lodging
subject to the order, notice or determination.
B. The petition for review shall be filed with the city within ten days after the notice; order or
determination for which review is sought has been mailed or served upon the person
requesting review.
C. Upon receipt of the petition, the city manager, or the manager's designee, shall set a date for
a hearing and give the petitioner at least five days’ prior written notice of the date, time and
place of the hearing.
D. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show cause why the notice,
order or determination should be modified or withdrawn. The petitioner may be
represented by counsel of petitioner's choosing at petitioner's own expense.
E. The hearing shall be conducted by the city manager, or the manager's designee, provided
only that the person conducting the hearing shall not have participated in the drafting of the
order, notice or determination for which review is sought.
F. The person conducting the hearing shall make written findings of fact and conclusion based
upon the applicable sections of this chapter and evidence presented. The person conducting
the hearing may affirm, reverse or modify the notice, order or determination made by the
Director.
G. Any decision rendered by the city administrator or clerk, or the manager's designee,
pursuant to this section may be appealed to the City Council. A petitioner seeking to appeal
the decision must file a written notice of appeal with the city within ten days after the
decision has been mailed to the petitioner. The matter will thereupon be placed on the
council agenda as soon as it is practical. The council shall then review the findings of fact
and conclusions to determine whether they are correct. Upon a determination by the
council that the findings and conclusions are incorrect, the council may modify, reverse or
affirm the decision of the city manager, or the manager's designee, upon the same standards
as set forth in subsection F of this section.
190.16: EFFECTIVE DATE.
This chapter shall be in force and effect from February 1, 2018.
Adopted: Ord. 309 1/9/2018
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 200 – Intoxicating Liquors - 1 -
CHAPTER 200
LIQUOR
200.01 DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this Chapter, any terms not defined below shall have the meanings
given them in Minnesota Statutes Section 340A. The following terms are defined as follows:
A. Alcoholic Beverage. Shall mean any beverage containing more than 1/2% alcohol by volume.
B. Brewer. A person who manufactures malt liquor for sale.
C. Commissioner. Shall mean the Commissioner of Public Safety of the State of Minnesota,
except as otherwise provided.
D. Club. Shall mean an incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state for civic,
fraternal, social or business purpose or for intellectual improvement or for the promotion of
sports or congressional chartered veterans organizations, which shall have more than thirty
(30) members, and which shall for more than a year have owned or leased a building or space
in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for members at a
meeting held for that purpose, none of whose members, officers, agents, or employees shall
receive any profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club, or to
its guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the governing
body.
E. Distilled Spirits. Shall mean and include ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, and other distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures
thereof, for nonindustrial use.
F. Exclusive Liquor Store. Shall mean an establishment used exclusively for the sale of
intoxicating liquors, cigars, cigarettes, all forms of tobacco, non-intoxicating malt beverages
and soft drinks at retail, either on-sale or off-sale or both. It shall be under control of an
individual owner or manager. It includes a restaurant or establishment selling food for
consumption on the premises.
G. Growlers. Malt liquor packaged in 64-ounce containers or in 750 milliliter bottles and bears a
twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug. The growlers are in accordance with Minnesota
Statute 340A.285 and as amended.
H. Hotel. Means an establishment where food and lodging is regularly furnished to transients,
which a dining room serving the general public at tables and having appropriate facilities for
seating at least 30 guests at one time, and have guest rooms for lodging of at least 10 rooms.
I. Intoxicating Liquor/Liquors. Shall mean and include ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented,
spirituous, vinous, and malt beverages containing in excess of 3.2 percent of alcohol by
weight.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 200 – Intoxicating Liquors - 2 -
J. Malt Liquor. Shall mean any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by fermentation
and containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume.
K. Manufacturer. Shall men a person who, by a process of manufacture, fermenting, brewing,
distilling, refining, rectifying, blending, or by the combination of different materials, prepares
or produces intoxicating liquor for sale.
L. Microdistillery. Shall mean a distillery operated within the state producing premium, distilled
spirits in total quantity not to exceed 40,000 proof gallons in a calendar year.
M. 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor. Shall mean malt liquor containing not less than one-half of one
percent (1/2%) alcohol by volume or more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.
N. Off-Sale. Shall mean the sale of alcohol beverages in original packages for consumption off
the licensed premises only.
O. On-Sale. Shall mean the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises
only.
P. Package/Original Package. Shall mean and include any container or receptacle holding
alcoholic beverages and liquor, which container or receptacle is corked or sealed.
Q. Person. Shall include and may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporations,
partnerships, and other unincorporated associations.
R. Restaurant. Means an establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a single
proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises and served at
tables to the general public and the principal part of the business of which is serving of foods.
Such establishment shall have facilities for seating not less than 30 guests at one time and
51% of all sales will be from food.
S. Wine. Shall mean a product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes, including
still wine, sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from condensed grape, wine made from
other agricultural products then sound, ripe grapes, imitation wine, compound sold as wine,
vermouth, cider, perry and sake, in each instance containing not less than one-half of one
percent nor more than 24% alcohol by volume for non-industrial use. Wine does not include
distilled spirits as defined in 200.01, letter E.
200.02 PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED. Except where specifically set forth in this Chapter, the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A relating to licensing, consumption, sales, financial
responsibility of licensees, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution,
and consumption of intoxicating liquor are adopted and made a part of this ordinance as if set out in full.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 200 – Intoxicating Liquors - 3 -
200.03 LICENSE REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful or any person, firm or corporation to keep or operate an
on-sale or off-sale of intoxicating liquor establishment within the limits of the City without first having
obtained a license to do so.
200.04 TYPES OF LICENSES.
A. On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License shall be issued only to hotels, clubs, restaurants, bowling
alleys and exclusive liquor stores and shall permit On-Sale of liquor only.
B. Off-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License shall permit the licensee to sell intoxicating liquor in
original packages for consumption off the premises only and shall be issued only to exclusive
liquor stores.
C. Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License may be issued to (1) a club or charitable,
religious, or other nonprofit organization in existence for at least three (3) years, (2) a political
committee registered under MN Statute Section 10A.14, or (3) a state university, a temporary
license for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the
municipality sponsored by the licensee. The license may authorize the on-sale of intoxicating
liquor for not more than four (4) consecutive days, and may authorize on-sales on premises
other than premises the licensee owns or permanently occupies. The license may provide that
the licensee may contract for intoxicating liquor catering services with the holder of a full-year
on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the city. The licenses are subject to the terms,
including a license fee imposed by the city. Licenses issued under this subdivision are subject
to all laws and ordinances governing the sale of intoxicating liquor except MN Statute 340A.409
and 340A.504, subdivision 3, paragraph (d), and those laws and ordinances which by their
nature are not applicable.
D. On-Sale 3.2 Malt Liquor License shall be granted only to restaurants, hotels, bowling centers
and clubs.
E. Temporary On-Sale 3.2 Malt Liquor License shall be granted only to organizations organized
for social purposes, business purposes, for intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of
sports where the serving of 3.2 percent malt liquor is incidental to and not the main purpose
of the organization, or to charitable, religious, or nonprofit organizations. The license may
authorize the on-sale of 3.2 malt liquor for not more than four (4) consecutive days and follow
the same terms as Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License.
F. Off-Sale 3.2 Malt Liquor License shall permit the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor at retail, in the
original package for consumption off the premises only.
G. Brewer Tap Room License may be issued only in accordance with Minn. Stat. § 340A.26 as
amended.
H. Small Brewer Off-Sale License may be issued a license for off-sale of malt liquor at its licensed
premises that has been produced and packaged by the brewer. The packaging does include
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 200 – Intoxicating Liquors - 4 -
allowing the sale of Growlers as defined in this chapter. The amount of malt liquor sold at
off-sale may not exceed 500 barrels annually. The license must be approved by the
commissioner and is subject to the requirements contained in Minn. Stat. § 340A.28, as
amended.
I. Cocktail Room License. A Cocktail Room license authorizes on-sale of distilled liquor
produced by the distiller for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one distillery
location owned by the distiller as allowed in MN Statute 340A22, Subd. 2, as amended.
J. Microdistillery Off-Sale License. A Microdistillery may be issued a license for off-sale of
distilled spirits. The license may allow the sale of one 375 milliliter bottle per customer per
day of product manufactured on site and in accordance to MN Statute 340A.22, Subd. 4 as
amended.
K. Club License. On-Sale Club License shall be granted for the consumption of liquor to bona
fide clubs in existence for 15 years or more, and to congressional chartered veteran’s
organizations which have been in existence for 10 years, and which are duly incorporated.
Such club license shall be On-Sale only and shall permit the sale of intoxicating liquor to
members and bona fide guests only. Such club licenses as herein permitted may be granted
in addition to other On-Sale liquor licenses.
L. On-Sale Wine License. An On-Sale Wine License authorizes the sale of wine of up to 24%
alcohol by volume for consumption on the licensed premises only in conjunction with the sale
of food. An on-sale wine license may be issued only to a restaurants. The holder of an on-sale
wine license who is also licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors at on-sale is authorized to sell
intoxicating malt liquors at on-sale without an additional license.
200.05 ISSUANCE OF LICENSES. The Council may issue both an On-Sale and Off-Sale license to the same
licensee, except exclusive liquor stores.
200.06 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
A. Not more than four (4) On-Sale Intoxicating licenses shall be granted at any one time to exclusive
Liquor stores, intoxicating liquor premises, and hotels: to exclude Restaurants as defined in
200.01, letter P are excluded from the number of licenses issued in accordance with State Statute
340A.413, Sub. 4, (2).
B. Number of Wine Licenses. On-Sale Wine License may be issued to Restaurants meeting the
definition of 200.01. The number of On-Sale Wine License issued to restaurants shall not exceed
six (6).
C. On-Sale 3.2 Licenses. On-Sale 3.2 Malt Liquor Licenses may be issued to Restaurants for
consumption on the premises only and shall be limited to six (6) licenses.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 200 – Intoxicating Liquors - 5 -
200.07 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
A. Every person desiring a license shall file an application with the City Clerk in the form to be
described by the Commissioner of Public Safety and with any additional information as the City
Council may require. The applicant shall complete the application forms furnished by the city.
Every application for either On-Sale or Off-Sale license shall be accompanied by liability insurance
policy in accordance to Minnesota Statutes 340A.409.
B. License Background Checks
1) Purpose: The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations that will
allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized Criminal History
information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing background checks.
2) Criminal History License Background Investigations: The Police Department is hereby
required, as the exclusive entity within the City, to do a criminal history background
investigation on all licenses within the city.
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen license
applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access data maintained in the
Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History information
system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be
maintained at the Police Department under the care and custody of the chief law
enforcement official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the
Computerized Criminal History data may be released by the Police Department to the
licensing authority, including the City Council, the City of Chisago City or other public
entities involved in the license approval process.
Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police
Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must
fully comply with the provisions of Minnesota Stat. Chapter 13 regarding the collection,
maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota
Statutes Section 364.09, the city will not reject an applicant for a license on the basis of
prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the license sought and the
conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with the jail sentence. If
the city rejects the applicant request on the basis, the City shall notify the applicant in
writing of the following:
a. The grounds and reasons for the denial
b. The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota Statutes
Section 364.06.
c. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license.
d. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 200 – Intoxicating Liquors - 6 -
200.08 FEES. The fees established in this ordinance shall be reviewed and set by City Council
resolution. The license fee for a new license shall be paid in full as listed below. The annual license fee for
the renewal of an existing license shall be paid prior to the expiration of the existing license.
A. The bi-annual fee for an On-Sale Intoxicating liquor license shall be $1,250 due on the 15th of
November for the year proceeding the renewal year January each year, and $1,250 due on the 1st
of July each year.
B. The annual fee for an Off-Sale Intoxicating Liquor license shall be $150 due on the 1st of January
each year.
C. The bi-annual fee for an On-Sale Wine License shall be $250 due on the 1st of January each year,
and $250 due on the 1st of July each year.
D. The annual fee for an On-Sale 3.2 Malt Liquor shall be $250 due on the 1st of January each year.
E. The annual fee for a Brewer Tap Room License shall be $250 due on the 1st of January each year.
F. The annual fee for Small Brewer Off-Sale License shall be $150 due on the 1st of January of each
year.
G. The annual fee for Cocktail Room shall be $250 due on the 1st of January of each year.
H. The annual fee for Microdistillery Off-Sale License shall be $150 due on the 1st of January of each
year.
I. The annual fee for Sunday sales for a restaurant, club, bowling center, or hotel with a seating
capacity for at least thirty (30) persons and which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license may
obtain a Sunday license and shall be $200.00.
J. The fee for Temporary On-Sale shall be $25 due at the time of application submittal.
K. Refunds. No part of the fee paid for any license shall be refunded except (1) as authorized under
MN Statute 340A.408, (2) upon rejection of any application for reasons other than a willful
misstatement in the license application, or (3) upon withdrawal of an application before approval
of the issuance by the council. The license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. The
investigation fee shall not be refunded. Fees will not be pro-rated, except the bi-annual fee for an
On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License. The City Administrator may deduct from any refund a
handling fee of $100.00. However, no refund shall be given to any licensee who has violated or
whose agent has violated any provisions or conditions of the Chapter within one year of the
request for refund.
200.09 GRANTING LICENSES. The Council shall cause an investigation to be made of all the
representations set forth in the application. Opportunity shall be given at a regular or special
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 200 – Intoxicating Liquors - 7 -
meeting of the Council to any person to be heard for or against the granting of any license. After
such investigation, the Council may grant or refuse such license in its discretion; provided that no Off-Sale
license shall become effective until it, together with the bond, has the approval of the Commissioner. All
licensed premises shall have the license posted in a conspicuous place therein at all times. No license shall
be transferable either as to license or premises without the approval of the Council and also the
Commissioner in the case of Off-Sale licenses.
200.10 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE. All licenses granted hereunder shall be granted subject to the
following conditions, and all other conditions of this Chapter, and subject to all other ordinances
of the Municipality applicable thereto and to all regulations promulgated by the Commissioner applicable
thereto.
A. Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his/her place of business and the
conditions of sobriety and order therein. No license for Off-Sale only, shall permit the consumption of
any liquor on such licensed premises. No On-Sale Intoxicating license shall sell liquor by the bottle or
container for removal from the premises without appropriate off-sale license.
B. No Off-Sale license shall be issued for any place where On-Sale Intoxicating, On-Sale 3.2 or
On-Sale Wine beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, except for Microdistilleries and
Small Brewers with appropriate Off-Sale license.
C. No liquor shall be sold or furnished to any minor for any purpose whatsoever or to any habitual
drunkard or to any person obviously intoxicated, or to any of the persons to whom sale is prohibited
by statute, or by reason of sale to whom, a penalty is provided by statute.
D. No licensee shall permit 18, 19 and 20 year olds to remain on the premises unless to consume
meals, attend social functions that are held in a portion of the establishment where liquor is not sold,
or to perform work for the establishment including the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages..
E. No person under the age of 18 may enter the premise without being accompanied by a parent or
legal guardian and can only do so until 10:00 p.m.
F. No person under the age of 18 may serve or sell alcoholic beverages in a retail intoxicating liquor
establishment. No person under the age of 18 shall be employed on the premises, except that persons
under 18 years of age may be employed as musicians, bus boys and kitchen help.
G. No licensee shall keep, possess, operate, or permit the keeping of, on the premise any slot
machine, dice or other gambling devise or apparatus, nor permit any gambling therein. Nor permit
the licensed premises to any room in the same, or in any adjoining building directly or indirectly
under his control to be used as a resort for prostitutes or other disorderly persons. Nudity is
prohibited.
H. No license shall be issued to any person who is not a citizen of the United States and who is not
of good moral character and repute. Nor to any person who shall hereafter be convicted of any
willful violation of any law of the United States, State of Minnesota, or any local ordinance with regard
to the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession for sale or distribution of any intoxicating liquor.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 200 – Intoxicating Liquors - 8 -
Any person whose license under this Chapter shall be revoked for any willful violation of any such
laws or ordinances.
I. No license shall be granted for operation on any premises upon which taxes or assessment or
other financial claims of the Municipality are delinquent and unpaid.
J. All premises where any license hereunder is granted shall be open to inspection by any police,
health officer, or other properly designated officer or employee of the Municipality at any time.
200.11 HOURS OF OPERATION.
A. No sale of any on-sale licensed premise shall be made between the hours of 1:00 a.m. on Sunday,
and 8:00 a.m. on Monday unless the establishment has been issued a Sunday license under
200.12.
B. No On-Sale shall be made between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any weekday.
C. No Off-Sale shall be made on:
1) Sundays, except between the hours of 11:00 am and 6:00 pm effective July 1, 2017.
2) Before 8:00 am or after 10:00 pm on Monday through Saturday.
3) Thanksgiving Day;
4) on Christmas Day, December 25; or
5) after 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24th.
D. No person other than an employee of an establishment licensed pursuant to this Chapter shall
remain on the licensed premises longer than one-half hour after closing time as established by
this Chapter. Nor shall any person consume or display intoxicating liquor on said premises after
one half-hour after closing time set forth above.
200.12 SUNDAY SALES.
A. Sunday License and Fee. A restaurant, club, bowling center, or hotel with a seating capacity for at
least thirty (30) persons and which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license may obtain a
Sunday license from the city to sell intoxicating liquor on Sundays in conjunction with the sale of
food. Intoxicating liquor may be sold for consumption on the premises between the hours of
12:00 noon on Sundays and 1:00 a.m. on Mondays. The annual fee for the Sunday license shall be
$200.00.
B. Extended Sunday Hours. The City may, after public hearing and by ordinance, permit a
restaurant, club, bowling center, or hotel that has been issued a Sunday License under Subdivision
1 to sell intoxicating liquor in conjunction with the sale of food between the hours of 10:00 a.m.
on Sundays and 1:00 a.m. on Mondays.
C. Hours. On-Sale establishments licensed to sell intoxicating liquor on Sunday may serve between
the hours of 12:00 pm and 12:00 am on Sunday. Effective July 1, 2017 Off-Sale Liquor License
may sell intoxicating liquor between the hours of 11:00 am and 6:00 pm.
D. Growlers. Malt liquor in growlers only, may be sold at off-sale on Sundays between the hours of
11:00 am and 6:00 pm.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 200 – Intoxicating Liquors - 9 -
E. Delivery. No delivery of alcohol to an off-sale licensee may be made by a wholesaler or accepted
by an off-sale licensee on a Sunday. No order solicitation or merchandising may be made by a
wholesaler on a Sunday.
200.13 RESTRICTION OF CONSUMPTION. No On-Sale place of business shall be permitted to have
swinging doors or opaque windows. All sales shall be made in full view of the public. It shall be
unlawful for any person or persons to mix or prepare liquor for consumption, or to permit the
consumption thereof in any public place or place of business where no On-Sale license is held, or
consume liquor in such a place, except for the purpose of Sampling in accordance with MN Statute
340A.510 and Tasting in accordance with MN Statute 340A.419, and as amended.
200.14 FINES, SUSPENSION, AND REVOCATION.
A. General Fines, Suspension, and Revocation Provisions. The Council has authority to either
suspend for up to 60 days or revoke any liquor license or impose a civil fine not to exceed
$2,000 for each violation upon a finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any
applicable statute, regulation or ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages. Except in cases of
failure of financial responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee
has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to Minn. Stat. 14.57 to 14.69 of the
administrative procedure act.
Lapse of required liquor liability insurance, or withdrawal of a required deposit of cash or
securities, shall effect an immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this Section
without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation, lapse of a current liquor liability
policy or bond, or withdrawal of deposited cash or securities shall also constitute notice to the
licensee of the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has received
notice of lapse of required insurance or bond, or withdrawal of a required deposit, or of
suspension or revocation of a license, may request a hearing. If a request is made in writing to the
clerk a hearing shall be granted within 10 days or such longer period as may be requested. Any
suspension under this paragraph shall continue until the Council determines that the financial
responsibility requirements of this Section have again been met.
B. Presumptive Penalties.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Subdivision is to establish a standard by which the Council
determines the length of license suspensions and the propriety of revocations and shall apply
to all on-sale and off-sale licensed premises for both non-intoxicating and intoxicating liquor
under this Section. These penalties are presumed to be appropriate for every case. However,
the Council may deviate from these penalties in an individual case where the Council finds
and determines that there exist substantial and compelling reasons making it more
appropriate to do so. When deviating from these standards, the Council shall provide written
reasons that specify why the penalty selected was more appropriate.
2. Presumptive Penalties for Violations. Adverse penalties for violations shall be presumed as
follows. It is not necessary for the prior offense to be the same offense as the current charge.
The presumptive sentence depends on the total number of prior offenses within 3 years.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 200 – Intoxicating Liquors - 10 -
Type of Violation 1st Violation 2nd Violation 3rd Violation 4th Violation
Commission of a felony
related to the licensed activity.
IMMEDIATE
REVOCATION
N/A N/A N/A
Sale of alcoholic beverages
while license is suspended.
IMMEDIATE
REVOCATION
N/A N/A N/A
Adult entertainment IMMEDIATE
REVOCATION
N/A N/A N/A
Sale of alcoholic beverages to
under-age person.
$500 3-day suspension
or $1000 fine
10-day
suspension
IMMEDIATE
REVOCATION
Sale of alcoholic beverages to
intoxicated person.
$500 3-day suspension
or $1000 fine
$2,000 and 7-day
suspension
IMMEDIATE
REVOCATION
After or before hours sale of
alcoholic beverages.
$500 3-day suspension $2,000 and 7-day
suspension
IMMEDIATE
REVOCATION
After-hours display or
consumption of alcoholic
beverages.
$500 $1000 and 3-day
suspension
$2,000 and 7-day
suspension
IMMEDIATE
REVOCATION
Refusal to allow city
inspectors or police admission
to inspect premises.
$1,000 and 3-day
suspension
$2,000 AND 7-day
suspension
IMMEDIATE
REVOCATION
N/A
Illegal gambling or
prostitution on premises.
$500 $1000 and 3-day
suspension
$2,000 and 7-day
suspension
IMMEDIATE
REVOCATION
Failure to take reasonable
steps to stop person from
leaving premises with
alcoholic beverage.
$500 $1,000 and 3-day
suspension
$2,000 and 7-day
suspension
IMMEDIATE
REVOCATION
Failure to make application for
license renewal prior to
license expiration date.
$500 $1,000 and 3-day
suspension
$2,000 and 7-day
suspension
IMMEDIATE
REVOCATION
Sale of intoxicating liquor
where only license is for wine
or 3.2
$500 3-day suspension IMMEDIATE
REVOCATION
N/A
Failure to comply with
statutory and ordinance
requirement for liability
insurance
IMMEDIATE
REVOCATION
N/A N/A N/A
No person under 18 years of
age allowed in liquor
establishment unless
$500 $1,000 and 3-day
suspension
$2,000 and 7-day
suspension
IMMEDIATE
REVOCATION
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 200 – Intoxicating Liquors - 11 -
employed by establishment
and working at the time, or
with parent or legal guardian.
Person under 18 serving
liquor
$500 $1,000 and 3-day
suspension
$2,000 and 7-day
suspension
IMMDIATE
REVOCATION
Failure to display liquor
license
Warning letter $500 fine $1,000 fine $1,500 fine
3. Multiple Violations. At a licensee’s first appearance before the Council, the Council shall
consider and act upon all the violations that have been alleged and/or incorporated in the
notices sent to the licensee up to and including the formal notice of hearing. The
occurrence of multiple violations shall be grounds for an upward departure from such
penalties in the Council’s discretion. Violations occurring after the date of the notice of
hearing that are brought to the attention of the city prior to the hearing date may be
added to the notices by stipulation if the licensee admits to the facts and shall, in that
case, be treated as through part of the “1 Appearance”. In all other cases, violations
occurring after the date of the formal notice of hearing shall be the subject of a separate
proceeding and dealt with as a “2 Appearance” before the Council.
4. Other Penalties. Nothing in this Section shall restrict or limit the authority of the Council to
suspend up to sixty (60) days, revoke the license or impose a civil fine not to exceed two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00), to prosecute an offender in criminal court, or to impose
conditions or take any other adverse action in accordance with the law, provided, that the
license holder has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing in the manner provided for
by law.
200.15 NUDITY PROHIBITED
A. Purpose. The City of Chisago City does hereby ordain that it is in the best interest of the public
health, safety and general welfare of the people of the City of Chisago City that certain types of
activities, as set forth in this ordinance are prohibited upon the premises or on other property that
is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the licensed premises and that is owned by the licensee or
an entity controlled by the licensee, so as to best protect and assist the owners and operators and
employees of these premises, as well as patrons and the public in general. Further, that the City
does ordain that the standards in this ordinance reflect the prevailing community standards in the
City of Chisago City. This ordinance is intended to prevent harm stemming from the physical
immediacy and combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The City also desires to prevent any
subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to lead to the possibility of
various criminal conduct such as prostitution, sexual assault, and disorderly conduct.
B. Certain Acts Prohibited. The following shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit on the licensed
premises or on other property that is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the licensed premises,
and that is owned by the licensee or an entity controlled by the licensee:
1. The employing or use of any person in the sale or service of beverages in or upon the
licensed premises where such person is unclothed or in transparent clothing or in such attire,
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 200 – Intoxicating Liquors - 12 -
costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of
the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals.
2. The employing or use of the services of any host or hostess while such host or hostess is
unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as described in subsection 1 above.
3. The encouraging or permitting of any person on the licensed premises to touch, caress or
fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any other person.
4. The permitting of any employee or person to wear or use any device or covering exposed to
view, which simulates the breast, genitals, anus, pubic hair or any portion thereof.
5. The permitting of any person to perform acts of or acts which simulate:
a. With or upon another person, sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, flagellation or
any sexual acts, which are prohibited by law.
b. Masturbation or bestiality.
c. With or upon another person the touching, caressing or fondling of the buttocks, anus,
genitals or female breast.
d. The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva, genitals or female breasts below the top of
the areola.
6. The permitting of any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the
prohibited activities described in subsections 5a through 5d above.
7. The permitting of any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to
public view any portion of his or her genitals or anus.
8. The permitting or showing of adult - film, still pictures, electronic reproductions or other
reproductions depicting:
a. Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts, which are prohibited by law.
b. Any person being touched, caressed or fondled on the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals.
c. Scenes wherein a person displays the vulva, or the anus or the genitals.
d. Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict, or drawings
are employed to portray, any of the activities described in subsections B1
through B7 above.
C. Exemptions. Breast-feeding by mothers in a parental relationship with a minor shall not be a
violation of this ordinance.
D. Violation. A violation of this section of the ordinance is a misdemeanor, and is justification for
revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine, or beer license.
200.16 REPEAL. All ordinances of this City or any provisions thereof in conflict with the Chapter or any of
its provisions are hereby repealed.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 200 – Intoxicating Liquors - 13 -
200.17 EVERY SECTION, provision or part of this chapter is declared separable from every other section,
provision or part; and if any section, provision or part hereof shall be declared invalid, it shall not
affect any other section, provision or part.
200.18 PENALTY. Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Adopted 12/96; Amended 8/03 ORD 273; Amended 06/01/06 ORD 276(11/07); Amended ORD 299 (2/13);
Amended 03/28/17 ORD 306;
CHAPTER 201
NON-INTOXICATING LIQUOR
210.01 DEFINITIONS.
A) As used in this Chapter, the term, “person” includes a natural person of
either sex, co-partnership, corporation and association of persons and
the agent or manager of any of the aforesaid. The singular number
includes the plural, and the masculine pronoun indicates the feminine
and neuter.
B) “Beer” or “non-intoxicating malt liquor” means any malt beverage with
an alcoholic content of more than one-half of one percent (.005%) by
volume and not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) by
weight.
C) “Intoxicating liquor,” means any distilled, fermented or vinous beverage
containing more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) of alcohol by
weight.
D) “Original package” means the bottle or sealed container in which the
liquor is placed by the manufacturer.
E) “Bona fide Club” means a club organized for social or business
purposes or for intellectual improvement or for the promotion of sports,
where the serving of beer is incidental to and not the major purpose of
the club.
F) “Restaurant” means a place of which the major business is preparing
and serving lunches or meals to the public to be consumed on the
premises.
G) “Beer Store” means an establishment for the sale of beer, cigars,
cigarettes, all forms of tobacco, beverages and soft drinks at retail.
201.02 LICENSE REQUIRED
A) No person, except wholesalers and manufacturers to the extent
authorized by law, shall deal in or dispose of by gift, sale or otherwise,
or keep or offer for sale, and beer within the Municipality without first
having received a license as hereinafter provided. Licenses shall be of
two kinds:
1) Retail “on sale” or
2) Retail “off sale”.
B) “On Sale” licenses shall be granted only to bona fide clubs, beer
stores, drug stores, restaurants and hotels where food is prepared and
served for consumption on the premises. “On Sale” licenses shall
permit the sale of beer for consumption on the premises only.
C) Not more than six (6) “off sale” licenses shall be issued during each
year.
D) “Off Sale” licenses shall permit the sale of beer at retail, in the original
package for consumption off the premises only.
201.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
All applications for any license to sell non-intoxicating malt liquor shall be made
in writing to the Council, setting forth the requirements of the statute, and such
other requirements as the Council may from time to time designate. No license
shall be issued to any person who has not been a resident of said Municipality for
a period of 12 months, nor who has not been in business in said Municipality for
a period of six months prior to the making of the application.
201.04 LICENSE FEES
The annual fee for an “on sale” license shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). “Off
sales” licenses shall be granted to permit the sale at retail and wholesale of such
liquor in the original package for removal from and consumption off the premises
only. The annual fee for an “off sale” license shall be five dollars ($5.00). No part
of the fee paid for any license issued under this chapter shall be refunded.
201.05 GRANTING OF LICENSE
A) The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application.
Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against
the granting of the license. After such investigation and hearing the
Council shall grant or refuse the application in its discretion.
B) Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be
transferable to another holder. Each license shall be issued only for
the premises described in the application. No license may be
transferred to another place without the approval of the Council.
201.06 PERSONS INELIGIBILE FOR LICENSE.
No license shall be granted to any person:
A) Who is a minor.
B) Who has been convicted of a felony, or of violating the National
Prohibition Act or any law of this state or local ordinance relating to the
manufacture or transportation of intoxicating liquors.
C) Who is a manufacturer of beer or who is interested in the control of any
place where beer is manufactured.
D) Who is an alien.
E) Who is not of good moral character.
F) Who is or during the period of this license becomes a holder of a
federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp for the sale of
intoxicating liquor at any place unless there has also been issued to
him a local license to sell intoxicating liquor at such place.
G) Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is
issued.
201.07 PLACES INELGIBLE FOR LICENSES.
No “on sale” or “off sale” license shall be granted for sale on any premises where
a licensee has been convicted of a violation of this Chapter, or of the state nonintoxicating
or intoxicating liquor law, or any license hereunder has been revoked
for cause until one year has elapsed after such conviction or revocation.
201.08 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
A) Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions in the
following paragraphs and all other provisions of this Chapter and of
any other applicable chapter of this code or state law.
B) All license premises shall have the license posted in a conspicuous
place at all times.
C) No beer shall be sold or served to any intoxicated person or to any
person who is a minor.
D) In any place license for “on sale” the liquor sold shall be consumed at
tables and shall not be consumed or served at bars, provided that the
same may be served at counters where food is regularly served and
consumed. All windows in the front of any such place shall be of clear
glass and the view of the entire interior shall be unobstructed by
screens, curtains, or partitions.
E) An applicant for a license hereunder shall furnish to said Council a
bond in the penal sum of $250.00, with sufficient sureties to be
approved by said Council, which bond shall be conditioned for the
faithful compliance by the principal with all the laws of the State of
Minnesota, ordinances of said Municipality, and all regulations
adopted by said Council relating to the sale of non-intoxicating malt
liquors. Upon the failure of the principal of said bond to comply with
the provisions of the said laws of said state, the ordinances and
regulations of said Council, the said Council shall declare a forfeiture
of said bond, and the principal sum thereof shall thereupon be
forfeited and paid to the Treasurer of said Municipality. The said
Council shall be the sole and exclusive judge of whether a default in
the provisions of said bond has occurred.
F) No minor shall be permitted to consume beer on the licensed
premises.
G) No minor shall be permitted to sell or serve beer in any “on sale”
establishment.
H) No gambling or any gambling device shall be permitted on any
licensed premises.
I) No manufacturer or wholesaler of beer shall have any ownership of or
interest in an establishment licensed to sell at retail contrary to the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes 340.02. No retail licensee and
manufacturer or wholesaler of beer shall be party to any exclusive
purchase contract. No retail licensee shall receive any benefits
contrary to law from a manufacturer or wholesaler of beer and no
such manufacturer or wholesaler shall confer any benefits contrary to
law upon a retail licensee.
J) No licensee shall sell beer while holding or exhibiting in the licensed
premises a federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp unless he is
licensed under the laws of Minnesota to sell intoxicating liquors.
K) The Liquor Control Commissioner, his designated agents, and duly
authorized peace officers of the Municipality shall have the
unqualified right to enter, inspect, and search the premises of a
licensee during business hours without a search and seizure warrant.
Refusal to permit such inspection shall be a violation of this Chapter.
L) No licensee who is not also licensed to sell intoxicating liquor shall
sell intoxicating liquors on the licensed premises.
M) Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his place of
business and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order.
N) An “on sale” license shall entitle the holder to serve beer in a
separate room of the licensed premises for banquets or dinners at
which are present not less than eight persons.
O) It shall be unlawful for any bona fide club or public place, other than a
place licensed to sell intoxicating liquors to directly or indirectly or
upon any pretense or by any device allow the consumption or display
of intoxicating liquor, or the serving of any liquid for the purpose of
mixing with intoxicating liquor, without first securing a permit from the
Liquor Control Commissioner and paying the annual fee as provided
for in this Chapter.
201.09 CLOSING HOURS.
No sale shall be made between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. of any
day.
201.10 REVOCATION.
The violation of any provision or condition of this Chapter by a beer licensee or
his agent shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the license. The
license of any person who holds a federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp
shall be revoked without notice and without hearing. In all other cases, a license
granted under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the Council after
written notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least
eight days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature
of the charges against the licensee. The Council may suspend any license
pending a hearing on revocation or suspension.
201.11 PENALTY.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
202-1
CHAPTER 202
INTOXICATING AND NON-INTOXICATING LIQUORS
PROHIBITED SALES – MINORS
202.01 DEFINITIONS. “Non-intoxicating malt liquor” and “intoxicating liquor” are hereby
defined to mean and include any distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous or malt liquid or any
kind, potable as a beverage, which contains an alcoholic content in excess of one-half of one
percent. (.005%) by volume.
202.02 POSSESSION OF LIQUOR BY MINOR. It shall be unlawful for any minor to have
non-intoxicating malt liquor or intoxicating liquor as the same are herein defined, in his
possession for the purpose of consumption by him, or any other minor at a place other than the
household of his parents or guardian. Possession by a minor of any non-intoxicating malt liquor
or intoxicating liquor shall be prima facie evidence to consume the same.
202.03 SALES OF INTOXICATING AND NON-INTOXICATING MAL LIQUOR TO MINOR.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to sell or furnish non-intoxicating
malt liquor or intoxicating liquor as the same are herein defined, to any person who is a minor.
202.04 MINOR PURCHASING. It shall be unlawful for a minor to enter any premises
licensed for the retail sale of non-intoxicating malt liquors or alcoholic beverages for the purpose
of purchasing or having served or delivered to him or her any non-intoxicating malt liquor or
alcoholic beverage.
202.05 MINOR CONSUMPTION. It shall be unlawful for a minor to consume any nonintoxicating
malt liquor or alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the retail sale of nonintoxicating
malt liquors or alcoholic beverages, or to purchase, attempt to purchase or have
another person purchase for him or her any non-intoxicating malt liquor or alcoholic beverage.
202.06 MISREPRESENTATION. It shall be unlawful for any person to misrepresent or
misstate his or her age, or the age of any other person for the purpose of inducing any licensee
or any employee of the licensee to sell, serve or deliver any non-intoxicating malt liquor or
alcoholic beverage.
202.07 PENALTY. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
1 | P a g e
PERMITS/PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,
SOLICITORS, PRODUCE & RELIGIOUS GROUPS
Ordinance Chapter #203
City of Chisago City
CHAPTER 203
PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, SOLICITORS,
PRODUCE & RELIGIOUS GROUPS
203.00 PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, SOLICITORS, PRODUCE &
RELIGIOUS GROUPS. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words
and terms are defined as follows:
Subd. 1. Peddler. Means any person, firm or corporation who goes
from dwelling to dwelling, business to business, place to place or from
street to street, carrying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise
and offering or exposing them for sale.
Subd. 2. Solicitor. Means any person, firm or corporation who goes
from dwelling to dwelling, business to business, place to place or from
street to street, soliciting donations or attempts to take orders for any
goods, wares or merchandise for future delivery.
Subd. 3. Transient Merchant. Means any person, firm or corporation
who engages temporarily in the business of selling and delivering
goods, wares or merchandise within the City, and who, in furtherance
of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure,
vacant lot, parking lot, motor vehicle, or trailer.
Subd. 4. Religious Groups. Means any person, firm or organization
who goes from dwelling to dwelling, business to business, place to
place or from street to street, carrying or distributing literature
regarding religion or religious beliefs.
203.01 SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,
RELIGIOUS GROUPS; REGISTRATION/PERMIT REQUIRED. It is
unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, transient merchant or religious
group to engage in any such activity within the City of Chisago
2 | P a g e
PERMITS/PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,
SOLICITORS, PRODUCE & RELIGIOUS GROUPS
Ordinance Chapter #203
City of Chisago City
without first registering with the City Administrator’s office in
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. Registration does
not exempt compliance with all other applicable local, state and
federal laws.
Subd. 1 Registration. Persons registering under this ordinance shall
file a sworn statement with the City Administrator’s office on a form to
be furnished by the City. The sworn statement shall provide:
A) Name and driver’s license number or other acceptable photo
identification of the person registering;
B) The permanent home address of the applicant and the address
of the place of business or the firm or corporation which the
applicant represents;
C) A description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold;
D) The length of time for which the right to do business is required.
E) In cases of transient merchant sales, the applicant must also
provide:
1) Proof of appropriate permission to operate on proposed
site.
2) A copy of the firm or individual’s sales tax permit. The
sales tax permit must be posted at the site.
203.02 SOLICITOR, PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS;
REGISTRATION/PERMIT FEE. At the time of registration, the person
registering shall pay a fee to cover the administrative costs of
processing. The following is the fee structure for permits:
PEDDLERS/SOLICITORS/RELIGIOUS GROUPS…$100.00/per month
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS……………… $25.00/per day weekdays
$40.00/per day weekends
3 | P a g e
PERMITS/PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,
SOLICITORS, PRODUCE & RELIGIOUS GROUPS
Ordinance Chapter #203
City of Chisago City
203.03 PERSONS WORKING FOR ASSISTING REGISTRANT. The
registrant shall also supply the name and address of all persons
working for or assisting the registrant.
203.04 REGISTRATION IDENTIFICATION. To identify that they have duly
registered with the City, all registered solicitors and peddlers shall
carry the registration/permit with them at all times. All transient
merchants shall conspicuously display a registration permit issued by
the City.
203.05 PRACTICES PROHIBITED. No Peddler or Solicitor shall enter in or
upon any premises or attempt to enter in or upon any premises
wherein a sign bearing the notice, “Peddlers or Solicitors Prohibited”,
or language similar thereto, is located.
203.06 REGISTRATION PERIOD. Registration shall be valid for the
following time periods:
Peddlers/Solicitors/Religious Groups……
• 30 days from date of issuance
• Peddlers/Solicitors/Religious Groups may operate between
9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. ONLY.
Transient Merchants…Per day basis, valid for days paid.
• Transient Merchants may operate between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. ONLY.
203.07 FARM AND GARDEN PRODUCTS EXCEPTION. In accordance
with Minnesota Status 329.08, the provisions of this ordinance shall
not apply to persons selling products of the farm or garden occupied
and cultivated by themselves. However, registration of Farm &
Garden Product sales is required. The City will not issue more than
four permits at a time for the sale of farm and garden products. These
permits are issued on a first-come-first-serve basis, and are issued as
seasonal permits.
4 | P a g e
PERMITS/PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,
SOLICITORS, PRODUCE & RELIGIOUS GROUPS
Ordinance Chapter #203
City of Chisago City
203.08 SPECIAL EVENTS EXCEPTION. The provisions of this ordinance
shall not apply to special events such as Ki-Chi-Saga Days, etc. which
are citywide celebrations and which received special permission from
the City Council.
203.09 NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION. I. E. BOY SCOUTS, GIRL SCOUTS,
ETC. The provision of this ordinance shall not apply to non-profit
organizations/groups (as listed above) and which receive special
permission from the City Council.
203.10 PENALTY. Any person violating any provision of this ordinance
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Adopted this 13th day of June 2000. This ordinance shall take effect upon its
passage and publication in the Chisago County Press.
ATTEST:
_____________________________ ________________________________
Mark Wm Hanson, Mayor Amy Oehlers, Administrative Director
Adopted: March 28, 1995
Amended: April 11, 1995
Amended: June 13, 2000
204-1
CHAPTER 204
BINGO
204.01 ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS. The provisions of Minnesota
Statutes 349.11 to 349.21, as amended from time to time are hereby adopted.
204.02 LICENSE FEES. License fees hereunder shall be $25.00 per year, and the
license fee shall be submitted with the application. Unless a lesser time is established by
the Council at the time of granting a license, each license shall expire on December 31
of the year for which it was issued.
205-1
CHAPTER 205
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
205.01 DEFINITIONS. The term “machine” as used herein means a mechanical
amusement device of any of the following types.
A) A machine or contrivance, including “pinball” machines, which upon the insertion of a
coin, slug or other token operates, or may be operated, as a game, contest or other
amusement only and which contains no automatic payoff device for the return of money,
coins, merchandise, checks, tokens or any other thing or item of value, provided,
however, that such machine may be equipped to permit a free play or game.
B) Mechanical standard or miniature pool tables, pool tables, bowling machines, shuffle
boards, electric rifle or gun ranges, miniature mechanical devices and games or
amusements patterned after baseball, basketball, hockey, or similar games and like
devices, machines or games which may be played solely for amusement and not as
gambling devices, and which devices or games are played by the insertion of a coin or
coins or at a fee fixed and charged by the establishment in which such devices or
machines are located.
205.02 LICENSE REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation shall maintain a machine for
operation by the public in any place within the Municipality without having first secured from the
Municipality a license.
205.03 APPLICATION FORM. The applicant for such license shall be the owner or lessee
of the premises where the machine is to be operated and maintained. After receiving the
application, the Clerk shall forward it to the police department for investigation. The police
department shall report the findings of its investigation to the council prior to its action on the
license.
205.04 LICENSE FEE.
A) Each application shall be accompanied by the annual license fee which shall be $25.00
for each machine described in paragraph (A) or $25.00 for each machine described in
paragraph (B) of section 205.01.
B) If the Council denies application for license, one-half of the license fee shall be refunded
to the applicant.
205.05 LICENSE PERIOD. All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on the 1st day of
January after issuance.
205.06 DISPLAY OF LICENSE. The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted
permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the
device is to be operated or maintained to be operated.
205.07 TRANSFERABILITY.
A) The license may be transferred from one machine or device to another similar machine
upon application to the Clerk to such effect and the giving of a description and the serial
number of the new machine or device. Not more than one machine shall be operated
205-2
under one license, and the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for
each and every machine displayed or operated by him.
B) Licenses are issued for one location only, and such licenses are non-transferable
between locations.
205.08 GAMBLING PROHIBITED. No person, firm or corporation shall permit the operation
of such a machine or device for the making of side bets or gambling in any form. No prize,
award, merchandise, gift, money or anything of value shall be given to any player of such
machine or device.
205.09 REVOCATION.
A) All licenses and permits granted hereunder shall be revocable for cause at any time on
reasonable hearing prescribed by the Council.
B) If there shall be two convictions for violation of this Chapter in an establishment where
such machines are maintained in any license year, whether of the same or of different
provisions hereof, the second such conviction shall automatically revoke the license
under which the establishment is operating. No refund of fees will be paid on revocation.
205.10 PENALTY. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Page 1 of 10
Pawnshop Regulations and Licensing
Ordinance Chapter 206
City of Chisago City
Chapter 206
Pawnshop Regulations and Licensing
206.01 Purpose.
The City Council finds that use of services provided by pawnbrokers provides an opportunity
for the commission of crimes and their concealment because pawn businesses have the
ability to receive and transfer property stolen by others easily and quickly. The City Council
also finds that consumer protection regulation is warranted in transactions involving
pawnbrokers. The City Council further finds that the pawn industry has outgrown the city's
current ability to effectively or efficiently identify criminal activity related to pawn shops. The
purpose of this chapter is to prevent pawn businesses from being used as facilities for the
commission of crimes, and to assure that such businesses comply with basic consumer
protection standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city. To help the police department better regulate current and future pawn
businesses, decrease and stabilize costs associated with the regulation of the pawn
industry, and increase identification of criminal activities in the pawn industry through the
timely collection and sharing of pawn transaction information, this chapter also implements
and establishes the required use of the automated pawn system (APS).
206.02 Definitions.
When used in this article, the following words shall mean:
A. Pawnbroker.
Any natural person, partnership or corporation, either as principal, or agent or employee
thereof, who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other valuable
thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property, or other valuable thing on
condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money
secured by chattel mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property or
any part thereof so mortgaged. To the extent that a pawnbroker' s business includes
buying personal property previously used, rented or leased, or selling it on consignment,
the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable.
B. Pawnshop.
Pawnshop means the location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker regularly
conducts business.
C. Pawn Transaction.
Pawn transaction means any loan on security of pledged goods or any purchase of
pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods are left with the pawnbroker and
may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price with in a fixed period of
time.
D. Reportable Transaction.
Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in which merchandise is received through
a pawn, purchase, consignment or trade, or in which a pawn is renewed, extended or
redeemed, or for which a unique transaction number or identifier is generated by their
point-of-sale software, is reportable except:
Page 2 of 10
1. The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a merchant,
manufacturer or wholesaler having an established permanent place of business,
and the retail sale of said merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must maintain a
record of such purchase or consignment which describes each item, and must
mark each item in a manner which relates it to that transaction record.
2. Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by pawn or
purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods have
expired.
E. Billable Transaction.
Every reportable transaction conducted by a pawnbroker except renewals, redemptions
or extensions of existing pawns on items previously reported and continuously in the
licensee's possession is a billable transaction.
206.03 LICENSE FEES
A. The annual license fees for licenses issued under this chapter shall be fifteen hundred
dollars ($1500) and may be amended from time to time by City Council resolution.
B. The billable transaction license fee shall reflect the cost of processing transactions and
other related regulatory expenses as determined by resolution of the City Council, and
shall be reviewed and adjusted, if necessary, every six (6) months. Licensees shall be
notified in writing thirty (30) days before any adjustment is implemented.
C. Billable transaction fees shall be billed monthly and are due and payable within thirty
(30) days. Failure to do so is a violation of this chapter.
206.04 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
A. An application form prepared by the City Administrator must be completed by every
applicant for a new license or for renewal of an existing license. Completed applications
must be submitted to the City Administrator for processing. Every new applicant must
provide all the following information:
1. If the applicant is a natural person:
a. The name, place and date of birth, street resident address, and phone
number of applicant.
b. Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or resident alien.
c. Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name other
than the applicant's name, and if so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places used.
d. The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation, name,
or style other than the name of the applicant and a certified copy of the
certificate as required by Minnesota Statutes, Section 333.01.
e. The street address at which the applicant has lived during the preceding five
(5) years.
f. The type, name and location of every business or occupation in which the
applicant has been engaged during the preceding five (5) years and the
name(s) and address(es) of the applicant's employer(s) and partner(s), if any,
for the preceding five (5) years.
g. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime, statute or
violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the applicant
Page 3 of 10
must furnish information as to the statute, time, place, and offense of all such
convictions.
h. The physical description of the applicant.
i. Applicant's current personal financial statement and true copies of the
applicant's federal and state tax returns for the two (2) years prior to
application.
j. If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the manager(s)
or other person(s) in charge of the business and all information concerning
each of them required in a. through h. of subdivision (1) of this section.
2. If the applicant is a partnership:
a. The name(s) and address(es) of all general and limited partners and all
information concerning each general partner required in subdivision (1) of this
section.
b. The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the interest of each partner in
the licensed business.
c. A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the
application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade
name pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 333.01, a certified copy of
such certificate must be attached to the application.
d. A true copy of the federal and state tax returns for partnership for the two (2)
years prior to application. If the partnership has not been in existence for two
(2) years prior to application, the general partners of the partnership must
submit their individual tax returns for the two (2) year period.
e. If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the manager(s)
or other person(s) in charge of the business and all information concerning
each of them required in a. through h. of subdivision (1) of this section.
3. If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
a. The name of the corporation or business form, and if incorporated, the state
of incorporation.
b. A true copy of the Certificate of Incorporation, Articles of Incorporation,
Articles of Organization or Association Agreement, and By-laws shall be
attached to the application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a
Certificate of Authority as required by Minnesota Statutes, Section 303.06,
must be attached.
c. A true copy of the federal and state tax returns for corporation or organization
for the two (2) years prior to application. If the corporation or organization has
not been in existence for two (2) years prior to application, the general
partners of the corporation or organization must submit their individual tax
returns for the two (2) year period.
d. The name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and
all information concerning each manager, proprietor, or agent required in a.
through h. of subdivision (1) of this section.
e. A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess of five (5)
percent in such organization or business form or who are officers of the
corporation or business form and all information concerning said persons
required in subdivision (1) above. This subdivision (d), however, shall not
apply to a corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a stock exchange
and is applying for a license to be owned and operated by it.
4. For all applicants:
a. Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker, precious metal dealer or
secondhand goods dealer license from any other governmental unit.
Page 4 of 10
b. Whether the applicant has previously been denied, or had revoked or
suspended, a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer, or secondhand dealer
license from any other governmental unit.
c. The location of the business premises.
d. If the applicant does not own the business premises, a true and complete
copy of the executed lease.
e. The legal description of the premises to be licensed.
f. Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable
for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years and
amounts that are unpaid.
g. Whenever the application is for premises either planned or under construction
or undergoing substantial alteration, the application must be accompanied by
a set of preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed premises to be
licensed.
h. The current zoning of the property on which the premises is located.
i. Such other information as the city council or issuing authority may require.
B. New manager. When a licensee places a manager in charge of a business, or if the
named manager(s) in charge of a licensed business changes, the licensee must
complete and submit the appropriate application within fourteen (14) days. The
application must include all appropriate information required in this section.
1. Upon completion of an investigation of a new manager, the licensee must pay an
amount equal to the cost of the investigation to assure compliance with this chapter.
If the investigation process is conducted solely within the State of Minnesota, the
fee shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). If the investigation is conducted outside
the State of Minnesota, the issuing authority may recover the actual investigation
costs not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
C. Application execution. All applications for a license under this chapter must be signed
and sworn to under oath or affirmation by the applicant. If the application is that of a
natural person, it must be signed and sworn to by such person; if that of a corporation,
by an officer thereof; if that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of
an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof. The
application must be notarized before a notary public licensed by the State of Minnesota.
D. Investigation. The police department must investigate into the truthfulness of the
statements set forth in the application and shall endorse the findings thereon. The
applicant must furnish to the police license inspector such evidence as the inspector
may reasonably require in support of the statements set forth in the application. The
police department investigative report and/or endorsement of findings must be in writing.
E. Persons ineligible for a license. No licenses under this chapter will be issued to an
applicant who is a natural person, a partnership if such applicant has any general
partner or managing partner, a corporation or other organization if such applicant has
any manager or proprietor or agent in charge of the business to be licensed, if the
applicant, general or managing partner or manager:
1. Is a minor at the time that the application is filed;
2. Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as
prescribed by Minnesota Statutes, Section 364.03, Subd. 2, and has not shown
competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the
Page 5 of 10
duties of a licensee under this chapter as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes, Section
364.03, Subd. 3; or
3. Is not of good moral character or repute.
206.05 BOND REQUIRED.
Before a license will be issued, every applicant must submit a five thousand-dollar
($5,000.00) bond on the forms provided by the City and approved by the City Attorney as to
form and execution. All bonds must be conditioned that the principal will observe all laws in
relation to pawnbrokers, and will conduct business in conformity thereto, and that the
principal will account for and deliver to any person legally entitled any goods which have
come into the principal's hand through the principal's business as a pawnbroker, or in lieu
thereof, will pay the reasonable value in money to the person. The bond shall contain a
provision that no bond may be canceled except upon thirty (30) days written notice to the
city, which shall be served upon the licensing authority.
206.06 RECORDS REQUIRED.
A. In addition to the information required by Minnesota Statute 325J.01 et seq., at the
time of any reportable transaction other than renewals, extensions or redemptions,
every licensee must immediately record in English the following information by using
ink or other indelible medium on forms or in a computerized record approved by the
police department:
1. A complete and accurate description of each item including, but not limited to,
any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name,
or other identifying mark on such an item.
2. The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, or pledged therefore.
3. The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including monthly and
annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges.
4. Date, time and place the item of property was received by the licensee, and the
unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all
other transactions in the licensee's records.
5. Full name, current residence address, current residence telephone number, date
of birth and accurate description of the person from whom the item of the
property was received, including: sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes and
color of hair.
6. The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of
identification of the seller:
a. Current valid Minnesota driver's license.
b. Current valid Minnesota identification card.
c. Current valid photo identification card issued by another state or province of
Canada.
d. Current passport with picture.
7. The signature of the person identified in the transaction.
8. Effective sixty (60) days from the date of notification by the police department of
acceptable video standards the licensee must also take a color photograph or
color video recording of:
a. Each customer involved in a billable transaction.
b. Every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial or identification
number permanently engraved or affixed. If a photograph is taken, it must be
at least two (2) inches in length by two (2) inches in width and must be
maintained in such a manner that the photograph can be readily matched and
correlated with all other records of the transaction to which they relate. Such
Page 6 of 10
photographs must be available to the chief of police, or the chief's designee,
upon request. The major portion of the photograph must include an
identifiable front facial close-up of the person who pawned or sold the item.
Items photographed must be accurately depicted. The licensee must inform
the person that he or she is being photographed by displaying a sign of
sufficient size in a conspicuous place in the premises. If a video photograph
is taken, the video camera must zoom in on the person pawning or selling the
item so as to include an identifiable close-up of that person's face. Items
photographed by video must be accurately depicted. Video photographs must
be electronically referenced by time and date so they can be readily matched
and correlated with all other records of the transaction to which they relate.
The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being videotaped orally
and by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the
premises. The licensee must keep the exposed videotape for three (3)
months.
9. Digitized photographs. Effective sixty (60) days from the date of notification by
the police department licensees must fulfill the color photograph requirements in
section 206.06, (A), (8) RECORDS REQUIRED by submitting them as digital
images, in a format specified by the issuing authority, electronically crossreferenced
to the reportable transaction they are associated with.
Notwithstanding the digital images may be captured from required video
recordings, this provision does not altar or amend the requirements in subdivision
(8).
10. Renewals, extensions and redemptions. For renewals, extensions and
redemptions, the licensee shall provide the original transaction identifier, the date
of the current transaction, and the type of transaction.
11. Inspection of records. The records must at all reasonable times be open to
inspection by the police department or department of licenses and consumer
services. Data entries shall be retained for at least three (3) years from the date
of transaction. Entries of required digital images shall be retained a minimum of
ninety (90) days.
206.07 DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE.
A. Effective no later than sixty (60) days after the police department provides licensees
with computerized record standards, licensees must submit every reportable
transaction to the police department daily in the following manner:
1. Licensees must provide to the police department all information required in the
section 206.06 RECORDS REQUIRED (1) through (6) and other required
information, by transferring it from their computer to the Automated Pawn System
via modem. All required records must be transmitted completely and accurately
after the close of business each day in accordance with standards and
procedures established by the issuing authority using procedures that address
security concerns of the licensees and the issuing authority. The licensee must
display a sign of sufficient size, in a conspicuous place in the premises, which
informs all patrons that all transactions are reported to the police department
daily.
B. Billable transaction fees. Licensees will be charged for each billable transaction
reported to the police department through the Automated Pawn System.
1. If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required reports by modem, the
licensee must provide the police department printed copies of all reportable
Page 7 of 10
transactions along with the video tape(s) for that date, by 12: 00 the next
business day;
2. If the problem is determined to be in the licensee's system and is not corrected
by the close of the first business day following the failure, the licensee must
provide the required reports as detailed in section 206.07 DAILY REPORTS TO
POLICE (B) (1), and must be charged a fifty dollar ($50.00) reporting failure
penalty, daily, until the error is corrected; or
3. If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee's system, the licensee
must provide the required reports in section 206.07 DAILY REPORTS TO
POLICE (B) (1) and resubmit all such transaction via modem when the error is
corrected.
4. If a licensee is unable to capture, digitize or transmit the photographs required in
section 206.06 RECORDS REQUIRED (9), the licensee must immediately take
all required photographs with a still camera, cross-reference the photographs to
the correct transaction, and make the pictures available to the Chief of Police or
designee upon request.
5. Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that prevented the
licensee from uploading their reportable transactions, upon correction of the
problem, the licensee shall upload every reportable transaction from every
business day the problem had existed.
6. Section 206.07 DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE (B) (1) through (3)
notwithstanding, the police department may, upon presentation of extenuating
circumstances, delay the implementation of the daily reporting penalty.
206.08 RECEIPT REQUIRED.
Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in every reportable transaction
and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three (3) years. The receipt must include at
least the following information:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the licensed business.
B. The date and time the item was received by the licensee.
C. Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the transaction.
D. An accurate description of each item received including, but not limited to, any
trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other
identifying mark on such an item.
E. The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee that conducted the
transaction.
F. The amount advanced or paid.
G. The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and charges.
H. The last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed by the pledgor
without risk that the item will be sold, and the amount necessary to redeem the pawned
item on that date.
I. The full name, current residence address, current residence telephone number, and date
of birth of the pledgor or seller.
J. The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of
identification of the seller:
a. Current valid Minnesota driver's license.
b. Current valid Minnesota identification card.
c. Current valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by another state
or province of Canada.
K. Description of the pledgor or seller including approximate sex, height, weight, race, color
of eyes and color of hair.
Page 8 of 10
L. The signature of the pledgor or seller.
M. All printed statements as required by state statute 325J.04 subdivision 2, or any other
applicable statutes.
206.09 REDEMPTION PERIOD.
Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an item for security must have a minimum of
ninety (90) days from the date of that transaction to redeem the item before it may be
forfeited and sold. During the ninety (90) day holding period, items may not be removed
from the licensed location except as provided in section 206.15 BUSINESS AT ONE
PLACE. Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any item to anyone other than the person
to whom the receipt was issued or, to any person identified in a written and notarized
authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or to a person identified in
writing by the pledgor at the time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledgor, or with
approval of the police license inspector. Written authorization for release of property to
persons other than original pledgor must be maintained along with original transaction
record in accordance with RECORDS REQUIRED (10).
206.10 HOLDING PERIOD.
Any item purchased or accepted in trade by a licensee must not be sold or otherwise
transferred for thirty (30) days from the date of the transaction. An individual may redeem an
item seventy-two (72) hours after the item was received on deposit, excluding Sundays and
legal holidays.
206.11 POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.
A. Investigative hold. Whenever a law enforcement official from the police department
verbally notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from
the premises. The investigative hold shall be confirmed in writing by the police
department within seventy-two (72) hours and will remain in effect for fifteen (15) days
from the date of initial notification, or until the investigative order is canceled, or until an
order to hold/confiscate is issued, pursuant to section 206.11 POLICE ORDER TO
HOLD PROPERTY (B), whichever comes first.
B. Order to hold. Whenever the chief of police, or the chief's designee, notifies a licensee
not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the licensed premises until
authorized to be released by the chief or the chief's designee. The order to hold shall
expire ninety (90) days from the date it is placed unless the chief of police or the chief's
designee determines the hold is still necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.
C. Order to confiscate. If an item is identified as stolen or evidence in a criminal case, the
chief or chief's designee may:
1. Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to a written order from
the chief or the chief's designee, or
2. Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in section 206.11 POLICE
ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY (B), and leave it at the premises for which the
license was issued. When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall provide
identification upon request of the licensee, and shall provide the licensee the name
and phone number of the police department’s confiscating agency and investigator,
and the case number related to the confiscation. When an order to hold/confiscate
is no longer necessary, the chief of police, or chief's designee shall so notify the
licensee.
Page 9 of 10
206.12 INSPECTION OF ITEMS.
At all times during the terms of the license, the licensee must allow the city’s police
department officials to enter the premises where the licensed business is located, including
all off-site storage facilities as authorized in section 206.16
BUSINESS AT ONLY ONE PLACE, during normal business hours for the purpose of
inspecting such premises and inspecting the items, ware and merchandise and records
therein to verify compliance with this chapter or other applicable laws.
206.13 LABEL REQUIRED.
Licensees must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned, purchased or received
in inventory from any reportable transaction. Permanently recorded on this label must be the
number or name that identifies the transaction in the shop's records, the transaction date,
the name of the item and the description or the model and serial number of the item as
reported to the police department, whichever is applicable, and the date the item is out of
pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not be re-used.
206.14 PROHIBITED ACTS.
A. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may pawn or sell or attempt to pawn or
sell goods with any licensee, nor may any licensee receive any goods from a person
under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. No licensee may receive any goods from a person of unsound mind or an intoxicated
person.
1. No licensee may receive any goods, unless the seller presents identification in
the form of a valid driver's license, a valid State of Minnesota identification card,
or current valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by the state or
providence of residency of the person from whom the item was received.
2. No licensee may receive any item of property that possesses an altered or
obliterated serial number or operation identification number or any item of
property that has had its serial number removed.
3. No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of
property not their own; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or
deposit the property of another, whether with permission or without; nor shall any
person pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property in
which another has a security interest; with any licensee. Nor may any licensee
receive the same.
4. No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of
property with any licensee shall give a false or fictitious name; nor give a false
date of birth; nor give a false or out of date address of residence or telephone
number; nor present a false or altered identification, or the identification of
another; to any licensee.
206.15 DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
A. Any license under this chapter may be denied, suspended or revoked for one or
more of the following reasons:
1. The proposed use does not comply with any applicable zoning code.
2. The proposed use does not comply with any health, building, building
maintenance or other provisions of this Code of Ordinances or state law.
Page 10 of 10
3. The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one or more provisions of this
chapter or any of its employees.
4. The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon
whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a background or financial
investigation due to the unavailability of information.
5. Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing or renewing a license.
6. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the application and
investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant's business.
7. Violation within the preceding five (5) years, of any law relating to theft, damage
or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance, or operation of a
business.
8. The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not qualify for a
license under the terms of this chapter.
9. The attempted assignment of the license by the licensee.
206.16 BUSINESS AT ONLY ONE PLACE.
A license under this chapter authorizes the licensee to carry on its business only at the
permanent place of business designated in the license. However, upon written request, the
police license inspector may approve an off-site locked and secured storage facility. The
licensee shall permit inspection of the facility in accordance with section 206.12
INSPECTION OF ITEMS. All provisions of this chapter regarding record keeping and
reporting apply to the facility and its contents. Property shall be stored in compliance with all
provisions of the city code. The licensee must either own the building in which the business
is conducted, and any approved offsite storage facility, or have a lease on the business
premise that extends for more than six (6) months.
206.17 SEPARABILITY.
Should any section, subsection, clause or other provision of this chapter be declared by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid such decision shall not effect the validity of the
ordinance as a whole or any part other than the part so declared invalid.
206.18 PENALITY.
Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than One Thousand and
no/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollars or by imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days or both
plus costs of prosecution in either case. This penalty is in addition to but not in limitation of
the potential suspension or revocation of the license granted hereunder.
206.19 OTHER LAWS.
The provisions of this Ordinance are not intended and should not be construed as restricting
the applicability of any other ordinance, state or federal laws, including without limitation,
state or federal laws regulating the purchase, storage and sale of firearms. To the extent
that such ordinances and laws cannot be applied consistently with this Ordinance the most
restrictive ordinance or law shall be applied.
206.20 EFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance shall take effect and be enforced from and after its passage and publication
according to law.
Adopted this 11th day of February , 2003.
Summary ran on February 20, 2003 in Chisago County Press
(August 4, 1994, June 25, 2013)
LAWFUL GAMBLING
Ordinance Chpt. 207
CITY OF CHISAGO CITY
An ordinance authorizing and regulating lawful gambling under the City Code of the City of Chisago City.
The City Council of Chisago City does ordain:
CHAPTER 207; LAWFUL GAMBLING
Section 207.01 Lawful gambling permitted.
1. Lawful gambling, as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 349.12 is permitted in the City of
Chisago City if the organization conducting such gambling meets the following criteria:
A. Is licensed by the Minnesota Gambling control Board, and is in compliance with
Minnesota Statute Section 349.
B. Is a tax exempt organization pursuant to Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code or
has a Section 501(c) application pending with the Internal Revenue Service;
C. Maintains a primary place of business within the City or trade area and conducts more
than 50% of its activities within the City;
D. Has been in existence as a non-profit corporation or as a Section 501(c) tax exempt
organization for at least three (3) consecutive years prior to the date it begins its
gambling operation; and complies with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 207.02 Filing of records; inspections; access to records.
1. Every organization licensed to conduct gambling in the City of Chisago City shall file with the City
Administrator copies of all records and reports required to be filed with the Minnesota Lawful
Gambling Control Board pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 349, and the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder. The records and reports shall be due at the same time they are due to the
Board;
2. Every gambling event in the City of Chisago City conducted by an organization under Minnesota
Statutes, Chapter 349, shall be open to inspection by officers of the Lakes Area Police Department,
and
3. Employees of the Lakes Area Police Department may inspect, at any reasonable time, without notice
or search warrant, all records of a licensed organization, including gambling accounts and other bank
records which are required, by the Minnesota Lawful Gambling Board, to be maintained and
preserved.
Section 207.03 Approval of Premises Permit.
1. The Minnesota Lawful Gambling Board shall notify the City council in writing in the manner
required by law of each pending application for a lawful gambling license at least ten (10) days
before issuing the license. Each pending application for a license shall be approved or disapproved
by resolution of the City Council.
2. Any organization applying to the Gambling Control Board for a Premises Permit, Bingo Hall
License, or for the City shall, within ten (10) days of making such application, file the following
with the City Administrator.
A. A duplicate copy of the Gambling Control Board application along with all supporting
documents submitted to the Gambling Control Board;
B. A copy of the Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws of this organization;
C. The names and addresses of all officers and directors of the organization;
D. A copy of the organization’s written procedures and/or criteria for distribution of funds
derived from lawful gambling, a standardized application form and its written fiscal control
procedures; and
E. A copy of the Internal Revenue Service’s tax exempt letter.
F. Such evidence as the City may deem necessary to determine whether the organization
maintains its primary place of business within the city and carries out more than 50% of its
activities within the city.
3. Upon receipt of the materials required by paragraph 2, above, and not later than sixty (60) days from
receipt of notice from the Gambling Control Board, City staff shall investigate the applicant, and
based upon said investigation, the City Council shall act on the application. An investigative fee may
be charged. The cost to investigate the application may not exceed $100.
4. The action of the City Council to approve an application for a Premises Permit or a Bingo Hall
License within the City shall be by resolution. Failure to receive a majority affirmative vote of the
City Council shall consist as denial of this application.
5. A copy of the council resolution will be made available to the license applicant upon request.
6. Copies of any other reports or documents which are required to be subsequently filed by the
organization with the Gambling Control Board, including monthly financial statements shall be filed
with the City within ten (10) days of filing such materials with the Gambling Control Board.
7. To assure compliance with this Ordinance, the City may require a Premises Permit Holder or Bingo
Hall Licensee to provide copies of the records described in Minnesota Statutes Section 349.
Section 207.04 Locations
1. A lawful gambling organization that wants to offer electronic pull-tabs must sell paper pull-tabs at
that location. The use of the electronic gambling devices for bingo and pull tabs is limited to
locations that are:
A. Licensed for the on-sale or off-sale intoxicating liquor or 3.2 malt beverages except for
general food stores or drug stores that sell alcoholic beverages.
B. Bingo halls with a seating capacity of 100 or more as determined by the local fire code.
2. Lawful gambling under license issued by the Minnesota Lawful Gambling Control Board may be
conducted only at the following locations:
A. In the licensed organization’s hall where it has its regular meetings. No organization shall
rent, lease, or occupy, directly or indirectly, any other property for the purpose of conducting
gambling, except an on-sale establishment as permitted in this ordinance;
B. In licensed on-sale liquor, wine, and beer establishments; and
C. Notwithstanding Sub-sections A & B above, “raffle only” licenses may be approved for any
property location.
3. No location shall be approved for gambling unless it complies with the applicable zoning, building,
fire, and health ordinances of the City of Chisago City.
Section 207.05 Liquor Sales/lawful gambling at on-sale establishments
1. No sale, consumption or possession of liquor, wine, or 3.2 beer shall be permitted by a licensed
organization, except as permitted under a valid on-sale liquor, wine, or 3.2 beer license, or a bottle
club permit; provided further that no sale, consumption, or possession of liquor, wine, or 3.2 beer
shall be permitted in the room where a bingo session is taking place.
2. Lawful gambling at on-sale liquor, wine, and 3.2 beer establishments shall be conducted in
compliance with the following regulations:
A. Only license for pull-tabs and raffles may be issued, except where the licensed gambling
organization also hold the on-sale liquor, wine or 3.2 beer licenses for the premises, in which
case any lawful gambling license may be issued;
B. On-sale establishments shall be limited to two (2) licensed gambling organization at any one
time in the licensed premises or any rooms adjoining the premised under the same
management or ownership. No lease shall be effective between an on-sale establishment and
a gambling organization while there is still a lease in effect between the on-sale
establishment and another gambling organization;
C. Every agreement between and an on-sale premises for gambling shall be in the form of a
written lease. The written lease shall be the complete agreement between the parties, and
there shall be no unwritten terms or conditions. The lease shall specifically provide that the
lessee shall operate only after issuance of a license and shall be subject to the terms of this
ordinance;
D. A copy of any lease agreement between a non-profit organization and an on-sale licensee
shall be filed with the City Administrator with the gambling license application;
E. A lease agreement between a non-profit organization and an on-sale establishment shall
provide for rental payments based on a percentage of receipts of profits from lawful
gambling. There shall be no other compensation paid to the on-sale establishment directly
or indirectly, other than the rental fee provided in the lease agreement. There shall be four
(4) different operation types as follows:
i. A booth operation is a method of selling and redeeming disposable gambling
equipment by an employee of a licensed organization on the premise that the lawful
gambling organization leases or owns. Monthly rent for a booth operation may not
exceed 10% of gross profits for that month. However, the maximum combined rent for
all organizations conducting lawful gambling on the premises may not exceed $1750
per month.
ii. Bar operations is a method of selling and redeeming disposable gambling equipment
by an employee of the lessor within a leased premises which is licensed for the on-sale
of alcoholic beverages. Monthly rent may not exceed fifteen percent 15% of the gross
profits from electronic pull-tabs and electronic bingo for that month. Monthly rent
may not exceed twenty percent 20% of the gross profits from all other forms of lawful
gambling.
iii. Booth and bar operations for electronic linked bingo and electronic pull-tabs that are
operated for separate time periods within a business day by a nonprofit organization
and the lessor, monthly rent maybe no more than fifteen percent (15%) for the monthly
gross profits for the time periods operated by the lessor. The lessor is also responsible
for any cash shortages that occur during these periods of operation. Ten percent (10%)
for the monthly gross profits for the time periods operated by the lawful gambling
organization. The lawful gambling organization is responsible for any cash shortages
that occur during these periods of operation.
iv. Electronic linked bingo and electronic pull-tabs that are operated for separate periods
within a business day by a nonprofit organization and the time lessor, monthly rent
maybe no more than Fifteen percent (15%) of the monthly gross profits for the time
periods operated by the lessor. The lessor is also responsible for any cash shortages
that occur during these periods of operation. Ten percent (10%) of the monthly gross
profits for the time periods operated by the lawful gambling organization. The lawful
gambling organization is responsible for cash shortages during these periods of
operation.
F. No gambling employee may use intoxicating beverages while working on the sale of games;
G. No gambling funds shall be commingled with funds of the on-sale establishment
H. No food, drink, or entertainment discounts or other promotions shall be offered in
conjunction with the sale of gambling devises or changes;
I. The on-sale establishment shall allow the organizations to conduct gambling at any time
during its lawful business hours and shall prohibit gambling at any time other than its lawful
business hours;
J. The on-sale licensee shall make no agreements with any gambling equipment distributor
requiring the use of his or her gambling equipment in the establishment;
K. Sub-sections F, G, H, I, J and K shall not apply when the licensed gambling organization is
also the holder of the on-sale license for the establishment where the gambling is conducted;
L. The City Council may disapprove a gambling license application for an on-sale
establishment in which gambling violations have previously occurred.
Section 207.06 Gambling Manager
1. Before any person may serve as a gambling manager for any organization licensed to conduct
gambling in the City of Chisago City, that person must have satisfactorily completed a course of
instruction conducted by the Minnesota Lawful Control Board on the duties and responsibilities of
the gambling manager.
Section 207.07 Trade Area Requirement
1. Unless specifically permitted by the City Council in accordance with sub-paragraph 3 below, every
organization conducting lawful gambling within the jurisdiction of the City of Chisago City shall
annually spend at least ninety percent (90%) of its expenditures for lawful purposes on lawful
purposes conducted or located within the City’s trade area.
2. The City of Chisago City’s “Trade Area” is defined as the area located within the Chisago City
limits and each city and township contiguous to the city per State Statue 349.213.
3. An organization may apply to the City Council for special permission to expend less than 90% of its
expenditures for lawful purposes within the City’s trade area on a case by case basis. The City
Council shall have complete discretion in deciding whether or not to grant such permission.
Section 207.08 Gambling exempt from stated licensing requirements.
1. Organizations which conduct lawful gambling which is exempt from state gambling licensing
requirement pursuant to Minnesota Statute Section 349.166 may conduct such gambling within the
City upon receipt of a permit from the City; except this requirement does not apply to door prized or
raffles and bingo where total prizes are less than $1500 in a calendar year;
2. An application for such a permit shall be made at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of such
gambling shall be conducted. The application shall contain the following:
A. The name of the organization.
B. The address of the organization;
C. The place where such gambling will occur;
D. The total prizes to be awarded.
3. The organization shall pay a permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each day gambling is conducted;
4. Permits for all classes of gambling activities may be approved;
5. Lawful gambling by an organization exempt form licensing may be conducted on the premises of a
licensed on-sale liquor, wine, or beer establishment or a bottle club, subject to the restrictions in this
chapter relating to the conduct of gambling in on-sale establishments and bottle clubs;
6. Except as provided in sub-section 5 above, the sale, consumption, and possession of intoxicating
liquor at the gambling event by an exempt organization shall be prohibited. However, 3.2 beer may
be served and consumed, but only under a valid temporary on-sale beer license;
7. The organization shall comply with all statutory requirements for an exempt organization, including
the thirty (30) day notice requirement to the City, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 349.166;
8. Within thirty (30) days after filing any reports with the Gambling Control Board, the organization
shall file a copy of such reports with the City; and
9. The provisions relating to “law enforcement and administrative costs” set forth in Section 207.08
shall not apply to gambling permitted pursuant to this Section. All other provisions of this Chapter
apply to such organizations.
Section 207.09 Lawful Gambling Contribution
1. Lawful gambling organizations must contribute ten percent per year of their net profits derived from
lawful gambling conducted at premises within the city's jurisdiction to a fund administered and
regulated by the responsible local unit of government without cost to such fund. This fund must be
disbursed by the local unit of government for (i) charitable contributions as defined in section
349.12, subdivision 7a, or (ii) police, fire, and other emergency or public safety-related services,
equipment, and training, excluding pension obligations. A contribution made by an organization is
not considered an expenditure to the city nor a tax under section 297E.02, and is valid and lawful.
The city after receiving and making expenditures authorized under this clause must by March 15 of
each year file a report with the lawful gambling board, on a form the board prescribes, that lists all
such revenues collected, interest received on fund balances, and expenditures for the previous
calendar year.
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the City Council of the City of Chisago City this 25th day of June 2013
.
Section 208 Adult Establishments
Approved by Council on May 14, 2002
- 1 -
208 ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS
City of Chisago City, Chisago County, Minnesota
An ordinance to enact Section 208.00 of the Chisago City Code of Ordinances to
administer and regulate the Adult Establishments in the public interest
THE COUNCIL OF CHISAGO CITY ORDAINS:
Section 208.00 entitled Adult Establishments is hereby added as Chapter 208.00
of the City’s Code of Ordinances, (hereafter (“this Code”) to read as follows:
CHAPTER 208 ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS
208.01 Findings and Purpose. A study conducted by the Minnesota Attorney General has
examined the impact that sexually orientated adult establishments have in cities in Minnesota
and throughout the country. This study concluded that adult establishments have an adverse
impact on surrounding neighborhoods. Those impacts include increased crime rates, lower
property values, increased transiency, neighborhood blight and potential health risks. Based on
these studies and findings, the City Council concludes:
A. The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be promoted by the city
adopting regulations governing adult establishments.
B. Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of the types set forth above.
C. The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend to diminish if adult
establishments are governed by location requirements, licensing requirements and
health requirements.
D. It is not the intent to prohibit adult establishments from having a reasonable opportunity
to locate in the city.
208.02 Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter only, the words and phrases below are
defined as follows:
1. Adult Establishment. A business engaged in any of the following activities or
which utilizes any of the following business procedures or practices:
a) A business that is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to
which minors are specifically excluded from patronage, either by operation or
law or by the owners of such business.
b) Any business that has a substantial or significant portion of its floor space
that is characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, exposing,
describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
Section 208 Adult Establishments
Approved by Council on May 14, 2002
- 2 -
An adult establishment includes, but is not limited to, any adult use as defined in this
chapter.
2. Adult Use. An adult use is any of the activities and businesses described below:
a) Adult Body Painting Studio. An establishment or business, which provides
the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or nontransparent,
to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or
partially nude in terms of "specified anatomical areas."
b) Adult Bookstore. A building or portion of a building over 65 sq. feet used for
the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides,
records, audio tape, videotape or motion picture film if such building or
portion of a building is not open to the public generally but only to one or
more classes of the public excluding any minor by reason of age or if a
substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified
anatomical areas."
c) Adult Cabaret. A building or portion of a building used for providing dancing
or other live entertainment, if such building or portion of a building excludes
minors by virtue of age or if such dancing or other live entertainment is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas."
d) Adult Companionship Establishment. A companionship establishment which
excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging
in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the
establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas."
e) Adult Conversation/Rap Parlor. A conversation/rap parlor which excludes
minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or
listening to conversation, talk or discussion, if such service is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas."
f) Adult Health/Sport Club. A health/sport club, which excludes minors by
reason of age, or if such club is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
g) Adult Hotel or Motel. Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel from which
minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is
presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or specified
anatomical areas."
Section 208 Adult Establishments
Approved by Council on May 14, 2002
- 3 -
h) Adult Massage Parlor, Health Club. A massage parlor or health club which
restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of
massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
i) Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater. A building or portion of a building with a
capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material if such building
or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of
age, or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by
patrons therein.
j) Adult Modeling Studio. An establishment whose major business is the
provision, to customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent
of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and
who engage in "specified sexual activities" or display "specified anatomical
areas" while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted by such customers.
k) Adult Motion Picture Arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or
i. invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
ii. mechanically controlled or operated still or motor picture machines,
projectors
iii. or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting
or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
l) Adult Motion Picture Theater. A building or portion of a building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material if such building
or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of
age or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by
patrons therein.
m) Adult Novelty Business. A business which has as a principal activity the sale
of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for
sexual stimulation.
n) Adult Sauna. A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which
provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing,
relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or
reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas."
o) Adult Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility. A building or portion of a building
used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a
cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of a building
restricts minors by reason of age or if the service provided by the steam
Section 208 Adult Establishments
Approved by Council on May 14, 2002
- 4 -
room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
3. Specified Anatomical Areas.
a) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, anus or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
b) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
4. Specified Sexual Activities.
a) Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oralanal
copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals,
flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of
excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the
following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy,
coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia,
piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or
b) Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence; or
c) Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or
masturbation; or
d) Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or
female breast; or
e) Situations involving a person or person, any of whom are nude, clad in
undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in
activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical
restraint of any such person; or
f) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an
animal by a human being; or
g) Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
h) Substantial or Significant. For purposes of this section, the phrase
"substantial or significant” means that at least 20 percent of the portion of the
floor area of the business (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms,
basement or any portion of the business not open to the public) is devoted to
items, merchandise or other material that is distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specific sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas."
208.03 Location. Adult establishments shall be located only in districts zoned Light Industrial
and shall be located at least 220 radial feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest point
Section 208 Adult Establishments
Approved by Council on May 14, 2002
- 5 -
of the building line of the property upon which the adult establishment is located, to the property
line of:
A. Residentially zoned property.
B. A licensed day care center.
C. A public or private educational facility classified as an elementary, junior high or senior
high.
D. A public park.
E. A church.
F. Movie Theater
G. Community Center
208.04 License Required. No person, firm or corporation shall own or operate an adult
establishment without having first secured a license as provided for in this chapter.
Subd. 1 Applications. The application for an adult establishment license shall be
submitted on a form provided by the city and shall include:
A. The name, residence, phone number and birth date of the applicant, if an
individual; and if a corporation, the names, residences, phone number and birth
dates of those owners holding more than five percent of the outstanding stock of
the corporation;
B. The name, address, phone number and birth date of the manager of such
operation, if different from the owners;
C. The address and legal description of the premises where the adult
establishment is to be located;
D. A statement detailing each gross misdemeanor or felony relating to a sex
offense and/or the operation of adult uses and related activities of which the
applicant, or in the case of a corporation, the owners of more than 0 % percent
of the outstanding stock of the corporation, have been convicted, and whether or
not the applicant has ever applied for or held a license to operate a similar type
of business in other communities;
E. The activities and types of business to be conducted;
F. The hours of operation; Monday thru Saturday 10 a.m. – 1 p.m., Sunday 10 a.m.
– 1 p.m.
G. The provisions made to restrict access by minors;
H. A building plan of the premises detailing all internal operations and activities.
Section 208 Adult Establishments
Approved by Council on May 14, 2002
- 6 -
Subd. 2 License Fees.
A. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a receipt from the city for
payment in full of the required fee for the license. All fees shall be paid into the
general fund of the municipality. Upon rejection of any applications for a license,
the Finance Director shall refund the amount paid.
B. All licenses shall expire on the last day of December in each year. Each license
shall be issued for a period of one year, except that if a portion of the license
year has elapsed when the application is made, a license may be issued for the
remainder of the year for a pro rated fee. In computing such fee, any unexpired
fraction of a month shall be counted as one month.
C. The annual license fee for adult establishments shall be $3,000.00 and may be
set from time to time by City Council resolution.
D. No part of the fee paid for any license shall be refunded except in the following
instances upon application to the City Administrator within 30 days from the
happening of the event. There shall be refunded a pro rata portion of the fee for
the unexpired period of the license, computed on a monthly basis, when
operation of the licensed business ceases not less than one month before
expiration of the license because of:
1) Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or other
catastrophe;
2) The licensee's illness;
3) The licensee's death;
4) A change in the legal status making it unlawful for the licensed
business to continue.
Subd. 3 Granting of License.
A. The city administrator or police chief, or such persons as they shall designate,
shall complete their investigation within 30 days after the city administrator
receives a complete application and all license and investigative fees.
B. If the application is for a renewal, the applicant shall be allowed to continue
business until the City Council has determined to renew or refuse to renew a
license.
C. If, after such investigation, it appears that the applicant and the place proposed
for the business are eligible for a license under the criteria set forth in this
subsection, then the license shall be issued by the City Council within 30 days
after the investigation is completed. Otherwise the license shall be denied.
D. Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be transferable
to another holder. Each license shall be issued only for the premises described
in the application. No license may be transferred to another premise without the
approval of the City Council. If the licensee is a partnership or a corporation, a
change in identity of any of the principals of the partnership or corporation shall
be deemed a transfer of the license. All adult establishments existing at the
Section 208 Adult Establishments
Approved by Council on May 14, 2002
- 7 -
time of the adoption of this subsection shall be required to obtain an annual
license.
E. An applicant for any license under this section shall deposit with the city at the
time an original application is submitted, $500 to cover the costs involved in
verifying the license application and to cover the expense of any investigation
needed to assure compliance with this section. If the investigation and
verification process is conducted outside the state of Minnesota, the city may
require the actual investigation costs not exceeding $1,500.
Subd. 4 Persons Ineligible for License. No license shall be granted to or held by
any person:
A. Under 18.
B. Who has been convicted of a felony or of violating any law of this state or local
ordinance relating to sex offenses and/or adult establishments.
C. Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is issued.
Subd. 5 Places Ineligible for License.
A. No license shall be granted for adult establishments on any premises where
the owner or the applicant has been convicted of a violation of this chapter, or
where any license hereunder has been revoked for cause, until one year has
elapsed after such conviction or revocation.
B. Except for uses lawfully existing at the time of this ordinance adoption, no
license shall be granted for any adult establishment, which is not in compliance
with the cities zoning regulations. Light Industrial District
Subd. 6 Conditions of License.
A. Every license shall be granted subject to the following conditions and all
other provisions of this chapter, and of any applicable sections of the code of
the city or state law. Or federal law whichever is more restrictive.
B. All licensed premises shall have the license posted in a conspicuous place
at all times.
C. No minor shall be permitted on the licensed premises, under age 18.
D. Any designated inspection officer of the city shall have the unqualified right
to enter, inspect and search the premises of a licensee during business
hours.
E. Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his/her place of
business and shall maintain conditions of order.
Subd. 7 Additional Conditions for Adult Cabarets. In addition to all other conditions
set forth in this ordinance, the following conditions apply to adult cabarets:
Section 208 Adult Establishments
Approved by Council on May 14, 2002
- 8 -
A. No owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret shall permit or allow
any dancer or other live entertainer to perform nude, in such a way as to
expose specified anatomical areas.
B. No dancer, live entertainer, patron or any other person shall expose
specified anatomical areas in an adult cabaret.
C. The owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret shall provide the
following information to the city concerning any persons who dance or
perform live entertainment at the adult cabaret: The person's name, home
address, home telephone number, date of birth and any aliases.
D. No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall be under 18 years old.
E. All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for
that purpose and which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor.
F. No dancer or performer shall perform any dance or live entertainment
closer than 10 feet to any patron.
G. No dancer or performer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron
shall fondle or caress any dancer or performer.
H. No patron shall pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or performer.
I. No dancer or performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
Subd. 8 Penalty.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more than the
maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.
B. Any violation of this chapter shall be a basis for the suspension or
revocation of any license granted hereunder. In the event that the City
Council proposes to revoke or suspend the license, the licensee shall be
notified in writing of the basis for such proposed revocation or
suspension. The Council shall hold a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether to revoke or suspend the license, which hearing
shall be within 30 days of the notice.
C. The City Council shall determine whether to suspend or revoke a license
within 30 days after the close of the hearing or within 60 days of the date
of the notice, whichever is sooner, and shall notify the licensee of its
decision within that period.
208.05 Severability. The provisions of this ordinance shall be severable. If any provision is
found to be void, the remaining provisions of the law shall remain valid, unless the court finds
the valid provisions of the law are so essentially connected with the void provisions so that the
court cannot presume the Council would have enacted the remaining valid provisions without
Section 208 Adult Establishments
Approved by Council on May 14, 2002
- 9 -
the void one; or unless the court finds the remaining valid provisions, standing alone are
incomplete and incapable of being executed in accordance with the legislative intent.
Page 1 of 3
ORDINANCE CHAPTER 209 SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS
City of Chisago City, Chisago County, Minnesota
An ordinance to enact Section 209.000 of the Chisago City Code of Ordinances to administer and regulate
the location of sexual offenders and sexual predators
THE CITY COUNCIL OF CHISAGO CITY ORDAINS:
Section 209.000 entitled SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS is hereby added as
Chapter 209.000 of the City’s Code of Ordinances, hereafter (“this code”) to read as follows:
ORDINANCE CHAPTER 209 SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS
209.010 Findings and Purpose.
A. Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence and sexual offenders who
prey on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual
offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and most
sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are
prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender
victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant.
B. It is the intent of this article to serve the City's compelling interest to promote, protect and
improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City by creating areas around
locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual
offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent
residence.
209.020 Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
A. Designated Offender means any person who has been convicted of a designated sexual offense,
regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, in which the victim of the offense was less
than 16 years of age, or has been categorized as a Level III sex offender under Minnesota Statute
244.052 or successor statute.
B. Designated Sexual Offense means a conviction, adjudication of delinquency, commitment under
Minnesota Statute 253B, or admission of guilt under oath without adjudication involving any of
the following offenses: 609.342; 609.343; 609.344; 609.345; 609.352; 609.365; 617.23; 617.246;
617.247; 617.293; successor statutes; or a similar offense from another state.
Page 2 of 3
C. Permanent Residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen
(14) or more consecutive days.
D. Temporary Residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of
fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the
person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a
period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the
person's permanent residence.
209.030 Sexual Offender and Sexual Predator Residence Prohibition; Penalties; Exceptions.
A. Prohibited Location of Residence. It is unlawful for any designated offender to establish a
permanent residence or temporary residence within 2,000 feet of any school, licensed day care
provider, or city park.
B. Measurement of Distance.
1) For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be
measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent residence or
temporary residence to nearest outer property line of a school, licensed day care provider or city
park.
2) The City Administrator shall maintain an official map showing prohibited locations as defined
by this Ordinance. The City Administrator shall update the map at least annually to reflect any
changes in the location of prohibited zones.
C. Penalties. A person who violates this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$1,000.00 or by confinement for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and
confinement. Each day a person maintains a residence in violation of this ordinance constitutes a
separate violation.
D. Exceptions. A designated offender residing within a prohibited area as described in (209.030, A)
does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply:
1) The person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and
registered the residence pursuant to Minnesota Statute 243.166, 243.167, or successor statute,
prior to December 27, 2011.
2) The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult.
3) The person is a minor.
4) The school or licensed day care provider within 2,000 feet of the persons permanent residence
was opened after the person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and
reported and registered the residence pursuant to Minnesota Statute 243.166 or 243.167.
5) The residence is also the primary residence of the person’s parents, grandparents, siblings,
spouse, or children.
6) The residence is a property owned or leased by the Minnesota Department of Corrections.
Page 3 of 3
209.040 Property Owners Prohibited From Renting Real Property To Certain Sexual Offenders
And Sexual Predators; Penalties.
A. It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with
the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person
prohibited from establishing such permanent residence of temporary residence pursuant to this
Chapter, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, is located within a
prohibited location zone described in Section (209.030, A).
B. A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this Section shall constitute a violation of
this Section, and shall subject the property owner to the code enforcement provisions and
procedures as provided in Chapter 209 of this Code, including the provisions of Chapter 209 that
allow the City to seek relief as otherwise provided by law.
C. If a property owner discovers or is informed that a tenant is a designated offender after signing a
lease or otherwise agreeing to let the offender reside on the property, the owner or property
manager may evict the offender.
209.050 Severability. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision of this Ordinance be
held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL ON DECEMEMBER 13, 2011
PUBLISHED ON DECEMBER 22, 2011
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 300 – Weapons Page 1
300.00 WEAPONS
300.01 PROHIBITION. No person shall fire off, discharge, explode or carry any Centerfire rifle
(high powered hunting rifles) or any other weapon or similar device within the City limits except
with the written permission of the City Council. No person shall display in public any toy, look-alike,
or imitation firearm without the red or orange tip required by Federal law at time of
manufacture.
300.02 PERMITTED AREAS. No person may fire off, discharge, explode or carry any
shotguns, muzzleloaders, bows, pistols, air guns, sling shots, or similar device within the City
limits except on privately owned parcels and at least 300 feet from any public road and 500 feet
from any building inhabited by people or animals. Any device not listed will be evaluated on a
case-by-case basis by the Lakes Area Police Department and reviewed by the City Council.
300.03 MINORS. It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian of any child under the age of 18
years to permit such child to carry or discharge any air gun, air rifle, sling shots, spring gun or
bow and arrow, within the City limits as permitted in Section 300.02 without direct adult
supervision.
300.04 DEFENSE. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use of firearms or
weapons by a person in the lawful defense of his person, his property or his family or for the
necessary enforcement of the law.
300.05 PENALTY. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Adopted: ___________. Amended: Ord. 265)
301-1
CHAPTER 301
MINORS - CURFEW
301.01 MINORS 16 YEARS AND UNDER. It shall be unlawful for any minor of the age of
16 years or under to loiter, idle or be in or upon the public streets, highways, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, places of entertainment, or
refreshment or any other unsupervised place within this Municipality between the hours of
10:00 P.M. on any day and 5:00 A.M. the following day unless said minor is on their way
home.
301.02 DEFENSE. This chapter shall not apply to such minor accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the said minor or
other adult person having the care and custody of the said minor or when the minor is
upon some necessary errand by permission or direction of said parent, guardian or other
adult person having the care and custody of the said minor, which permission shall be in
writing and signed by such parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and
custody of the said minor.
301.03 ADULTS LIABILITY. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of a minor to loiter, idle or be in or upon the public
streets, highways, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, places of
entertainment, or refreshment or any other unsupervised place within this Municipality
during the hours prohibited herein.
301.04 SCHOOL NIGHTS. The Mayor of the City may designate certain nights during the
school year as “School Nights’. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any
student under the ages of 18 years or to his or her parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of said minor who is lawfully going to, attending or returning
from any school function on any designated “School Night”.
301.05 PENALTY. Any minor of the ages set forth herein or any person having care and
custody of such minor who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 302 – Regulations to the Use of
Snowmobiles, All Terrain Vehicles, Off Road Vehicles & Motorcycles 1
Chapter 302
Regulations to the Use of
Snowmobiles, All Terrain Vehicles, Off Road Vehicles & Motorcycles
The Council of the City of Chisago City hereby ordains:
302.01 Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following terms have the meanings stated:
Subd. 1 Snowmobile. A self propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice and steered by skis or
runners.
All Terrain Vehicle (ATV):
Class 1 ATV. A motorized flotation-tired vehicles with at least three but no more than
six low pressure tires that have an engine displacement of less than 800 cubic centimeters
and total dry weight of less than 900 pounds.
Class 2 ATV. A motorized flotation-tired vehicles with at least three, but no more than
six, low pressure tires that have an engine displacement of less than 800 cubic
centimeters and total dry weight of 900-1,500 pounds.
Off-highway motorcycles (OHMs). A motorized off-highway vehicle traveling on two wheels.
OHMs have a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and have handlebars for
steering control. Motorcycles may be legal for highway use and still considered to be OHMs if
used for off-highway operation on trails or natural terrain.
Off-road vehicles (ORVs). A motorized recreational vehicle capable of cross-country travel on
natural terrain, such as four-wheel-drive trucks. This does not include vehicles such as
snowmobiles, ATVs, OHMs, motorcycles, watercraft or aircraft. Farm, logging, military,
emergency, law enforcement, utility, trail grooming, and construction vehicles are not considered
to be ORVs when used for their intended purpose.
Go-Cart. A motorized miniature vehicle capable of achieving speeds in excess of ten miles per
hour and commonly used on courses or racetracks specifically designed for such vehicles.
Golf Carts. A motor vehicle that is designed and manufactured for operation on a golf course for
sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of exceeding speeds of 20 miles per hour.
Golf carts shall have no increased power, wheel base or tire modifications from a standard
manufactured gas or electric golf cart.
Owner. A person, other than a lien holder, having the property in or title to a snowmobile, ATV
OHMs, ORV, or go-cart entitled to the use or possession thereof
Operate. To ride in or on and have control of the operation of the motorized snowmobile, ATV,
OHMs, ORV, or go-cart.
Operator. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile, ATV,
OHMs, ORV, or go-cart.
Deadman Throttle or Safety Throttle. A device which when pressure is removed from the engine
accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to stop supplying power.
Natural Terrain. Areas other than roadways, driveways (private or public), parking lots and other
areas the surface of which has been intentionally modified for motor vehicle operation thereon.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 302 – Regulations to the Use of
Snowmobiles, All Terrain Vehicles, Off Road Vehicles & Motorcycles 2
Established Riding Area. Means trails or area on a lot used by a motorized snowmobile, ATV,
OHMs, ORV, or go-cart.
Public Roads. Any township, municipal, county, state or federal road or highway.
Right–Of-Way. The entire strip of land traversed by any highway, street, county road or roadway
easement for the purpose of vehicle travel, and includes the entire width of the land dedicated or
acquired by law for right-of-away purposes.
Roadway. That portion of the improved right-of-way designed or ordinarily used for vehicle
travel, including the shoulder.
302.02 Permitted Uses. Except as specifically permitted and authorized herein, it is unlawful for any person to
operate a snowmobile, ATV, OHM, ORV, go-cart or golf cart under the following conditions within the
City:
A. On any right-of-way of any public highway, street, road, trail or alley, except that a snowmobile or
Class 1 ATV may operate upon the most right hand side of a municipal street or alley and may in
passing or making a left turn operate on other lanes which are used for vehicle traffic in the same
direction, for purposes of going to or returning from a non-highway or non-county area of permissible
operation, by the most direct route.
B. Snowmobiles may be operated upon the ditch bottom or the outside bank of trunk county state-aid and
county highways where such highways are so configured within the corporate limits.
C. On a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel.
D. On a trail not specified for snowmobile or ATV use.
E. Snowmobiles, ATVs, and ORVs operating in Chisago City not licensed as a motor vehicle.
F. On boulevards within any public right-of-way.
G. On private property of another without specific permission of the owner or person in control of the
property.
H. On any other public place except as may be specifically permitted by other provisions of the City.
I. Snowmobiles and Class 1 ATVs shall not exceed a speed of 20 m.p.h. on local city streets unless
specifically posted.
J. In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to disturb or interfere with the
peace and quiet of another persons.
K. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, the safety of any
person or property of any other person.
L. At any place while under the influence of alcohol or drugs as defined in Minn. Stat. 169.121.
M. Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the agricultural use of an all-terrain vehicle in the right-ofways,
as defined in the Minnesota Statue 84.92, Subd. 1d, or the use an all-terrain vehicle to maintain
permitted accesses over Public Road Right-of-way.
N. Nothing in this ordinance is intended to prohibit the crossing of a City or County Right-of-Way, which
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 302 – Regulations to the Use of
Snowmobiles, All Terrain Vehicles, Off Road Vehicles & Motorcycles 3
is otherwise allowed by Minnesota Statues 84.87 and 84.928.
O. Nothing in this ordinance is intended to prohibit the operation of a snowmobile upon the shoulder,
inside bank, or slope of any public highway, street, road, trail, or alley as permitted by Minnesota.
Statute 84.87, Subd. 3.
302.03 Crossing of Streets or Highways. A snowmobile or Class 1 ATV may make a direct crossing of a street or
highway, other than an interstate highway or freeway, provided:
A. The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the street or highway
and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing.
B. The snowmobile or Class 1 ATV first comes to a complete stop at the edge of the shoulder of the main
traveled way.
C. The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard.
D. In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing made only at the intersection of such street of
highway with another public street or highway.
E. If the crossing is made between the hours of 1/2 hour after sunset to 1/2 hour before sunrise or, in
conditions of reduced visibility, both front and rear lights shall be on.
302.04 Traffic Ordinance Applicable. City and State traffic regulations shall apply to the operation of snowmobiles
upon streets and highways, except for those relating to required equipment, those which by their nature
have no application and those inconsistent with the provisions herein.
302.05 Yielding Right-of-Way. No snowmobile or ATV shall enter any intersection without yielding the right-ofway
to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so cross the intersection as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
302.06 Operation. Persons under 18 years of age.
A. No person under 14 years of age shall operate a snowmobile or ATV on local city streets or the
roadway surface of highways or make a direct crossing of a trunk, county state aid, county highway, or
city streets.
B. A person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, may operate a snowmobile on local
city streets and highways as permitted under this Section and make a direct crossing of the streets and
highways only if he/she has in his/her immediate possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate
issued by the Commissioner, as provided by Minnesota Statute 84. 87.
C. Any person operating an ATV in Chisago City must possess a valid driver’s license or safety
certificate as required by the Minnesota Statute 84.9256.
D. A person under 18 years of age operating a snowmobile or ATV on local city streets or frozen waters
must wear approved helmet.
302.07 Golf carts and Class 1ATVs for the physically handicapped persons may be operated on city streets with a
city permit. The permit is a period not to exceed one year and may be renewed annually. The permits are
exempt from registration tax, but must display the triangular slow-moving vehicles emblem. A driver’s
license is not required.
302.08 Established Riding Area.
A. The use of an OHM, ORV, or go-cart is not allowed on a lot or parcel of land of less than one (1) acres
in size.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 302 – Regulations to the Use of
Snowmobiles, All Terrain Vehicles, Off Road Vehicles & Motorcycles 4
B. A motorized OHM, ORV, or go-cart may be used on a riding track on lots of five (5) acres or greater
in size located within the city on the condition that the riders shall adhere to the following:
1. Established Riding Area for a motorized dirt bike, go-cart, snowmobile and/or all-terrain vehicle is
to be located no closer than three hundred feet (300’) from a neighboring building occupied by
humans or livestock.
2. Dust and noise control measures are to be maintained. If other properties are adversely affected by
dust and noise due to motorized dirt bike, go-cart, snowmobile and/or all-terrain vehicles use. The
owners affected must file a written complaint with the City Police Department.
a). Dust control measures shall include, but are not limited to, the planting of eight foot (8’)
high coniferous trees planted ten feet (10’) on center, or the construction of a six foot (6’)
maximum board on board style fence.
b). A motorized OHM, ORV, or go-cart must have a factory approved exhaust. The noise
emission may not exceed one hundred five (105) decibels at a distance of 20 inches during
operation, and mufflers may not be altered to increase motor noise, or have a cut out bypass,
or similar device.
3. No more than four (4) riders may operate a motorized dirt bike, go-cart, snowmobile or all-terrain
vehicles on the property. A motorized dirt bike, go-cart, snowmobile, and/or all-terrain vehicle
may only be operated on the property during the following times: Monday through Friday, 9:00
a.m. through 7:00 p.m.; and Saturdays and Sundays, 10:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m. Operation of a
motorized dirt bike, go-cart, snowmobile and/or all-terrain vehicle must cease for a minimum of
one (1) hour after every two hours of riding.
4. Operation of a motorized dirt bike, go-cart, snowmobile and/or all-terrain vehicle shall not be
allowed on either primary or secondary septic sites.
302.09 Uses Specifically Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile or ATV under the
following conditions:
A. At any place while under the influence of alcohol or drugs as defined in Minnesota Statute 169.211
which is hereby incorporated herein by reference.
B. At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all surrounding circumstances.
C. At any place in a careless, reckless, or negligent manner or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or
safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to
any person or property.
D. No person shall operate a snowmobile or Class 1 ATV on any street in the City between the hours of
12:01 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., except going to or from their usual place of abode at a reduced speed and
using the most direct route.
E. So as to tow any person or thing except through use of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the
snowmobile or ATV.
F. Within 100 feet of any fisherman, pedestrian, skating rink or sliding area where the operation would
conflict with use or endanger other persons or property, or within 100 feet of any dwelling which is
usually occupied by one or more persons.
302.10 Equipment Required. It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile or ATV any place within the
limits of the City unless it is equipped with the following:
A. Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of operation of the motor to
the minimum necessary for operation.
B. No person shall use a muffler cut-out, bypass straight pipe or similar device on a snowmobile or ATV
motor.
Chisago City Municipal Code
Chapter 302 – Regulations to the Use of
Snowmobiles, All Terrain Vehicles, Off Road Vehicles & Motorcycles 5
C. Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the snowmobile or ATV under any
conditions of operation.
D. A safety or so-called “deadman” throttle in operating condition.
E. When operated between the hours of 1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise or at a time of
reduced visibility at least one clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient intensity to reveal
persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness and under
normal atmospheric conditions. The headlamp shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into
the eyes of an oncoming snowmobile or ATV operator. It shall also be equipped with at least one red
tail lamp having am minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible
from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.
F. Reflective material at least 16 inches square on each side, forward of the handlebars or steering device
of a snowmobile or ATV and at the highest practical point on any towed object, as to reflect light at a
90 degree angle.
302.11 Ignition Lock. Every person leaving a snowmobile or ATV on a public place or way shall lock the ignition,
and remove and take the keys with them.
302.12 Emergencies. Operation Permitted: Notwithstanding any other provisions in this Section, a snowmobile
may be operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time and at locations where
snow upon the roadways renders travel by an automobile impractical.
302.13 Uses Prohibited. Animals. It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal with a
snowmobile or ATV.
302.14 Exemptions
The following uses are exempt from this Ordinance:
A. Any motorized vehicles used for the purpose of property maintenance.
B. Any agent or employee of any road authority, law enforcement or public safety agency, or any agent or
employee of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources or any other governmental body in
conducting official business.
C. Any organized track-racing event that is required to be registered with the DNR.
302.15 Signal from Officer to Stop. It is unlawful for a snowmobile operator, after having received a visual or
audible signal from a law enforcement officer, to operate the vehicle in willful or wanton disregard of the
signal to stop, interfere with or endanger the law enforcement officer or any other person or vehicle, or
increase speed or attempt to flee or elude the officer. Any person attempting to flee an officer in or on any
motorized vehicle is guilty of a gross misdemeanor and punishable thereto.
302.16 Penalty for Violation. Any person who violates the provisions of Chapter 302, excluding Subd. 302.12, of
the City Code shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $200.00. Any person
who violates Subd. 302.12 shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and punishable according to Minnesota
Statute 609.487.
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication.
(Ordinance Amendment Chapter 302: 11/10/2008)
CHAPTER 303
ABANDONED, JUNK AND UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES
303.01 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS. Except as may otherwise be provided
in or clearly implied by context of this Chapter, all terms shall be given a commonly
accepted definition. The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the
singular. The following terms shall have the definitions given to them:
(a) Abandoned Vehicle. "Abandoned Vehicle" means a motor vehicle that:
1. has remained:
i. For a period of more than 48 hours on any property owned
or controlled by a unit of government or on any street or
highway or more than 4 hours on that property when it is
properly posted; or on private property for thirty (30) days
or more, without the consent of the person in control of the
property; and
ii. Lacks vital component parts or is in inoperable condition
such that it has no substantial potential for further use
consistent with its usual functions, unless it is kept in an
enclosed garage or storage building.
2. Classic cars or pioneer cars as defined in Minnesota Statute
168.10 are not considered abandoned vehicles. Vehicles on the
premises of junk yards and automobile grave yards that are
defined, maintained and licensed in accordance with Minnesota
Statute 161.242, or that are licensed and maintained in
accordance with local laws and zoning regulations, are not
considered abandoned vehicles. A vehicle being held for storage
by agreement or being held under police authority or pursuant to a
Writ or Court Order is not considered abandoned, nor may it be
processed as abandoned while the police hold, Writ or court order
is in effect.
(b) Junk Vehicle. A “junk vehicle” means a motor vehicle that:
1. is three years old or older;
2. is extensively damaged, with the damage including such
things as broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train, or transmission;
3. is apparently inoperable;
4. does not have a valid, current registration plate; and
5. has an approximate fair market value equal only to the
approximate value of the scrap in it.
(c) Unauthorized Vehicle. An “unauthorized vehicle” means a motor
that:
1. is subject to removal and impoundment pursuant to Chapter 141
of the City Code, Minnesota Statute 169.041, or Minnesota
Statute 168B.04, Subd. 2, including, but not limited to the
removal of a motor
vehicle from public property for a parking or traffic violation four (4)
hours after issuance of the traffic ticket or citation;
2. is parked in violation of snow emergency regulations, blocking
driveways, alleys, or fire hydrants;
3. is parked in bus lanes or bus stops during hours when parking is
prohibited;
4. is parked within thirty (30) feet of a stop sign and visually blocking
the stop sign;
5. is parked in a handicapped transfer zone or handicapped parking
space without a handicapped parking certificate or license plates;
6. is parked in a area that has been posted with temporary restricted
parking;
7. is parked within the right of way of a controlled access highway or
within the travel portion of a public street when travel is allowed
there;
8. is unlawfully parked in a zone that is restricted by posted signs to
use by fire, police, public safety emergency vehicles,
9. a law enforcement official has probable cause to believe
constitutes or contains evidence of a crime;
10. the driver, operator, or person in physical control of the vehicle
has been taken into custody and the vehicle is impounded for
safe keeping;
11. a law enforcement official has probable cause to believe that the
owner, operator, or person in physical control of the vehicle has
failed to respond to five or more citations for parking or traffic
offenses;
12. is unlawfully parked and presents a risk by a lawfully parked
vehicle;
13. is parked on a school day during prohibited hours in a school
zone on a public street where official signs prohibit parking;
14. has been left unattended on a public highway and properly tagged
by a peace officer after four hours;
15. is unattended and located so as to constitute an accident or traffic
hazard to the traveling public as determined by a peace officer;
16. is left unattended in a parking facility or other public property
owned and controlled by a unit of government, that has been
properly posted after four hours; or
17. is left unattended on private property not owned or occupied by
the owner of the motor vehicle for the time period stated below:
i. property that is a single family or duplex residential property,
immediately;
ii. property that is private, non-residential property, properly
posted, immediately;
iii. property that is private, non-residential property not posted
after 24 hours; or
iv. property that is any residential property, property posted,
immediately.
(d) Agency. “Agency” means the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
(e) Department. “Department” means the Minnesota Department of Public
Safety.
(f) Impound. “Impound” means take and hold the vehicle in legal custody.
There are two types of impounds, pubic and non-public.
(g) Impound Lot Operator or Operator. “Impound Lot Operator” means a
person who engages in impounding or storing, usually temporarily,
unauthorized or abandoned vehicles. “Operator” means an operator of a
public or non-public impound lot, regardless of whether a tow-truck
service is provided.
(h) Motor Vehicle or Vehicle. "Motor Vehicle" or "Vehicle" means every
vehicle which is self-propelled and also means trailers or wagons
requiring licenses under applicable state law.
(i) Motor Vehicle Waste. “Motor Vehicle Waste” means solid waste and
liquid waste derived in the operation of or in the recycling of a motor
vehicle, including such things as tires and used motor oil, but excluding
scrap metal.
(j) Non-Public Impound Lot. “Non-public Impound Lot” means an impound
lot that is not a public impound lot.
(k) Public Impound Lot. “Public Impound Lot” means an impound lot owned
by or contracting with the City of Chisago City.
(l) Vital Component Parts. “Vital Component Parts” means those parts of a
motor vehicle that are essential to the mechanical functioning of the
vehicle, including such things as the motor, drive train, and wheels.
303.02 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.
(a) Abandoned or Junk Vehicles. The City of Chisago City and its police
department may take into custody and impound any abandoned or junk
vehicles.
(b) Unauthorized Vehicles. The City of Chisago City and its police
department may take into custody and impound any unauthorized vehicle
as defined in Section
303.01(c).
303.03 SALE; WAITING PERIODS.
(a) Sale of abandoned and junk vehicles. An impounded vehicle is eligible
for disposal or sale, fifteen (15) days after notice to the owner, if the
vehicle is determined to be:
1. A junk vehicle except that it may have a valid, current registration
plate and still be eligible for disposal or sale under this
subdivision; or
2. An abandoned vehicle.
(b) Sale of unauthorized vehicles. An impounded vehicle is eligible for
disposal or sale forty-five (45) days after notice to the owner, if the vehicle is determined to be
an unauthorized vehicle.
(c) Notice of Taking and Sale.
1. Contents; Notice Given Within Ten (10) Days. When an
impounded vehicle is taken into custody, the City of Chisago City
shall give notice of the taking within ten (10) days. The notice
shall:
i. Set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make,
model and serial number of the impounded motor vehicle if
such information can be reasonably obtained and the place
where the vehicle is being held;
ii. Inform the owner and any lien holders of their right to reclaim
the vehicle; and
iii. State that failure of the owner or lien holders to exercise their
right to reclaim the vehicle and contents within the appropriate
time allowed under Section 303.03 shall be deemed a waiver
by them of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle and
consent to the transfer of title to and disposal or sale of the
vehicle and contents.
2. Notice by Mail or Publication. The notice shall be sent by mail to
the registered owner, if any, of any impounded vehicle and to all
readily identifiable lien holders of record. If it is impossible to
determine with reasonable certainty that the identity and address
of the registered owner and all lien holders, the notice shall be
published once in a newspaper general circulation in the area
where the motor vehicle was towed from or abandoned.
Published notices may be grouped together for convenience and
economy.
3. Unauthorized vehicles; If an unauthorized vehicle remains
unclaimed after thirty (30) days from the date that notice was sent,
a second notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested to the registered owner, if any, of the unauthorized
vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien holders of record.
303.04 RIGHT TO RECLAIM
(a) Payment of charges. The owner or any lien holder of an impounded
vehicle shall have a right to reclaim such vehicle from the City of Chisago
City or its contracted impound lot operator taking such vehicle into
custody upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from
taking the vehicle into custody within fifteen (15) or forty-five (45) days as
applicable under and after notice as required by Section 303.03.
(b) Lien Holders. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair any lien
of a garagekeeper under the laws of the State of Minnesota, or the right a
lien holder to foreclose. For the purposes of this section “Garagekeeper”
is an operator of a parking place or establishment, operator of a storage
facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
303.05 DISPOSITION BY IMPOUND LOT
(a) Auction or Sale.
1. If an abandoned, junk or unauthorized vehicle and contents taken
into custody by a unit of government or contracted impound lot is
not reclaimed under Section 303.09, it may be disposed of or sold
at auction or sale when eligible pursuant to the previous sections.
2. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in the form prescribed by
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient title to
dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser
to register the vehicle and receive a Certificate of Title, free and
clear of all liens and claims of ownership. Before such a vehicle is
issued a new Certificate of Title, it must receive a motor vehicle
safety check.
(b) The City of Chisago City or its contracted impound lot shall be disposed
of in accordance with Section 303.06.
(c) Sale Proceeds-Public entities, From the proceeds of a sale under this
section by the City of Chisago City or its contracted impound lot of an
abandoned, junk or unauthorized vehicle, the City of Chisago City shall
reimburse itself for the costs of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle,
and all administrative, notice and publication costs incurred in handling
the vehicle pursuant to the previous sections. Any remainder from the
proceeds of the sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled
lien holder for ninety (90) days and then shall be deposited in the treasury
of the City of Chisago City.
303.06 DISPOSAL AUTHORITY. The City of Chisago City may contract with others or
may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the inventory of impounded motor
vehicles and abandoned scrap metal and, if no bids are received, may utilize its own
equipment and personnel for the collection, storage and transportation of these vehicles
and abandoned scrap metal; provided however, that the City may utilize its own
equipment and personnel for the collection and storage of not more than five (5)
abandoned or unauthorized vehicles without advertising for or receiving bids in any 120
days.
303.07 CONTRACTS ; REIMBURSEMENT BY AGENCY.
(a) Agency review and approval. If the City enters into a contract with a
person licensed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency pursuant to
this chapter or a contract pursuant to the previous section, the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency may review the contract to determine whether it
conforms to the agencies plan for solid waste management and its
compliance with agency rules. If the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
approves the contract, the City may seek reimbursement for costs
incurred under the contract that have not been reimbursed.
(b) City Equipment. If the City of Chisago uses its own equipment and
personnel and the use of the equipment and personnel conforms to the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s plan for solid waste management
and is in compliance with agency rules, the City may be reimbursed by
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency for reasonable costs incurred
which it had not reimbursed.
303.08 PENALTIES. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
303.09. PUBLIC NUISANCE. Without limiting any other remedy or course of action
available to the City for violations of this Ordinance, abandoned, junk and unauthorized
motor vehicles are declared public nuisances affecting public peace and safety. The
enforcement of this section of possible abatement of the nuisance is provided for in
Chisago City Chapter 150.04.
303.01 EFFECTIVE DATE. The provisions of this Order shall take effect upon its
passage and publication as provided by Minnesota Statute.
400-1
CHAPTER 400
MISDEMEANORS
400.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
The acts, types and causes of behavior enumerated in this chapter constitute misdemeanors
and are punishable as provided in chapter 2.11, subd. 1 of this code. The following provisions
and section of Minnesota Statutes chapter 609, the criminal code of 1963, as amended, are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code as if fully set forth herein.
400.02 CRIMES AGAINST THE PERSON.
Subd. 1 MSA 609.22
Assault.
400.03 THEFT AND RELATED CRIMES.
Subd. 1 MSA 609.52
Theft where the value of the property or services is $100.00 or less.
Subd. 2 MSA 609.535
Issuance of worthless check.
Subd. 3 MSA 609.545
Mis-using credit card to secure services.
400.04 DAMAGE OR TRESPASS TO PROPERTY.
Subd. 1 MSA 609.575
Negligent fires.
Subd. 2 MSA 609.605
Trespasses and other acts.
400.05 CRIMES AGAINSTPUBLIC SAFETY AND HEALTH.
Subd. 1 MSA 609.66
Dangerous weapons.
Subd. 2 MSA 609.675
Exposure of unused refrigerator or contain to children.
Subd. 3 MSA 609.68
Unlawful deposit of garbage.
400.06 PUBLIC MISCONDUCT OR NUISANCE.
Subd. 1 MSA 609.705
Unlawful assembly.
Subd. 2 MSA 609.715
Presence at unlawful assembly.
Subd. 3 MSA 609.72
Disorderly conduct.
Subd. 4 MSA 609.725
400-2
Vagrancy.
Subd. 5 MSA 609.74
Public nuisance.
Subd. 6 MSA 609.745
Permitting public nuisance.
400.07 GAMBLING.
Subd. 1 MSA 609.755
Acts of or relating to gambling.
Zoning Code
Chisago City, Minnesota
Adopted: January 2000
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 1 – Purpose of Zoning Ordinance Page 1
1.00 PURPOSE OF ZONING ORDINANCE
1.01 TITLE
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Chisago City” or the “Zoning Ordinance”.
1.02 PURPOSE OF ZONING ORDINANCE
The purpose of this Title is to protect and promote the public health, safety, morals,
peace, prosperity, and the general community welfare; to encourage orderly, compatible
and beneficial uses of land in a manner that will be of benefit to the general community
as well as to neighborhoods and individuals; to enhance the aesthetic quality of the
natural and built environment of the community which, in addition to being a general
concern to the citizenry, contribute to the recreational, and visitor oriented sector of the
local economy; to secure freedom of choice and initiative to all persons in the use of
privately owned land, insofar as that use is not harmful to the public health, safety, or
general community welfare; to prevent unnecessary regulation or arbitrary restrictions in
the exercise of private initiative and property use; to minimize conflicts between private
individuals or groups, or other conflicts which might result from incompatible or
inappropriate adjacent land uses; and to establish simple and readily available
procedures through which private individuals or group, the City Administrator, Zoning
Administrator, the Planning Commission, or the City Council may initiate zoning changes
as evolving community needs dictate. Further, the purpose of these regulations is to
establish land use regulations and a zoning plan for the City of Chisago City deemed
necessary to encourage the most socially desirable use of the land; to maintain and
enhance the desirable character of the downtown and neighborhoods; to provide open
space for light and air, and to prevent and fight fires; to prevent residential congestion; to
promote orderly community development; to lessen traffic congestion; to facilitate
adequate provisions for community utilities such as transportation, schools, parks,
sewer, water and storm drain facilities; to prevent pollution of air, water, and other
natural resources; and to otherwise promote health, safety, and the general community
welfare all in accordance with the City of Chisago City Comprehensive Plan.
1.03 CONTENTS OF ZONING ORDINANCE
The zoning ordinance consists of a zoning map designating certain zoning districts, and
a set of regulations controlling the uses of land, the density of population, and the
locations, the height and the bulk of structures, the land coverage and the open spaces
around structures, the function and the appearance of certain uses and structures, the
areas and the dimensions of sites; and requirements for off-street parking and off-street
loading facilities within such districts.
1.04 PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE
The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Chisago City has been prepared in accordance with
the following planning principles and standards:
A. The ordinance is based on land use and development policies contained in the
City of Chisago City Comprehensive Plan as to the general pattern of future land
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 1 – Purpose of Zoning Ordinance Page 2
uses, population densities, and other planning principles. It is based on the
Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map, insofar as zoning districts established
herein generally correspond to the land use designations of said map.
Amendments to the ordinance are to be in general accordance and consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan.
B. The ordinance recognizes the need of all uses to be protected from other uses,
which are unrelated or incompatible.
C. The ordinance recognizes the importance of order and beauty in the overall
character and appearance of Chisago City and to the public welfare and the
general economy. These values are sought to be achieved through the review of
the siting, function, landscaping, and general appearance of selected uses,
structures and buildings. Such provisions are intended to provide the minimum
amount of regulation necessary to encourage orderliness, attractive appearance
and compatibility of structures and to encourage opportunity for variety and
innovation.
D. Lot area, yards, off-street parking, and other standards in the ordinance are
based on accepted contemporary planning practices. Variance from the strict
application of standards is available when extreme individual hardship would
otherwise occur. Other modification procedures exist where unique site or land
use characteristics suggest that the purpose of this ordinance is furthered by
such modifications.
E. Review of individual projects is necessary for implementation of community-wide
planning policy. This ordinance provides for specialized procedures for the
review and approval of, a) integrated, large-scale projects; b) multi-phased
projects; c) mixed use developments; d) Commercial and Industrial uses.
F. Uses which may adversely affect existing adjoining uses or areas, unless
designed or arranged in a particular way or situated only in certain locations, are
allowed only as “conditional uses” subject to the authority of appropriate hearing
officers or bodies.
G. The ordinance recognizes the need to minimize adverse impacts of development
on natural and built environments through application of planning standards and
prescribed environmental review procedures.
H. The need for the coordination of existing and proposed land uses with the
provision of public review is recognized herein.
The ordinance recognizes the need and desire of the comprehensive plan to efficiently
use land in the existing city and to rationally and orderly expand the city boundary into
surrounding rural and semi-rural areas.
1.05 INTERPRETATION
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be the
minimum requirements. Where this Title imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or
required by other rules, regulations, or ordinances the provisions of this title shall control.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 1 – Purpose of Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Where provisions of this Title are in conflict, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: Ord. #____)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 2.0 – Administration & Enforcement Page 1
2.0 ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
2.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to establish the procedures required for the administration
of this Title and to set forth the basic responsibilities of city officials and bodies charged
with its administration.
2.2 DECISION-MAKING BODIES AND OFFICIALS
The following decision making bodies and officials are hereby identified. Other City
Officials shall assist in the administration of these regulations as necessary.
A. Zoning Administrator. In order to carry out the purposes of this title, to aid in its
enforcement, and to relieve hearing bodies, such as the Planning Commission
and City Council, of certain routine and non-policy functions, there is hereby
established within the city government the title of Zoning Administrator. The City
Council shall appoint the Zoning Administrator and assign such duties as may be
required to fulfill the purposes of this title.
B. Building Official. There is hereby created within the City Government the position
of Building Official. The City Council shall appoint the Building Official and assign
such duties to the Building Official as may be required to fulfill the purposes of
this title and the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City of Chisago City.
C. Planning Commission. The Planning Commission of the City of Chisago City
shall have seven (7) regular members as appointed by the City Council for
staggered terms. Each commissioner shall be appointed by the City Council for a
four-year term. Refer to established Planning Commission Bylaws for
responsibilities and operation of the Planning Commission and its members. In
most planning application reviews, the Planning Commission will act as an
advisory board to the City Council and provide a recommendation.
D. City Council. The City Council shall consist of five (5) members. Four (4) council
members and a Mayor. All seats are elected from the City at-large. The City
Council generally holds the final decision authority.
E. Other Review Authorities. The City Council may establish from time to time other
authorities to assist in the review and implementation of this title.
2.3 TYPES OF PERMITS AND OTHER ACTIONS AUTHORIZED BY THIS ORDINANCE
The following permits and actions are established in order to carry out the purposes and
requirements of this title.
A. Conditional Use Permit
B. Interim Use Permit (Home Occupation)
C. Variance
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 2.0 – Administration & Enforcement Page 2
D. Design Permit
E. Sign Permit
F. Certificate of Compliance
G. Planned Unit Development Permit
H. Zoning Ordinance Text or Map Amendment
I. Others As May Be Established
2.4 PERMIT APPLICATION, SUBMITTAL AND PROCESSING
Application for any permit shall be made by the property owner or his/her authorized
agent, to the Zoning Administrator on a form prescribed for the purpose. The application
shall include information as may be necessary for the adequate review of the
application. Staff shall determine within 10 days of application submittal whether the
application is complete and shall notify the applicant of its incompleteness or the need
for additional information.
2.5 TIME LIMIT
All applications shall be acted upon in accordance with established schedules but in no
case acted upon later than sixty (60) days from the time a complete application is filed
unless an extension is granted to these provisions according to Minnesota State Law.
2.6 FEES, APPLICATIONS AND PENALTIES
For the purpose of reimbursing the City for administration of this title, the City Council
shall, by resolution, from time to time fix the amount of fees and penalties to be charged
for processing all applications and appeals provided for in this title.
2.7 CONDITIONS OF APPLICATION APPROVAL
Decision making bodies may require changes to applications and/or impose conditions
of approval in order to carry out the policies (and) of the Comprehensive Plan and the
purposes of this title.
2.8 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS
Public hearing shall be required for the following planning permits or as required by this
ordinance or the city code.
A. Planned unit developments
B. Conditional use permits
C. Interim use permit (& Home Occupation)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 2.0 – Administration & Enforcement Page 3
D. Variances
E. Zoning Text or Map Amendments
2.9 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
When a public hearing is required, notice shall be given not less than ten (10) calendar
days prior to said hearing. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners,
or other defects in the notice procedure shall not invalidate the proceedings, if a
bonafide attempt to give proper notice has been made. A record of the notification shall
be kept in a permit file.
A. Notice shall be given by publication in a local newspaper of general circulation,
and by first class mail as required. All means of notice shall include:
1. The case number assigned, if any;
2. The time, place and date of the hearing;
3. A brief description of the matter to be considered and permits required;
4. A brief description of the property involved;
5. A brief description of general procedure concerning submission of public
comments;
6. The name of the authorized applicant or property owner.
B. Notification by first-class mail shall be made to the following:
1. Owner or authorized agent;
2. All property owners within 500 feet of the periphery of the project site;
3. Persons who have requested to be on a mailing list for specific projects.
C. Exception. In the case of an amendment to the zoning ordinance text initiated by
the city, notice shall at a minimum be by publication in the official city newspaper.
2.10 CONTINUANCE OF HEARING
The hearing body, on its own motion, may continue a hearing from time to time without
decision within the required decision making time limit in accordance with Minnesota
State Statutes.
2.11 FINDINGS REQUIRED
Prior to action on any permit application, the hearing body shall make findings with
respect to the manner in which the proposed project conforms to the appropriate
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 2.0 – Administration & Enforcement Page 4
requirements as outlined in this title and the purposes of the Comprehensive Plan.
2.12 DECISION-MAKING BODY WITH FINAL AUTHORITY IN APPLICATION APPROVAL
The City Council shall be the decision making body with final authority in all applications
requiring a public hearing. Such action shall be taken after receiving recommendation
from the Planning Commission. The Council’s decision shall be made with or without
prejudice.
2.13 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ACTIONS
A. All authorized permit actions shall take effect upon Council approval and
signature of applicant to the conditions if any imposed.
B. Exception. Certificates of compliance authorized by the Zoning Administrator
may be appealed within ten (10) calendar days of the action to the Planning
Commission for review and decision. All actions by the Planning Commission
may be appealed within ten (10) calendar days of Planning Commission action to
the City Council.
2.14 LIFE OF PERMIT
A. Expiration.
1. Each approved permit shall expire and become null and void twelve (12)
months from the date on which it is approved, unless a building permit
has been issued and work on the development commenced. A lesser or
greater time period may be specified as a condition of project approval.
All work on the approved development shall be completed within 24
months or as approved as a condition of project approval.
2. An approved permit applies to the subject property and runs with the land
unless otherwise designated. Once exercised, an approved permit
remains in effect unless terminated or modified and remains in effect
even if the property is rezoned or sold.
3. An approved permit is transferable to any future owner of the subject
property unless because of the nature of the use, the permit is tied to the
original applicant as a condition of project approval.
B. Extensions of Permits. Any permit may be extended for an additional period not
to exceed one (1) year by the decision making body which finally approved the
original permit.
C. Revocation of Permit. In any case where the conditions to the granting of a
permit have not been or are not being complied with, the decision-making body
with final authority over said permit shall give notice to the permit holder,
specifying a reasonable period of time within which to correct any violations of
the approved permit. If the permit holder fails to comply with said conditions or
correct said violation within time allowed, notice shall be given to the permit
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 2.0 – Administration & Enforcement Page 5
holder of intention to revoke such permit at a public hearing before the City
Council not less than ten (10) days after said notice. Following said hearing and,
if good cause exists, the City Council may revoke such permit.
2.15 APPLICATION WITHDRAWAL PROCESS.
An application may be withdrawn by the applicant prior to final action on the matter. Said
withdrawal must be submitted by the applicant in writing. Withdrawal of an application
shall terminate all further action on the application. The application fee shall be forfeited.
2.16 RESUBMITTAL OF DENIED OR WITHDRAWN APPLICATION
Whenever any permit is denied or withdrawn, no new application for the same or
substantially the same project may be filed for a period of one (1) year from the date of
said denial or withdrawal.
2.17 APPEAL PROCEDURE
Any applicant or other interested person dissatisfied with the action taken under the
provisions of this title may appeal such action or decision according to this procedure.
A. Where to File Appeal. Appeals to actions of the Zoning Administrator shall be
filed with the Administrative Assistant to the Planning Commission. Appeals to
Planning Commission actions shall be filed with the City Clerk.
B. Procedure for Appeals.
1. All appeals shall be made in writing and state the reason for the appeal.
The appeal accompanied by appropriate fees shall be received within ten
(10) calendar days following the date of action.
2. The Zoning Administrator or City Clerk shall place the appeal on the next
available Planning Commission or City Council agenda for review and
action. The appellant shall be notified of the meeting date. If the decision
being appealed required a public hearing the appeal shall be notified and
considered at a public hearing.
2.18 EMERGENCY PERMITS
Where a building permit is required as an emergency measure to protect life and
property from imminent danger or to restore, repair or maintain public works, utilities, or
services during and immediately following a natural disaster or serious accident, any
permit authorized by this title which is needed to accompany such building permits may
be authorized provided that within three (3) days of the danger, the Zoning Administrator
is notified and a preliminary application is filed describing the nature of the disaster and
the type and location of work to be performed, and that within thirty (30) days a
completed application for necessary permit is filed.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 2.0 – Administration & Enforcement Page 6
2.19 ENFORCEMENT
A. Violations. The violation of any provision of this title or violations of conditions or
provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this title shall be a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof, the violator shall be subject to a fine, imprisonment or
both; plus in either case, the cost of prosecution.
B. Penalties. Unless otherwise provided each act of violation and every day on
which such violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense.
C. Equitable and Other Release.
1. In the event of a violation or the threatened violation of any provision of
this title or any provision or condition of a permit issued pursuant to this
title, the City, in addition to other remedies, may institute actions or
proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violations or
threatened violations as deemed appropriate by the City.
2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, where any provision of this ordinance
requires an applicant, property owner or other designated individual or
entity to correct a nonconformity of a property, building or use hereunder
or to take any other affirmative action and such applicant, owner, or other
individual or entity fails to respond to the City within ten (10) days and to
complete such action within thirty (30) days of written notice from the City
of such failure, the City may, but shall not be obligated to, correct such
nonconformity or take such affirmative action as shall be reasonably
determined to be appropriate by the City.
3. The City will bill the cost incurred by the City in taking such corrective
action, including legal, engineering and all other administrative costs, to
such applicant, owner or other individual or entity and if such person or
entity fails to pay the amounts so billed within thirty (30) days after the
date of the bill, the unpaid costs together with interests thereon at the rate
of 8% per annum may be certified as an assessment against the property
to which such cost is attributable.
4. Before certification against the property as afore described, ten (10) days
notice of the pending assessment certification and an opportunity to be
heard by the City Council will be given to the taxpayer of record with
respect to such property. However, failure of the taxpayer to receive the
notice shall not invalidate the assessment certification or hearing process.
Thereafter, the unpaid cost may be certified as an assessment to the
County Auditor for collection along with current taxes in the following year
or in such annual installments, not exceeding five (5), including interest at
the rate of 8% per annum, as the City Council may determine in each
case.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 2.0 – Administration & Enforcement Page 7
2.20 AMENDMENT TO ZONING ORDINANCE OR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
A. An amendment to this title or the Comprehensive Plan may be initiated by the
City Council, Planning Commission or by petition of affected property owners. A
petition by affected property owners shall be presented to the Planning
Commission for study, review and recommendation to the City Council. The City
Council, upon reviewing the petition and Planning Commission report and
recommendation, may or may not initiate such amendment to this title or the
Comprehensive Plan.
B. Any Comprehensive Plan amendment, adoption or amendment in addition to any
notice required by this Title shall be given in a manner provided by Minnesota
Statute.
2.21 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
The purpose of the Environmental Review Program is to provide for the preparation and
review of Environmental Assessment Worksheets (EAW), Environmental Impact
Statements (EIS) and other environmental documents required under Minnesota
Environmental Quality Act as currently in effect. The administration of environmental
impact review requirements may extend or modify the time limit for decisions depending
on environmental review required.
2.22 ZONING MAP
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this ordinance are
hereby set forth on the Zoning Map entitled “Zoning Map” a copy of which is on file with
the City Clerk. Said map and all of the notations, references and other information
shown there on shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and
thereby is made a part of this ordinance by reference. (APPENDIX I)
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: September 2007, September 2009)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 3.0 – Zoning Permits Page 1
3.0 ZONING PERMITS
3.1 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
A. Purpose. The purpose of this permit is to allow the proper integration into the
City of essential or desired uses which may be suitable only in certain locations
or zoning districts, or only provided that said uses are designed or arranged on a
site in a particular manner.
B. Procedure. Request for a conditional use permit, as provided within this title,
shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form. Such
application shall also be accompanied by copies of detailed written and graphic
materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use. The Zoning
Administrator shall refer said application, along with all related information, to the
Planning Commission for consideration at its next regular meeting, provided that
adequate time exists between the filing date and meeting date to allow for
notification of public hearing as required by law. If there is not adequate time
between the filing date and meeting date, the requests will be considered at the
next regular meeting of the Planning Commission.
C. Application. The application shall be accompanied by five sets of the site plan, at
a scale not less than 1”=100’, and a reduced set (11”x17”) of plans capable of
being reproduced. The plan shall describe the proposed use showing such
information as may be necessary or desirable, including, but not limited to Items
(1) through (15) below. Within ten (10) working days of receipt of all of the
following items, the Zoning Administrator on behalf of the Planning Commission,
shall set a date for a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be published in
the official newspaper of the City. For projects that require design review refer to
Section 3.5, for description of submittal requirements.
1. Site plan drawn at a scale showing parcel with lot dimensions, setback
and building dimensions, landscape plan, lighting plan, and building
design details (elevations).
2. Locations and designated use of all proposed and existing buildings and
their square footage.
3. Curb cuts, driveways, access roads, parking spaces and off-street loading
areas.
4. Existing topography. (2 foot contours)
5. Final grading and drainage plan including first floor elevation for each
structure on each lot and for residential structures, type of residence
(walkout, lookout, full basement).
6. Erosion control plan showing erosion measure according to city
specifications.
7. Type of business or activity and proposed number of employees.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 3.0 – Zoning Permits Page 2
8. Proposed floor plan of any building and use indicated.
9. Sanitary sewer and water plan with estimated daily use, as required by
City.
10. Soil type and soil limitations for the intended use. If severe soil limitations
for the intended use are noted, a plan or statement indicating the soil
conservation practice or practices to be used to overcome said limitation
or limitations, shall be made part of the permit application, as required by
City.
11. A location map showing the general location of the proposed use within
the City.
12. A map showing all owners of record and land uses within 350 feet of the
parcel for which application is being made, provided by City, paid for in
application fee.
13. Certified mailing list of all owners of record of properties with 350 ft of the
exterior boundary of the property for which the application is being made,
provided by City, paid for in application fee.
14. Recorded easements and right of ways.
15. Any other information deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator,
Planning Commission or their designed representative.
D. Review and Decision. The Planning Commission shall consider the conditional
use permit request at a public hearing. The following general factors and other
requirements of this Title or Comprehensive Plan shall be considered in the
review.
1. The use is in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan and development
policies of this Title.
2. The use will not create an excessive demand on existing parks, schools,
streets and other public facilities and utilities which serve or are proposed
to serve the area.
3. The use will be sufficiently compatible or separated by distance or
screening from adjacent development or land so that existing
development will not be depreciated in value and there will be no
deterrence to development of vacant land.
4. The structure and site will have an appearance that will not have an
adverse effect upon adjacent properties.
5. The use, in the opinion of the City, is reasonably related to the overall
needs of the City and to the existing land use.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 3.0 – Zoning Permits Page 3
6. The use will be consistent with the purpose of this and other City
Ordinances.
7. The use will be located, designed, maintained, and operated to be
compatible with the existing or intended character of the zoning district in
which it is to be located.
8. The use will generate only minimal vehicular traffic on local streets and
shall not create traffic hazards or unsafe access or unmet parking needs.
9. Existing businesses nearby will not be adversely affected because of the
curtailment of customer trade brought about by intrusion of noise, glare,
or general unsightliness.
10. The establishment or maintenance of the use shall not be detrimental to
the public health, safety or general welfare.
11. The use will not be hazardous, detrimental, or disturbing to present and
potential surrounding land use due to water pollution, odor, fumes,
general unsightliness or other nuisances.
12. The use will preserve and incorporate the site’s important natural, scenic,
and historical features into the development design
13. The use will cause minimal adverse environmental effects.
E. Finding of Fact. Upon review of the conditional use permit request the Planning
Commission and City Council shall make a finding of fact. The findings are that
the project as proposed or as approved contains the following conditions:
1. Conforms to the requirements and intent of this Title and the
Comprehensive Plan;
2. That any conditions necessary to protect the public interest have been
imposed; and
3. That such use or structure will not constitute a nuisance or be detrimental
to the welfare of the surrounding neighborhood or community.
F. Conditions of Approval. In issuing a conditional use permit, conditions of
approval may be imposed. These conditions, may include, but not be limited to:
1. Matters relating to the architecture or appearance.
2. Establishing hours of operation.
3. Increasing the required lot size or yard dimension.
4. Limiting the height, size or location of buildings.
5. Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points.
6. Increasing the street width.
7. Increasing the number of required off-street parking spaces.
8. Limiting the number, size, location or lighting of signs.
9. Requiring dikes, fences, screening, landscaping or other facilities to
protect adjacent or nearby property.
10. Designating additional sites for open space.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 3.0 – Zoning Permits Page 4
11. Limiting the duration of the use.
12. Regulating storm water runoff.
13. Limiting the amount of signage.
14. Controlling exterior building or parking lot lighting.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 3.0 – Zoning Permits Page 5
3.2 INTERIM USE PERMIT
A. Purpose: These uses may be permitted as a temporary use of property in the
following cases:
1. To allow a use for a temporary period of time until a permanent location is
obtained or while the permanent location is under construction.
2. To allow a use which is presently judged acceptable by the City Council, but
that with anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be acceptable in
the future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or conditional use
allowed within the respective district.
3. To allow a use which is reflective of long-range change in an area and which
is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, provided that said use
maintains harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and is in keeping
with the architectural character and design standards of existing uses and
development.
B. Procedure: Interim uses shall be processed according to the standards and
procedures for a conditional use permit as established in Section 3.1
C. Qualifications and Requirements: The following uses shall be deemed interim
uses:
1. An interim use permit may be granted to the following conditional uses in the
respective zoning district
a. Licensed Day Care facilities.
b. Recreational vehicles and equipment parking and outdoor storage as
regulated by Section 6.5 .
c. Horticultural uses.
d. Home Occupations
e. All auto or related repair shops
f. Outside display of merchandise or sales area, excluding temporary
sidewalk sales or special events sales.
2. Existing home occupations or business in a residential district that in the
opinion of the City Administrator, Planning Commission or City Council has
changed, expanded, and/or may be disruptive to the adjacent neighbors.
3. Other uses in the opinion of the City Council are of the same general
character, uses may be permitted as authorized by the City Council.
D. General Standards: In granting an interim use permit, the Planning Commission
and City Council shall consider the effect of the proposed use upon the health,
safety and general welfare of occupants of surrounding properties. The Planning
Commission and City Council shall consider and make findings regarding the
following factors:
1. The proposed use meets the standards of the conditional use permit set forth
in section 3.1 of this chapter.
2. The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty.
3. The use will not impose additional unreasonable costs on the public.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 3.0 – Zoning Permits Page 6
4. The proposed use will be subjected to, an agreement with the property
owner, any conditions the City Council deems appropriate for permission of
the proposed interim use, including a condition that the owner will provide an
appropriate surety to cover the cost of removing the interim use and any
interim structures upon the expiration of the interim use.
E. Conditions of approval: In permitting a new interim use permit or amending an
existing interim use permit, the Planning Commission may recommend and the
City Council may impose, in addition to the standards and requirements
expressly specified by this section, additional conditions which the Planning
Commission or City Council consider necessary to protect the best interest of the
surrounding area or the community as a whole. These conditions may include,
but are not limited to, the following:
1. Matters relating to the architecture or appearance.
2. Establishing hours of operation.
3. Increasing the required lot size or yard dimension.
4. Limiting the height, size or location of buildings.
5. Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points.
6. Increasing the street width.
7. Increasing the number of required off-street parking spaces.
8. Limiting the number, size, location or lighting of signs.
9. Requiring dikes, fences, screening, landscaping or other facilities to protect
adjacent or nearby property.
10. Designating additional sites for open space.
11. Limiting the duration of the use.
12. Regulating storm water runoff.
13. Limiting the amount of signage.
14. Controlling exterior building or parking lot lighting.
F. Termination: An approved interim use shall terminate upon the occurrence of
any of the following events:
1. The termination date or event specified with approval of the interim use.
2. Any violation of the conditions under which the interim use was approved.
3. The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is located to a
permitted or conditional use as allowed within the respective zoning district.
G. Review of Permit: All interim use permits hall be reviewed annually or on a
complaint basis by the Planning Commission. A public hearing may be held at
the Planning Commissions discretion.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 3.0 – Zoning Permits Page 7
3.3 HOME OCCUPATION
It is the purpose of this section to provide for the interim use of the home in a residential
district as a place for limited operation of a business or profession, provided the
occupation is clearly secondary to the principle use of the home as a residence and
does not alter the character appearance or residential atmosphere of the neighborhood.
A. Interim Use Permit Required. A Tier II and III Home occupation shall require an
interim use permit as regulated in section 3.2.
B. Tier I Home Occupations. Tier I Home occupation are permitted uses within the
residential district without an interim use permit who conform to the following
standards:
1. Does not require the use of an accessory structure or garage.
2. Does not generate noise or odors
3. Does not require additional parking or generate additional traffic.
4. Does not require any signage
5. Do not employ workers who do not reside in the house.
6. Does not store any equipment or materials for their business outside
except for one personal automobile, truck, or van not exceeding twentyfive
(25) feet in length or a gross vehicle weight rating of fifteen-thousand
(15,000) pounds may be parked on the premises.
C. Tier II Home Occupation. Tier II home occupations are permitted in all residential
districts and shall conform to the following performance standards:
1. The conduct of the home occupation does not require or result in
alteration to the residence except where required to comply with State fire
and building code regulations.
2. Only those residing in the home and up to five (5), or at the discretion of
the City Council other persons may be employed on the site or report to
the site.
3. Signage shall consist of one sign, 2 square foot maximum.
4. No outdoor storage or display of goods, machinery or other related
business items without adequate buffering.
5. All needed parking shall be provided on site and not be more than 3
spaces (as defined by Sections 6.7 and 9.0)
6. All business operation shall begin operation no earlier than 7:00 am and
shall close by 9:00 pm
7. Should the home occupation be a repair business, the repair operation
shall take place within the residence, an accessory structure or garage.
8. The home occupation shall not generate noise or noxious fumes or cause
a fire hazard.
9. The home occupation shall not generate excessive traffic.
10. The home occupation shall not occupy more than 15% of the residence
floor space or 200 sq. feet whichever is less.
D. Tier III Home Occupation. Tier III home occupations are permitted in Residential
districts of 1 acre or more and shall conform to the following performance
standards:
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 3.0 – Zoning Permits Page 8
1. The conduct of the business does not require or result in alteration to the
residence except where required to comply with State fire and building
code regulations.
2. No retail sales permitted.
3. Signage shall be limited to one free-standing sign no more than twelve
(12) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height. The sign shall be no
closer than ten (10) feet from the public right-of-way. The exact location
of the sign shall be as approved through the Interim use permit process.
4. Outdoor storage of goods, machinery or other related business items
shall be limited and screened from the lakes, adjacent and nearby
properties and must be placed more than 75 feet from the ordinary high
water.
5. All needed parking shall be provided on site.
6. All business operation shall begin operation no earlier than 7:00 am and
shall close by 9:00 pm
7. Should the business be a repair shop, the repair operation shall take
place within an accessory structure or garage.
8. The business shall not generate noise or noxious fumes or cause a fire
hazard.
9. The business shall not generate excessive traffic.
10. The office shall not occupy more than 15% of the residence floor space or
200 sq. feet whichever is less.
E. Review of Permit. All home occupation permits either permitted or interim use
permits shall be reviewed on a complaint basis by the Planning Commission. A
public hearing may be held at the Planning Commissions discretion.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 3.0 – Zoning Permits Page 9
3.4 VARIANCE
A. Purpose. A variance is the modification or variation of the Zoning Ordinance
development standards where it is determined that there are practical difficulties
in complying with the strict enforcement of this Title. Practical difficulties as used
in connection with the granting of a variance, means that the proposed use in a
reasonable manner is not permitted by this title without a variance.
B. Procedure. Requests for a variance, as provided within this title, shall be filed
with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form and shall follow the
procedures as required in Section 2.0. Such application shall also be
accompanied by copies of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining
the proposed variance request. The Zoning Administrator shall refer said
application, along with all related information, to the Planning Commission for
consideration at its next regular meeting, provided that adequate time exists
between the filing date and meeting date to allow for notification of public hearing
as required by law. If there is not adequate time between the filing date and
meeting date, the requests will be considered at the next regular meeting of the
Planning Commission. Unless the applicant requests a special meeting and one
is able to be scheduled the applicant shall pay the costs of the special meeting.
A. Application. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan of the proposed
variance showing such information as may be necessary or desirable, including,
but not limited to items (1) through (8) below. Within ten (10) working days of
receipt of all of the following items, the Zoning Administrator on behalf of the
Planning Commission shall set a date for a public hearing. Notice of such
hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the City.
1. Evidence that the applicant is the owner of the property which is subject to the
variance request or if not the owner that the applicant has been granted
authority to make and proceed with the application.
2. A detailed site plan drawn to scale showing parcel with lot dimensions,
setbacks, building location and dimensions, and dimensional variance(s)
requested.
3. Locations and designated use of all proposed and existing buildings and their
square footage.
4. A location map showing the general location of the proposed use within the
City.
5. A map showing all owners of record and land uses within 350 feet of the
parcel for which application is being made, provided by the City, paid for in the
application fee.
6. Mailing list of all owners of record of properties with 350 feet of the exterior
boundary of the property for which the application is being made, provided by
the City, paid for in the application fee.
7. Recorded easements and right of ways.
8. Any other information deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator or
Planning Commission.
B. Variance Conditions. The following conditions will be considered in addressing the
application for the variance.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 3.0 – Zoning Permits Page 10
1. No variance may be granted that would allow any use that is not permitted or
conditionally permitted in the Zoning district in which the subject property is
located.
2. The property in question cannot be used in a reasonable manner similar to
other properties within zoning district under the conditions allowed by this
Title.
3. The use is allowed in the zoning district in which the subject property is
located.
4. The variance shall only be permitted when it is in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the ordinance and the comprehensive plan.
5. The applicant has established that there are practical difficulties in complying
with the zoning ordinance.
6. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property which do
not apply generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity, and result
from physical conditions such as lot size or shape, topography, or other
circumstances over which the owners of property, since enactment of this
Title, have had no control.
7. The literal interpretation of’ the provisions of this Title would deprive the
applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district
under the terms of this Title.
8. The special conditions or circumstances do not result from actions of the
applicant.
9. The property is compatible with the adjacent property and the other
properties in the vicinity.
10. The variance will not result in significant increases in adverse off site impacts
such as noise, dust, odors and parking congestion.
11. Granting the variance will improve the appearance or stability of the vicinity.
12. Granting the variance will improve the quality of runoff into the lakes and
wetlands.
13. Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special
privilege that is denied by this Title to owners of other lands, structures, or
buildings in the same district.
14. The variance requested must consider the minimum variance which would
alleviate the practical difficulties.
15. The variance would not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this Title,
or to property in the same zone.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 3.0 – Zoning Permits Page 11
16. Economic conditions or circumstances alone do not constitute the granting of
a variance request if a reasonable use of the property exists under the terms
of the ordinance.
17. In the Flood Plain district, no variance shall be granted which
permits a lower degree of flood protection than the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation for the particular area or permits standards lower than
those required by state law.
18. Variances shall be granted for earth-sheltered dwellings according to state
statutes when in harmony with this Title.
C. Finding of Fact. In considering requests for variances, the Planning Commission
and City Council shall make findings of fact. The findings are that the project, as
proposed or as approved, with conditions meets the application and procedural
requirements of this Section 3.4, meets the conditions set forth in Subsection D
above and will not:
1. Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property.
2. Unreasonably increase the congestion in the public right-of-way.
3. Increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety.
4. Unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the
neighborhood.
5. Cause an unreasonable strain upon existing municipal facilities and
services.
6. Be contrary, in any way, to the spirit and intent of this Title.
7. Have a negative (direct or indirect) fiscal impact upon the City or school
district, unless the proposed use is determined to be in the public interest.
D. Conditions of Approval. In issuing a variance, conditions of approval may be
imposed to reduce the impact of the request.
E. Precedents. A previous variance shall not be considered to have set a precedent
for granting of further variances; each case must be considered on its individual
merits.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 3.0 – Zoning Permits Page 12
3.5 DESIGN PERMIT/HISTORIC GUIDELINES
A. Purpose. The purpose of the design permit is to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare through the review of architectural and site
development plans and through application of recognized principles of design,
planning and aesthetic qualities.
B. General Provisions. A design permit shall be required for the following:
1. Multifamily dwellings containing 4 or more dwelling units.
2. New or remodeled structures intended for commercial or industrial use.
3. As required in the Zoning Ordinance.
C. Procedure. Applications for design permits shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and other agencies as specified by the Zoning Administrator. The
Planning Commission shall make recommendation for design permit review to
the City Council and the Council shall take final action. Every person, before
commencing construction or major alterations of a structure, except one and two
family dwellings and building accessories, shall submit to the City Administrator
the following:
1. A detailed drawing drawn to scale showing pertinent existing conditions.
2. A complete set of scaled preliminary drawings that include at least the
following:
a) An accurately scaled and dimensioned site plan indicating parking
layout including access provisions, designation and locations of
principle and accessory buildings, landscaping, including trees and
shrubbery with an indication of species, planting size and location.
b) Fences, walls or other screening, including height and type of
material.
c) Lighting plan with type and location.
d) Curbs
e) Building elevations including materials proposed.
f) Existing and proposed land elevations and drainage plans.
g) Location of all existing and proposed utilities including, but not limited
to, location and size of water mains, storm and sanitary sewers, fire
hydrants, gas lines, electric and telephone poles, street lights, curbs,
gutter, culverts, catch basins, manholes and other facilities.
h) Complete plans for storage of waste and garbage.
i) Boundary line of property, clearly indicated, along with identifying any
adjacent public and private streets, sidewalks, and drainage and utility
easements and any other easements and their purpose.
3. The developer or applicant shall establish an escrow account with the
City to pay for design review application and review costs, and inspection
of grading, paving, utilities, and other civil improvements. The escrow
amount shall be set by the City Council by resolution. Any escrowed
funds remaining after City acceptance of the site improvements and
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, or the developer canceling the
project, shall be returned to the developer. If the initial escrowed amount
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 3.0 – Zoning Permits Page 13
is insufficient to complete design review and inspection of site civil
improvements, the developer shall provide additional funds to be
escrowed as required by the City.
D. Findings Required. All applications for design permits shall be reviewed in
relation to the following criteria and standards. Applications for design review that
meets the standards shall be approved.
1. The site plan shall be consistent with physical development policies of the
Comprehensive Plan, zoning code or other City design standards or
criteria.
2. The exterior design and appearance of buildings and structures and the
design of the site plan shall be compatible with the design and
appearance of other existing buildings and structures in neighborhoods
which have established architectural character worthy of preservation.
3. Design of the site plan shall respect design principles in terms of
maintaining a balance of scale, form and proportion, using design
components which are harmonious, materials and colors which blend with
elements of the site plan and surrounding areas. Location of structures
should take into account maintenance of view; rooftop mechanical
equipment shall be incorporated into roof design or screened from
adjacent properties. Utility installations such as trash enclosures, storage
units, traffic control devices, transformer vaults and electrical meters shall
be accessible and screened from public view.
4. Where a site plan abuts, or is in close proximity to uses other than that
proposed, the plan shall take into account its effect on other land uses.
Where a non-residential use abuts or is in close proximity to a residential
use, the effect of the site plan should maintain the residential quality of
adjacent or nearby areas through site design and building location, larger
setbacks, berming, the use at landscape buffers or screening.
5. The orientation and location of buildings, structures, open spaces and
other features of the site plan shall be such as to maintain natural
resources including significant trees and shrubs to the extent feasible,
maintain a compatible relationship to and preserve solar access of
adjacent properties, and minimize alteration of natural land forms.
Building profiles, location, and orientation must relate to natural land
forms.
6. The site plan shall minimize the effect of traffic conditions on abutting
streets through careful layout of the site with respect to location,
dimensions of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exit drives and
walkways; through the adequate provision of off-street parking and
loading facilities; through an adequate circulation pattern within the
boundaries of the development; and through the surfacing and lighting of
off-street parking facilities.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 3.0 – Zoning Permits Page 14
7. The site shall provide open space and landscaping which complement
building and structures. Open space should be useful to residents,
employees, or other visitors to the site. Landscaping shall be used to
separate and/or screen service and storage areas, separate and/or
screen parking areas from other areas, break up expanses of paved
areas, define open space for usability and privacy. For commercial or
industrial projects, one tree per four parking stalls shall be planted in or
around the parking lot.
8. The site plan shall reasonably protect against external and internal noise,
vibration and other factors which may tend to make the environment less
desirable. The site plan should respect the need for privacy of adjacent
residents.
9. Signs shall complement the site plan and avoid dominating the site and/or
existing building on the site or overwhelming the building or structures to
which they are attached. Multiple signs on a given site should be of a
consistent theme.
10. In the Central Business Commercial area new development and
renovation shall preserve or recreate the historic character of the area.
Building height, proportions, material, orientation, window openings,
signage and materials shall be compatible with the best characteristics of
the area to maintain the “old-town” character.
11. For the Highway 8 Business District the design guidelines contained in
the Business District plan shall be used to review development
application in that area.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 3.0 – Zoning Permits Page 15
3.6 ZONING PERMIT REVIEW
The Zoning Administrator shall review yearly all conditional use permits (CUP) and
interim use permits (IUP) in all districts. In the event the CUP or IUP are found to be
non-compliant, a letter with correction date will be sent. Failure to correct will result on
the City Council reviewing the CUP for non-conformity.
A. Application. A written application and required fee shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. The application shall be accompanied by a legal description of the
property and full sets of development plans of the proposed use showing such
information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator. These plans shall
contain adequate information upon which the Zoning Administrator can
determine the proposed development will meet all development standards if the
project proceeds in accordance with such plans.
B. Compliance. The use shall conform with the regulations specified in this Title.
C. Issuance and Conditions. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the use is
in compliance with the conditions contained in this ordinance, the Zoning
Administrator shall report to the City Council the use is compliant. Conditions
required by this Title shall be applied to the issuance of and incorporated into the
approval process.
E. Appeals to Denial of a Zoning Permit. If the request for a Zoning permit is
denied, or conditions are imposed, not acceptable to the applicant, the applicant
may appeal the decision of the Zoning Administrator to the Planning
Commission.
F. Revocation. A violation of any condition set forth in an approved zoning permit
shall be a violation of this ordinance and failure to correct said violation within
thirty (30) days of written notice from the Zoning Administrator shall terminate the
zoning permit. The hearing procedure for said revocation shall be the same
procedure as that set forth under Section 2.17 of this Title.
G. Existing Uses. All uses existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance that
now require a zoning permit may continue in the same manner of operation as
the use did upon the effective date of this Title. The Zoning Administrator may
require a zoning permit for the use. Any enlargement, structural alteration or
intensification of use shall require a zoning permit as provided for above. The
Zoning Administrator may impose additional, reasonable conditions for the
continuation of such use.
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: June 2007, September 2007, August 24, 2010, August, 2011)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.0 – Zoning Districts – Zoning District Regulations Page 1
4.0 ZONING DISTRICTS
4.1 ZONING DISTRICT INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY REGULATIONS
For purposes of this ordinance, Chisago City is hereby divided into the following zoning districts.
The section numbers for each district are listed in the third column. Each section will provide
more detailed information and regulations related to each district.
Agricultural
Agricultural A 4.2.1
Residential
Rural Residential – Existing RR-1 4.2.2
Rural Residential – Planned RR-2 4.2.3
Low Density Residential R-1 4.2.4
Low/Medium Density Residential R-2 4.2.5
Medium Density Residential R-3 4.2.6
High Density Residential Mobile Home R-4 4.2.7
Reserved - 4.2.8
Commercial
Neighborhood Commercial NC 4.3.1
Central Business Commercial CB 4.3.2
Highway Commercial HC 4.3.3
Industrial
Light Industrial LI 4.4.1
Office Park Industrial OPI 4.4.2
Planned Development Districts
Planned Unit Development PUD 4.5.2
Planned Mixed-Use Development PMD 4.5.3
Planned Industrial Mixed-Use Development PID 4.5.4
Public/Semi Public
Public/Semi Public – Open Space PSP-OS 4.6.1
Public/Semi Public – Facilities PSP-F 4.6.2
Overlay Districts
Conservation C 4.7.1
Floodplain FP 4.7.2
Shoreland SH 4.7.3
4.1.1 Zoning Ordinance Map
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this Ordinance are hereby set forth on
the Zoning Map, APPENDIX I. Said map and all notations, references, and data shown thereon
are hereby incorporated by reference into this Ordinance and shall be the same as if it was fully
described herein. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to maintain said map, and amendments
thereto shall be recorded on said Zoning Map within thirty (30) days after adoption of
amendments. The Zoning Map shall be kept or filed in the office of the City Clerk.
4.1.2 Zoning District Boundaries
The boundaries between zoning districts are unless otherwise indicated the center lines of
highways or roads or such lines extended or lines parallel or perpendicular thereto; or lines on a
registered plat, or section type map of United States Public Land Surveys as established by law.
Figures may be shown on the Zoning Map between a road and a district boundary line that runs
parallel to the road centerline at the distance indicated.
In all Shoreland Zone Districts, the zone district boundary shall extend one thousand (1,000) feet
from the ordinary high water level of each lake and three hundred (300) feet from the ordinary
high water level of each stream, river, or protected waterway or the distance of floodplain district
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.0 – Zoning Districts – Zoning District Regulations Page 2
boundaries whichever is greater. Most of the City limits as of the date of adoption fall within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the ordinary high water level of a lake.
4.1.3 Newly Annexed Land Zoning Procedures
Newly annexed land will be zoned upon annexation. In the event specific zoning is not
established at time of annexation, land will be zoned in accordance with the adopted
Comprehensive Plan, or at the discretion of the City Council. The Comprehensive Plan map and
phasing plan adopted in the 2006 Comprehensive Plan shall be referenced for all zoning
decisions made with respect to annexations and rezoning requests.
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: October 2000, January 2005, October 2006)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.2 – Residential Zoning Districts Page 1
4.2 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
A. Purpose: To define regulations and standards for each residential zoning district in the
City. The following sections identify uses, regulations, and performance standards that
shall be required for all residential development in the City. The zoning districts included
in this chapter include: A, RR-1, RR-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4. These districts are
dedicated to residential uses; other zoning districts which include commercial or industrial
uses are defined in other sections of this ordinance.
B. The following set of Architectural and Performance Standards shall apply to all proposed
development in agricultural and residential zoning districts as defined in this chapter.
1. Principal dwellings shall have a width of not less than twenty-five (25) feet excluding
the garage.
2. Accessory Structures shall be located behind the Principal structure, excluding
attached garages and riparian lots. Accessory Structures shall be constructed in
accordance of Section 6.03 of this ordinance.
3. Dwellings shall be placed on a permanent foundation forming a complete enclosure
under exterior walls, unless specifically required by the MN Building Code.
4. The roof pitch shall be a minimum of 4/12 in all residential districts excluding the R-4
district.
5. Exterior walls shall have the appearance of wood, masonry regardless of their actual
components.
6. All fronts or dwellings when positioned on the lot shall face a dedicated local street.
On corner lots, one of the streets will be designed as the front street and the dwelling
will face this street or may be angled toward the intersection of the streets. Under no
condition shall the back of the house face or angle toward the street unless said
street is an alley road which provides access to the residence.
7. The minimum size of the outside foundation of any detached dwelling unit shall be at
least eight hundred fifty (850) square feet, with no less than 850 finished square feet
with a minimum of an additional 350 square feet available for future expansion.
8. The minimum size of the outside foundation of any attached dwelling unit shall be at
least seven hundred (700) square feet, with no less than 700 finished square feet.
9. Impervious lot coverage shall not exceed 35-percent on non-riparian lots and 25-
percent on riparian lots. This includes driveways and paved walkways.
10. All districts shall identify permitted uses, and uses allowed as a conditional use. Any
other use not identified as permitted or conditional, but as determined by the City
Council to be of the same general character as the foregoing principal permitted or
conditionally permitted, uses may be permitted as authorized by the City Council.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.2 – Residential Zoning Districts Page 2
4.2.1 Agricultural (A)
a. Purpose: The agricultural zoning district applies to properties that use land for
residential uses AND agriculture. The purpose of the Agricultural District is to
provide for an orderly means whereby lands in the City can be guided for longterm
agricultural uses as defined by the comprehensive plan. The purpose of
including the Agricultural designation in the Residential Zoning Districts is to
regulate the principal and accessory structures, rather than agricultural
production.
b. Permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Detached Dwellings
2. Accessory structures (no more than three, including the garage)
3. Farms, hobby farms, agriculture, nurseries, wholesale nurseries, green
houses, and tree farms
4. Public/Semi-Public Facilities
5. Licensed day care facility (14 or less children, 8 or less adults).
6. Essential Services
7. Open Space, parks, trails, and directly related buildings or structures.
8. Agriculture and farm related activities
c. Conditional Uses
1. Accessory structures (more than three, including garage)
2. Home Occupations as regulated and permitted by Section 3.2
3. Roadside stand for sale of agricultural products planted and completely
grown on premises.
4. Licensed Day care facilities (14 or more children) .
5. Recreational vehicles and equipment parking and outdoor storage as
regulated by Section 6.5
d. Performance and Architectural Standards
1. Accessory structures (excluding attached garages) shall be located behind
the principal structure when possible, so as to have the principal structure
front on the most accessible road.
2. All principal and accessory structures shall be painted and maintained in a
manner which is complementary.
3. Accessory structures are permitted as regulated in Section 6.3.
e. Lot Requirements and Setbacks
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the Agricultural
District subject to the additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set
forth:
Minimum Lot Area 10 Acres
Lot Width 200 Feet
Front Yard or Public Right of Way 30 Feet
Setbacks
1. Non-Riparian - Rear Yard
2. Riparian – Rear Yard
30 Feet
50 Feet or as regulated by the DNR,
whichever is greater.
3. Side Yards 15 Feet on each side
4. Corner Yard 30 Feet abutting a public right-of-way
*All setback requirements shall apply to principal structures
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.2 – Residential Zoning Districts Page 3
4.2.2 Rural Residential - Existing (RR-1)
a. Purpose: The RR-1 District identifies areas suitable, and currently used for low
density residential or open spaces, in accordance with the City’s Comprehensive
Plan. The RR-1 shall include areas where Rural Clustering has occurred, and
open spaces have been set aside for the enjoyment of adjacent residents.
b. Permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Dwellings
2. Parks, Open space, and recreational uses
3. Essential Services
4. Public/Semi-Public Facilities (except as indicated as a conditional use)
5. Accessory structure (no more than two including the garage)
6. Licensed day care facility (14 or fewer children, 8 or fewer adults).
c. Conditional Uses:
1. Church, subject to design review
2. School, subject to design review
3. Home Occupations as regulated by Section 3.2
4. Accessory structures (more than 3, including the garage)
5. Horticultural uses (including nurseries and greenhouses)
6. Other State licensed Day Care Facilities (14 or more children )
e. Performance and Architectural Standards
1. Maximum height of building
• Principal (stories and feet) 2-1/2, but no more than 35 feet
• Accessory (stories and feet) 1-1/2, but no more than 26 feet
2. All principal buildings shall face the most primary road, and shall have clearly
identified house numbers so as to be visible to the passerby.
3. Principal and Accessory structures shall be coordinated through similar
materials (composition or appearance), painting, and architectural styles.
4. All existing structures shall be held to the standards set forth in this zoning
district, but shall exclude minimum lot areas for properties included within the
district not meeting this requirement.
5. All structures shall have private well and on-site septic treatment.
Maintenance and installation of such systems shall be consistent with rules
and regulations of those regulatory agencies with authority over such
systems.
f. Lot Requirements and Setbacks
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the RR-1 district
subject to additional requirements and modifications set forth in this ordinance:
Minimum Lot Area 2.0 Acres
Lot Width 150 Feet
Front Yard or Public Right of Way 30 Feet
Setbacks
1. Non-Riparian - Rear Yard
2. Riparian – Rear Yard
30 Feet
50 Feet or as regulated by the DNR,
whichever is greater.
3. Side Yards 10 Feet on each side
4. Corner Yard 30 Feet abutting a public right-of-way
*All setback requirements shall apply to principal structures
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.2 – Residential Zoning Districts Page 4
4.2.3 Rural Residential - Future (RR-2)
a. Purpose: The RR-2 District identifies areas suitable for residential development
that are scheduled to receive urban services as development demands increase.
This district shall allow large-lot subdivision with the intent of planning for urban
services through ghost platting during the approval process. The ghost plat shall
be recorded with the City and shall be enforced if and when the community
system is no longer adequate or needed, and City services are available.
Appropriate escrow may be required for such future services at the time of ghost
platting. The ghost plat shall follow the PUD guidelines, if such property is
required as stated in section 4.5.2. The Rural Clustering subdivision technique
shall also be permitted and encouraged in RR-2 district. See Section 4.7.1.2 for
Rural Clustering regulations.
b. Permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Dwellings
2. Park and recreation areas
3. Public/Semi-Public Facilities (except as indicated as a conditional use)
4. Essential Services
5. Accessory structure (no more than three including the garage)
6. Licensed Day Care Facility (14 or fewer children, 8 or fewer adults)
7. Parks and Open Space Uses
c. Conditional Uses:
1. Church subject to design review as regulated in Section 3.4
2. School subject to design review as regulated in Section 3.4
3. Home Occupations as regulated by Section 3.2
4. Accessory structures (more than three, including the garage)
5. Horticultural uses (including nurseries and greenhouses)
6. Other State Licensed Day Care Facilities (14 or more children )
e. Performance and Architectural Standards
1. Maximum height of building
• Principal (stories and feet) 2-1/2, but no more than 35 feet
• Accessory (stories and feet) 1-1/2, but no more than 26 feet
2. All proposed plans for subdivision shall include a ghost plat to demonstrate
planning for future urban services. Such ghost plats shall be subject to the
requirements of the PUD process in Section 4.5.2 of this ordinance. All
ghost plats shall be recorded by the City.
3. All plats, including ghost plat, shall demonstrate how each structure shall be
placed on the property so as to show orientation, and relationship to major
roads, trails, and proposed or existing open space.
4. All principal buildings shall face the most primary road, and shall have clearly
identified house numbers so as to be visible to the passerby.
5. If Rural Clustering subdivision technique is used open spaces shall be clearly
identified and purpose and use stated to see that proper preservation of the
area occurs over time.
6. Principal and Accessory structures shall be coordinated through similar
materials (composition or appearance), painting, and architectural styles.
7. All structures shall have private well and on-site septic treatment, with the
exception of community systems which might be used in a Rural Cluster
subdivision. Maintenance and installation of such systems shall be
consistent with rules and regulations of those regulatory agencies with
authority over such systems.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.2 – Residential Zoning Districts Page 5
g. Lot Requirements and Setbacks
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the RR-2 district
subject to additional requirements and modifications set forth in this ordinance.
All ghost plat submittals shall demonstrate that the standards identified in Section
4.2.5, Low/Medium Density Residential (R-2) are met to ensure that current and
future residents understand the future implications of such a process. When
municipal services are available and development is requested the property shall
be rezoned to Low/Medium Density Residential (R-2).
Minimum Lot Area 2.5 Acres
Lot Width 160 Feet
Setbacks
1. Front Yard 30 Feet
2. Rear Yard (non-riparian) 30 Feet
3. Rear Yard (riparian, OHW) 50 Feet or as regulated by the DNR,
whichever is greater
4. Side Yards 10 Feet on each side, or
5. Corner Yard 30 feet on the side yard abutting a
public right-of-way
*All setback requirements shall apply to principal structures
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.2 – Residential Zoning Districts Page 6
4.2.4 Low Density Residential (R-1)
a. Purpose: To provide a residential living area within the City which allows low
residential densities and provide protection for lakes and other environmental
resources and a transition development pattern to rural areas that adjoin the City.
b. Permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Dwellings
2. Accessory structure (no more than three including the garage)
3. Sheds up to 400 square feet
4. Park and recreation areas
5. Public/Semi-Public Facilities (except as indicated as a conditional use)
6. Essential Services
7. Licensed Day Care Facility (14 or fewer children, 8 or fewer adults)
8. Parks and Open Space Uses
c. Conditional Uses:
1. Church subject to design review as regulated in Section 3.4
2. School subject to design review as regulated in Section 3.4
3. Private Garages, including boat storage units, sheds greater than 400 square
feet (no commercial mini-storage)
4. Home Occupations
5. Accessory structures (more than 3, including the garage)
6. Bed and Breakfasts (see Section 6.9)
7. Horticultural uses (including nurseries and greenhouses)
8. Other Licensed Day Care Facilities (14 or more children )
d. Performance and Architectural Standards
1. Maximum height of building:
• Principal (stories and feet) 2-1/2, but no more than 35 feet
• Accessory (stories and feet) 1, but no more than 26 feet
2. All principal and accessory structures shall be made of similar materials and
have consistent architectural elements to ensure compatibility of structures.
3. All residents shall have their homes numbered so as to be visible from the
street or sidewalk.
4. All principal structures shall face the primary road, and shall follow the
setback requirements as identified in section (e) of this ordinance.
5. Landscaping and vegetation requirements as identified in the Subdivision
Ordinance, section 5.00 shall be required for all development.
6. There shall be one principal dwelling unit per lot.
7. All development in the R-1 district shall use open space development
standards if any part of the proposed development is covered by the
conservation overlay, or if deemed appropriate by the City Council.
e. Lot Requirements and Setbacks
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the R-1 district with
municipal services. Minimum requirements for new lot splits or subdivisions
without municipal services shall follow the RR-2 district regulations and shall
meet the underlying zoning for the R-1 district.
Lot Area 15,000 sq. ft. (Non-Riparian)
20.000 sq. ft. (Riparian)
Setbacks
1. Minimum lot width 100 ft.
2. Minimum lot depth 150 ft.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.2 – Residential Zoning Districts Page 7
3. Front yard 30 ft.
4. Side yard 15 ft.
5. Corner side yard (adjacent or) 30 ft. to public right-of-way
6a. Rear yard (Non-Riparian)
6b. Rear yard (Riparian)
30 ft.
50 ft. or as regulated by the
DNR, whichever is greater
7. Distance between buildings on same lot 10 ft.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.2 – Residential Zoning Districts Page 8
4.2.5 Low/Medium Density Residential (R-2)
a. Purpose: To stabilize and protect the residential characteristics of existing and
new development in the district, and to promote and encourage a suitable
environment for family life; and intended for single family detached dwellings.
b. Permitted Uses:
1. Single Family Dwellings
2. Park and recreation areas
3. Public/Semi-Public Facilities (except as indicated as a conditional use)
4. Essential Services
5. Accessory Structures as regulation in Section 6.3
6. Licensed Day Care Facility (14 or fewer children, 8 or fewer adults)
7. Parks and Open Space Uses
c. Conditional Uses:
1. Private Garages (no commercial mini-storage)
2. Twinhomes, Duplexes, and detached townhomes
3. Mobile Homes
4. Church subject to design review as regulated in Section 3.4
5. School subject to design review as regulated in Section 3.4
6. Home Occupations as regulation by section 3.02
7. Bed and Breakfasts (see Section 6.9)
8. Horticultural uses (including nurseries and greenhouses)
9. Other Licensed Day Care Facilities (14 or more children )
d. Performance and Architectural Standards
1. Maximum height of building:
• Principal (stories and feet) 2-1/2, but no more than 35 feet
• Accessory (stories and feet) 1, but no more than 26 feet
2. Proposed accessory structures, including the garage, shall be made of
similar materials and have consistent architectural elements as the principal
structure to ensure visual compatibility
3. All residents shall have their homes numbered so as to be visible from the
street or sidewalk.
4. All principal structures shall face the primary road, and shall follow the
setback requirements as identified in section (e) of this section.
5. Landscaping and vegetation requirements as identified in subdivision
ordinance section 5.00 shall be required for all development.
6. There shall be one principal dwelling unit per lot.
7. Each lot shall be allowed one accessory structure, excluding an attached
garage.
8. Impervious lot coverage shall not exceed 35-percent, including driveways
and paved walkways.
e. Lot Requirements and Setbacks
The following regulations shall apply to detached single-family homes located or
proposed in the R-2 District with municipal services. Proposed detached
townhomes or twin homes with municipal services shall follow the regulations in
the R-3 District as regulated in Section 4.2.5.e. and must meet the underlying
zoning in the R-2 district. Minimum requirements for new lot splits or
subdivisions without municipal services shall follow the RR-2 district regulations
and shall meet the underlying zoning for the R-2 district.
Lot Area 10,000 sq. ft. (Non-Riparian)
12,000 sq. ft. (Riparian)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.2 – Residential Zoning Districts Page 9
Setbacks
1. Minimum lot width 80 ft.
2. Minimum lot depth 115 ft.
3. Front yard 25 ft.
4. Side yard, no less than 25 feet
combined
10 ft.
5. Corner side yard (adjacent or) 30 ft. to public right-of-way
6a. Rear yard (non riparian) 25 ft.
6b. Rear yard – OHW (riparian) 50 ft. or as regulated by the
DNR, whichever is greater
7. Distance between buildings on same lot 10 ft.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.2 – Residential Zoning Districts Page 10
4.2.6 Medium Density Residential (R-3)
a. Purpose. To provide residential attached and detached housing that promotes
increased overall density while maintaining the rural residential quality of
neighborhoods throughout the community. The District shall provide increased
density and provide a variety of housing types and options so as to create
interesting neighborhoods.
b. Permitted Uses.
1. Single family
2. Townhouse and other attached dwellings (6 or fewer units)
3. Parks, playgrounds and open space uses
4. Public/Semi-Public Facilities (except as indicated as a conditional use)
5. Licensed Day care facilities (14 or fewer children, 8 or fewer adults )
6. Essential services
7. One Accessory structures and facility, excluding detached and attached
garages.
8. Recreational building such as community center or fitness room not to
exceed 10,000 square feet and shall meet all impervious surface
percentages.
c. Conditional Uses
1. Townhouses and other attached single family dwellings (7 or more dwellings)
2. Multifamily dwellings over ten (10) units, or part of a PUD development and
subject to design review as regulated in section 3.4.
3. Mobile Homes
4. Home Occupations as regulated by Section 3.2
5. State Licensed Day Care Facilities (14 or more children )
6. Churches subject to design review as regulated in Section 3.4
7. Schools subject to design review as regulated in Section 3.4
8. Hospitals subject to design review as regulated in Section 3.4.
9. Office and service commercial subject to design review as regulated in
Section 3.4.
10. Funeral homes subject to design review as regulated in Section 3.4
11. Retirement home, nursing homes and convalescent care subject to design
review as regulated in section 3.4
d. Performance and Architectural Standards
1. Maximum height of building:
• Principal (stories and feet) 2-1/2, but no more than 35 feet
• Accessory (stories and feet) 1, but no more than 26 feet
2. All proposed accessory structures, including the garage, shall be made of
similar materials and have consistent architectural elements as the principal
structure to ensure visual compatibility
3. All residences shall have their homes numbered so as to be visible from the
street or sidewalk.
4. All principal structures shall face the primary road, and shall follow the
setback requirements as identified in section (e) of this section.
5. Landscaping and vegetation requirements as identified in the subdivision
ordinance section 5.00 shall be required for all development.
6. There shall be one principal dwelling unit per lot, with the exception of an
apartment or condo structure that does not provide private access to each
dwelling unit. Such proposals shall be required to submit a design permit
and utilize the PUD process for submittals.
7. All townhomes and multifamily lots shall be allowed one accessory structure,
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.2 – Residential Zoning Districts Page 11
excluding detached and attached garage.
8. All townhouse and multifamily developments containing four (4) or more
dwelling units shall require a design permit and shall be held to the standards
set forth in the PUD section 4.4.2.
e. Lot Requirements and Setbacks
The following regulations apply to all single family detached, and attached homes
located or proposed in the R-3 District with municipal services. Minimum
requirements for new lot splits or subdivisions without municipal services shall
follow the RR-2 district regulations and shall meet the underlying zoning for the
R-3 district.
1. All detached homes shall have a minimum of 6,000 Square Feet per dwelling
unit.
2. All attached townhomes, defined as units with private entry, shall have a
minimum of 4,500 square feet of lot per unit and shall meet all setback
requirements and lot standards.
3. All attached or multifamily homes shall have a minimum 3,500 square feet of
lot area per unit.
Minimum lot area 6,000 SF
a. Minimum lot width 60 ft.
b. Minimum lot depth 100ft
c. Front yard 25 ft.
d. Side yard 15 ft.
e. Maximum density 8 units per acre
e. Corner side yard (adjacent or) 30 ft. to public right-ofway
f. Rear yard (non-riparian)
Rear yard OHW (riparian)
25 ft.
50 ft (minimum) or as
regulated by the DNR,
whichever is greater
g. Distance between buildings on same lot 10 ft.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.2 – Residential Zoning Districts Page 12
4.2.7 Mobile Home Residential (R-4)
a. Purpose. The purpose of the Mobile Home Requirements is to provide for mobile
home uses and appropriate safe, sanitary and attractive environment.
b. Site Plan Requirements. A site plan shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission and City Council in accordance with procedures outlined and
information required within the Subdivision Regulations.
c. Permitted Uses.
1. Recreation and Open Space
2. Essential Services
3. Licensed Day Care Facility (14 or less children, 8 or less adults)
d. Conditional Uses.
1. Mobile Home within mobile home parks (independent)
2. Licensed Day Care Facility (14 or more children)
e. Accessory Uses.
1. Off-street parking facilities.
2. Recreational vehicles and equipment.
3. Swimming pools, tennis courts, and other recreational facilities.
4. Fencing, screening, and landscaping as provided and required in Section 6.0
of this Ordinance.
5. Tool sheds, storage buildings, and other similar accessory structures.
f. Performance and Architectural Standards.
The following regulations apply to all new construction in the R-4 zoning district.
1. Maximum height of building:
? Principal (stories and feet) 2-1/2, but no more than 35 feet
? Accessory (stories and feet) 1, but no more than 26 feet
2. Proposed accessory structure for the individual mobile home, including the
garage, shall be made of similar materials and have consistent architectural
elements as the principal structure to ensure visual compatibility.
3. Each lot shall be allowed one accessory structure, excluding the garage.
4. Mobile homes shall not be used for residential purposes in the City if they:
a. Do not conform to the requirements of the Vehicle Code of the State of
Minnesota.
b. Are in an unsanitary condition or have an exterior in bad repair.
c. Are structurally unsound and do not protect the inhabitants against all
elements.
d. Do not have adequate sewage facilities as required by the City Council in
accordance with the Minnesota Department of Health regulations.
3. No tents shall be used other than recreational purposes in a mobile home
park.
4. Recreational vehicle parking is permitted as allowed by City ordinances, but
shall not be used for occupancy.
5. Access to mobile home parks shall be as approved by the City.
6. All mobile homes shall have their homes numbered so as to be visible from
the street.
7. All principal structures shall follow the setback requirements as identified in
section (4.2.7 (h)) of this section.
8. Skirting: Manufactured homes shall be skirted between the bottom of the
manufactured home and the ground with a fireproof and masonry material
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.2 – Residential Zoning Districts Page 13
within 30 days of the placement of the manufactured home.
9. Landscaping and vegetation shall follow the requirements in Section 6.10 and
approved by the City.
10. There shall be one principal dwelling unit per lot.
11. Impervious coverage shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent for the entire
mobile home park. This includes calculating all structures, driveways and
paved walkways.
12. A minimum of five-hundred (500) square feet per manufactured home shall
be provided for definable play areas and open space within the manufactured
home park.
13. The area beneath a mobile home coach shall be enclosed except that such
enclosure must have access for inspection.
14. Manufactured home parks shall establish emergency storm protections for all
residence in the park.
15. A manufactured home park shall have an adequate central community
building. Such building must be provided with rest room facilities, have
adequate heating in all areas, and be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary
condition.
g. Density. The maximum density shall be seven (7) manufactured homes per net
developable acre.
h. Lot Requirements and Setbacks.
The following regulations apply to all new mobiles homes within a mobile home
park.
1. Each mobile home site shall have off-street parking space for two (2) or more
automobiles. The parking space shall accommodate vehicles at least 20 feet
long.
2. Each mobile home park shall maintain a hard surfaced off-street parking lot
for guests of occupants in the amount of one (1) space for each five (5)
coach sites. Access drives off roads to all parking spaces and coach sites
shall be hard surfaced.
3. Utilities: All mobile homes shall be connected to public water and sanitary
sewer system or a private water and sewer system approved by the State
Department of Health. The State Department of Health must approve all
installations for disposal of surface storm water. The City shall approve all
utility connections. All utilities shall be underground. There shall be no
overhead wires or supporting poles except those essential for arrest or other
Minimum lot area 6,000 SF
Minimum lot width 60 ft.
Minimum lot depth 100ft
Front yard 20 ft
Side yard 10 ft.
Rear yard 20 feet
Exterior boundary of any mobile home court 20 ft.
Maximum density 7 units per acre
Corner side yard (adjacent or) 30 ft. to public right-ofway
Rear yard (non-riparian)
Rear yard OHW (riparian)
25 ft.
50 ft (minimum) or as
regulated by the DNR,
whichever is greater
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.2 – Residential Zoning Districts Page 14
lighting purposes.
4. The City must approve the method of garbage, waste, and trash disposal.
5. The Court Owner shall pay any required sewer connection fees to the City.
6. All streets within the mobile home park shall be hard surfaced and have a
hard surfaced curb and gutter as approved by the City.
7. All streets shall be privately owned streets and shall be developed with a
road bed of not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width and shall meet City
design specifications.
8. Buffer Area: A green belt, at least twenty (20) feet in width shall be located
along all boundaries of the mobile home park, except where it is crossed by
driveways, streets and roads.
9. Recreation: All mobile home courts shall have at least ten (10%) percent of
the land areas developed for recreational use (tennis courts, children’s play
equipment, swimming pool, golf green, etc.) developed and maintained at the
owner-operator’s expense.
10. Drainage facilities. All drainage facilities shall be properly designed to control
surface water runoff.
11. Lighting: The mobile home park shall have a street lighting plan approved by
the City. Artificial light shall be maintained during all hours of darkness along
streets and in all buildings containing public toilets, laundry equipment, and
the like.
i. Anchoring and Support Systems.
1. The provisions made for anchoring systems shall be based on the
regulations outlined in the current Minnesota Building Code.
4.2.8 Reserved
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: October 2000, October 2006, March 2010, May 2016)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.3 – Commercial Zoning Districts Page 1
4.3 COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
A. Purpose: The purpose of this district is to provide a variety of retail and services to residents,
neighborhoods, and travelers. The emphasis is to place convenience for all motor vehicles,
bicycles and pedestrians.
B. Design Review: A formal design review procedure is required subject to the requirements of
Section 3.4. The Planning Commission shall make recommendation for the design review to
the City Council and final action from the City Council is required.
4.3.1 Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
a. Purpose: To provide for attractive neighborhood shopping centers that is compatible
with residential neighborhoods. Convenience for pedestrian and bicycle access shall
be integrated. The center should be designed to eliminate any nuisance or
incompatibility with surrounding land uses.
b. Permitted Uses
1. Permitted Agricultural uses
2. Public parks and recreation
3. Essential Services
4. Public/Semi-Public facilities
5. Convenience commercial retail/service uses serving the day-to-day needs of
neighborhood residents including, but not limited to, small grocery, and branch
bank.
6. Personal services including, but not limited to laundry/cleaners pick-up,
barber/beauty shop.
7. State licensed day care centers
8. Small restaurants
9. Small animal clinics, excluding establishments with outside runs and non-patient
overnight boarding.
10. Medical and dental clinics
11. Physical Fitness Centers of 4,000 square feet floor area or less.
c. Conditional Uses
1. Motor fuel stations, provided that:
a) The fuel sale is incidental to a retail store.
b) No separate building, structure or store is used as part of the fuel sales.
c) No more than four dispensing pumps.
d) Pump island shall be set back at least 25 feet from any street right-of-way,
at least 40 feet from any non-street property line.
2. Physical Fitness Centers of 4,000 square feet floor area or more.
d. Performance and Architectural Standards
It is in the best interest of the City to promote high standards of architecture design
and compatibility with surrounding structures and neighborhoods.
1. Acceptable exterior materials are divided into Class 1, Class 2, and Class
3 categories as presented in the table below. Facades facing public rightof-
way or residential district must be composed of at least 65 percent of
Class 1 or 2 materials, with Class 1 materials comprising at least 25
percent of the total façade. Side and rear facades not visible from public
right-of-way or residential districts may use any combination of Class 1, 2,
or 3
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.3 – Commercial Zoning Districts Page 2
Classes of Material
Class 1 Class 2 Class 3
? Brick
? Natural Stone
? Glass
? Seamless metal panels
? Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved
by the City Administrative
? Masonry Stucco
? Decorative Concrete Block
? Decorative Concrete
Panels
? Tile
? Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by
the City Administrative
? Industrial grade concrete
panels
? Smooth concrete
? Scored concrete
? Ceramic
? Wood
? Aluminum or vinyl Siding
? Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved
by the City Administrative
2. The combined gross floor area of all buildings within any single NC District
shall not exceed 50,000 square feet, and the gross floor area of any single
business establishment shall not exceed 20,000 square feet.
3. Exterior surfaces of all primary structures shall be face brick, architectural
concrete, glass, decorative block, or natural stone. A wall surface may
use wood or vinyl as an accent material, provided that they are
appropriately integrated into the overall building design.
4. Colors shall be generally subtle, low reflectance, neutral or earth tones.
Brighter metallic or fluorescent colors should be reserved for use as
accents.
5. Trash receptacles shall be screened or placed in the rear of the property
and not be visible from Highway 8.
6. Truck and trailer parking shall be on the side or back of the building and
not block the front façade of building.
7. Merchandise which is offered for sale may be displayed beyond the
confines of a building, but the area occupied by such outdoor display shall
not constitute a greater number of square feet than ten percent of the
ground floor area of the principle building. The area for display shall be
located near the principle structure. Any other outside storage or display
is prohibited.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.3 – Commercial Zoning Districts Page 3
e. Lot Requirements and Setbacks
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the Neighborhood
Commercial District subject to the additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth:
Lot Area 20,000 square feet
Lot Width 150 feet
Setbacks – Front Yard 40 feet
Setbacks – Rear Yard 30 feet
Setbacks – Side Yard
Setbacks – Side Yard to any ROW
20 feet
30 feet
Setback from adjacent residential lot 30 feet
Maximum Impervious Surface 60%
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.3 – Commercial Zoning Districts Page 4
4.3.2 Central Business (CB)
A. Purpose: The purpose of this district is to encourage the continuation of the
downtown as the central commercial area of the City. Allowing retail, service, office,
and entertainment facilities, as well as public and nonprofit uses of a certain design
quality will encourage this.
B. Permitted Uses:
Commercial establishments offering merchandise or services to the general public,
which include but are not limited to:
1. Retail establishments, including but not limited to grocery stores, bakeries,
drug stores, hardware, craft, gift, floral, clothing and furniture stores.
2. Personal services, including tailor, barber, salons/spas, jewelry repair,
shoe repair, photo studio & print shops.
3. Dry cleaning stations (excluding processing)
4. Eating & drinking establishments
5. Professional offices including medical, dental, chiropractic, & law offices.
6. Small electronic repair services including, radio, computer, TV.
7. Banks, finance, insurance & real estate services.
8. Entertainment and amusement service, including, bowling & theaters.
9. State Licensed Day Care Facility
10. Residential uses in accordance with Section 4.2.6.
11. Public/Semi-public/non-profit facilities
12. Automobile parking lots
13. Essential Services
14. Bike sales & repairs
15. Public Parks and Recreation
C. Conditional Uses:
1. Minor auto repair
2. Auto body, motor fuel stations and convenience stores.
3. Outside display of merchandise, excluding temporary sidewalk sales or
special events sales.
4. On and off sale liquor establishments
5. Laundromats
6. Wholesale sales
7. Lodging service including B & B, hotel, motel.
8. Residential uses above a permitted or conditionally permitted first floor
use.
D. Performance and Architectural Standards:
1. Maximum height of building
? Principal structure (stories and feet) 3, but no more than 40 feet.
? Accessory structure (stories and feet) 1, but no more than 20 feet.
1. For each front, side or rear yard in the CB District abutting directly or
across an alley from any residential zone property, there shall be provided
a front, side or rear yard setback equal to the adjacent residential district
setback requirements.
2. The gross floor area of any single business shall not exceed 20,000
square feet.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.3 – Commercial Zoning Districts Page 5
3. Trash receptacles shall be screened or placed in the rear of the property
and not be visible from Highway 8.
4. Truck and trailer parking shall be on the side or back of the building and
not block the front façade of building.
5. Colors shall be generally subtle, low reflectance, neutral or earth tones.
Brighter metallic or fluorescent colors should be reserved for use as
accents.
6. Acceptable exterior materials are divided into Class 1, Class 2, and Class
3 categories as presented in the table below. Facades facing public rightof-
way or residential district must be composed of at least 65 percent of
Class 1 or 2 materials, with Class 1 materials comprising at least 25
percent of the total façade.
Classes of Material
Class 1 Class 2 Class 3
? Brick
? Natural Stone
? Glass
? Seamless metal panels
? Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by
the City Administrative
? Masonry Stucco
? Decorative Concrete Block
? Decorative Concrete Panels
? Tile
? Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by
the City Administrative
? Industrial grade concrete
panels
? Smooth concrete
? Scored concrete
? Ceramic
? Wood
? Aluminum or vinyl Siding
? Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by
the City Administrative
E. Lot Requirements and Setbacks:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the Central Business
District subject to the additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth:
Lot Area 5,000 square feet
Minimum Width 50 feet
Minimum Depth 60 feet
Setback – Front yard 0 feet
Setback - Side Yard 0 feet
Setback - Rear Yard 15 feet
Maximum Impervious Surface 90%
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.3 – Commercial Zoning Districts Page 6
4.3.3 Highway Commercial (HC)
A. Purpose: The purpose of the Highway Commercial district is to provide an area for
commercial uses conveniently located and of a quality design for use by residents
and travelers on major highways and the broader community.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. All permitted uses in the CB District.
2. Motor fuel stations
3. Hotel/Motel
4. Carwash
5. Strip commercial retail centers including sale of general retail merchandise
6. Churches
7. Day care facilities including pre-school
8. Small appliance rental
9. Laboratory and related facilities
10. Recreational entertainment
C. Conditional Uses:
1. Outside sales area
2. Auto repair (minor), enclosed building material sales and other autorelated
services.
3. Retail establishments that exceed 150,000 square feet. This shall include
strip malls as one building limited to 150,000 square feet and not each
individual unit, but the entire building.
4. All residential units above the first floor of a permitted or conditionally
permitted commercial uses
D. Performance and Architectural Standards
It is in the best interest of the City to promote high standards of architecture
design, provide visual interest, at the scale of the pedestrian, reduce massive
aesthetic effects, and be compatible with surrounding structures and
neighborhoods.
2. Maximum height of building
? Principal structure (stories and feet) 3, but no more than 40 feet.
? Accessory structure (stories and feet) 1, but no more than 20 feet.
3. Exterior surfaces of all primary structures shall be face brick, architectural
concrete, glass, decorative block, or natural stone. A wall surface may
use wood or vinyl as an accent material, provided that they are
appropriately integrated into the overall building design.
4. Colors shall be generally subtle, low reflectance, neutral or earth tones.
Brighter metallic or fluorescent colors should be reserved for use as
accents.
5. Merchandise which is offered for sale may be displayed beyond the
confines of a building, but the area occupied by such outdoor display shall
not constitute a greater number of square feet than ten percent of the
ground floor area of the principle building. The area for display shall be
located near the principle structure. Any other outside storage or display
is prohibited.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.3 – Commercial Zoning Districts Page 7
6. Trash receptacles shall be screened or placed in the rear of the property
and not be visible from Highway 8.
7. Truck and trailer parking shall be on the side or back of the building and
not block the front façade of building.
8. Acceptable exterior materials are divided into Class 1 and Class 2
categories as presented in the table below. Facades facing public right-ofway
or residential district must be composed of at least 65 percent of
Class 1 or 2 materials, with Class 1 materials comprising at least 25
percent of the total façade. Side and rear facades not visible from public
right-of-way or residential districts may use any combination of Class 1, 2,
or 3.
Classes of Material
Class 1 Class 2 Class 3
? Brick
? Natural Stone
? Glass
? Seamless metal panels
? Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by
the City Administrative
? Masonry Stucco
? Decorative Concrete Block
? Decorative Concrete Panels
? Tile
? Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by
the City Administrative
? Industrial grade concrete
panels
? Smooth concrete
? Scored concrete
? Ceramic
? Wood
? Aluminum or vinyl Siding
? Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by
the City Administrative
9. Retail establishments exceeding 50,000 square feet in floor space are
allowed in the Highway Commercial District and shall meet or exceed
these additional standards:
a. Animating features such as arcades, display windows, and entry
awnings shall be used at least 60% of the façade.
b. Provide a clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances. All
public entrances shall feature at least three of the following:
• Canopies or porticos
• Overhangs, projections, and raised corniced parapets
• Arcades, arches and entry courts
• Peaked roof forms
• Outdoor patios Display windows
• Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which
are integrated into the building structure and design
• Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped
areas and/or places for sitting.
c. Parking lots provided for these retail establishments shall be
divided by landscaping and/or pedestrian walkways.
d. If the façade is over 100 feet in length, projections or recesses of
3 feet in depth shall be incorporated for every 50 feet of façade.
Extend these over 20% of the façade.
e. Building facades over 100 feet in length must include a repeating
pattern that shall include no less than three of the elements listed
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.3 – Commercial Zoning Districts Page 8
below. At least one of these elements shall repeat horizontally.
All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than thirty (30)
feet, either horizontally or vertically.
• Color change.
• Texture change.
• Materials module change
• Expression of architectural or structural bay through a
change in plane no less than 12 inches in width, such as an
offset, reveal, or projecting rib.
F. Lot Requirements and Setbacks:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the Highway Commercial
District subject to the additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth:
Lot Area 35,000 square feet
Minimum Width 175 feet
Setback –
Public Right-of-way
50 feet
Setback - Side Yard 20 feet
Setback - Rear Yard 30 feet
Maximum Impervious Surface 70%
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: October 2000, October 2006, November 2008, February 2013, May
2017)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.4 – Industrial Zoning Districts Page 1
4.4 INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
A. Purpose. The Industrial Zoning District is intended to provide quality designed buildings or
sites for industrial uses that may be suitably located in areas of relatively close proximity to
shoreland and non-industrial development. Industries that pose problems such as air, water,
or noise pollution will not be permitted in this district.
B. All new and remodeled development in the Industrial Zoning Districts shall require a design
permit and design review according to the regulations in Section 3.5.
4.4.1 Light Industrial (LI)
A. Purpose: The purpose of the Light Industrial Zoning District is established to provide
land to serve industrial, manufacturing, and warehouse needs that provide vital
services and increase the tax base of the City. The nature of LI uses prohibits their
operation in most other districts in the City.
B. Permitted Uses:
Such permitted establishments shall include, but are not limited to the following:
1. Light assembly/light manufacturing
2. Auto and truck washes
3. Storage and warehousing within a primary business
4. Carpet cleaning, dry cleaning
5. Custom shop for making articles produced, or products sold at retail on
the premises.
6. Laboratory, research, experimental, and testing.
7. Nursery sales or green houses.
8. All fabricating, manufacturing, processing, production, or other industrial
use provided the activity shall be undertaken within completely enclosed
buildings.
9. Construction contractors, office and storage yards.
10. Printing shops and companies.
11. Storage in bulk, of such materials as building supplies, contracting
equipment, furniture, food, fabrics, hardware, or similar goods, when
entirely enclosed in building, provided that such permitted storage building
shall not store junk, metals, petroleum and other inflammable liquids in
above ground tanks, paint, and paint materials, discarded or salvaging
material, or be used for wrecking or dismantling of motor vehicles.
12. Essential Services
13. Recreational Facilities
14. Public/Semi-Public Facilities
15. Parks and open space
C. Conditional Uses:
1. Outdoor storage or sales of materials, equipment or vehicles.
2. Recycling Collection Centers.
3. Mini Storage.
4. Mineral Extraction and Manufacturing according to the regulations in
Section 7.5
5. Automobile sales, and service, including body repair.
6. Storage and sale of lumber, brick, stone, provided such use is stored
behind a fence of a minimum of eight (8) feet in height with screening,
landscaping and berming subject to design review.
7. Adult Establishment as regulated in Section 208.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.4 – Industrial Zoning Districts Page 2
8. Any other use recommended by the Planning Commission and approved
by the City Council to be of the same general character as the permitted
or conditionally permitted uses which will not impair the present or future
use of surrounding properties.
D. Performance and Architectural Standards:
The following performance standards shall apply to all permitted and conditionally
permitted light industrial areas.
1. In determining compliance with the performance standards of this section,
the zoning administrator may refer any matter to such governmental
agencies or other entities as deemed necessary to obtain their review and
comments as to such compliance.
2. Storage of Materials. Ancillary and accessory buildings shall be
constructed of similar material and design of the primary structure to
permit the keeping of articles, goods, or materials, or planted ground cover
in the open or exposed to public view. When necessary to store or keep
such materials in the open, the area of outdoor storage shall be screened
by a fence of no less than eight (8) feet in height, with screening,
landscaping and or berming. Such storage shall be limited to the rear twothirds
(2/3) of the lot.
3. Glare and Heat. No glare or heat shall be produced in any building in this
district which can be detected from a distance of more than fifty (50) feet
from the building which it is produced or from the property line, whichever
is closer.
4. Noxious Fumes, Odor, and Air Emissions. No use or structure shall make,
continue, permit or cause to be emitted into the open air any dust, gasses,
fumes, vapors, smoke and/or odors with objectionable properties and in
such quantities as would be likely to cause discomfort or annoyance to a
reasonable person of normal sensibilities that does one or more the
following:
a. Injures or are sufficient to injure the health or safety of any person or
the public;
b. creates an obnoxious odor in the atmosphere as recommended by
the Planning Commission and determined by the City Council or
authorized agent;
c. causes damage to property;
d. creates a nuisance or hazard by obscuring vision; or produces a
deleterious effect upon trees, plants or other forms of vegetation.
5. Explosive and flammable. All uses involving the manufacture, storage or
use of explosive or flammable materials shall employ best management
practices and the provision of adequate safety devices to guard against
the hazards of fire and explosion and adequate fire-fighting and firesuppression
devices standard in the industry. The manufacture, storage
or use of any explosive or blasting agent as defined in the Uniform Fire
Code shall be prohibited.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.4 – Industrial Zoning Districts Page 3
6. Exterior Lighting. Any light used for exterior illumination shall be directed
down and away from adjacent properties.
7. Waste Materials. No waste material shall be washed into the City Storm
Sewer. All waste materials must be properly disposed of an approved
landfill, or into the City Sanitary Sewer System as governed by the City
Sewer use ordinance. Any waste material which is found to be untreatable
by the City’s wastewater treatment system must be pretreated. All
pretreatment systems must be granted a permit by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency. All solid waste materials, debris, or refuse must
be properly contained within an enclosed building or container. Said
containers must be stored in racks designed for said purpose.
8. Inspections. In order to assure compliance with the standards set forth
above, the council may require the owner or operator of any permitted use
to make such investigations and tests as may be required to insure
adherence to the standards above. Any needed investigations or tests
shall be carried out by an independent testing organization as selected by
the City Council after thirty (30) days’ notice. The costs incurred in having
such investigation or tests shall be borne by the businesses unless such
owner/operator is found to be in compliance with the appropriate
Ordinance and State and Federal regulations.
9. Architectural Standards: It is in the best interest of the City to promote high
standards of architecture design and compatibility with surrounding
structures and neighborhoods.
a. Front facades must be composed of at least 75 percent of Class 1 or
2 materials, with at least 25 percent of Class 1 material on the total
façade. Side and rear facades visible to public right-of-ways, parks,
or residential property must be composed of as least 25 percent of
Class 1 or 2. Side and rear facades not visible from public right-ofway,
parks, residential property or district may use any combination
of Class 1, 2, or 3 materials.
Classes of Material
Class 1 Class 2 Class 3
? Brick
? Natural Stone
? Glass
? Seamless metal panels
? Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by
the City Administrative
? Masonry Stucco
? Decorative Concrete Block
? Decorative Concrete Panels
? Tile
? Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by
the City Administrative
? Industrial grade concrete
panels
? Smooth concrete
? Scored concrete
? Ceramic
? Wood
? Aluminum or vinyl Siding
? Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by
the City Administrative
10. All rooftop or ground mounted mechanical equipment, satellite dish
antennas, and exterior trash storage areas shall be screened with
materials compatible with the principal structure.
11. Accessory structures, either attached or detached from the primary
structure, shall be constructed of identical materials, style, quality, and
appearance as the principal structure.
12. Screen walls, and exposed areas of retaining walls shall be of similar
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.4 – Industrial Zoning Districts Page 4
type, quality, and appearance as the principal structure.
13. Landscape requirement to be 2% of the building value.
E. Lot Requirements and Setbacks:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the Light Industrial district
subject to additional requirements and modifications set forth in this ordinance.
Minimum Lot Area 1.5 Acres
Lot Width 150 feet
Setbacks – Public Right of Way 35 feet
Setbacks – Side 25 feet
Setbacks – Rear Yard 25 feet
50 feet from residential property
Maximum Impervious Surface 70%
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.4 – Industrial Zoning Districts Page 5
4.4.2 Office Park Industrial (OPI)
A. Provide a location for high quality design office type research and development
master planned district.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. Business, professional and medical offices, supplies and services.
2. Administrative office for financial, insurance and real estate institutions (not
for sales operations)
3. Research and Development facilities.
4. Essential Services
5. Public/Semi-Public facilities
6. Parks and open space.
C. Conditional Uses:
1. Light manufacturing/offices of medical, computer, or scientific products.
2. Wholesale trade.
3. Medical clinics.
4. Light fabrication of computer components or equipment.
5. Use as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the
City Council to be of the same general character as the permitted or
conditionally permitted use.
D. Performance and Architectural Standards:
1. Maximum height of building:
? Principle structure – 3 stories, but no more than 40 feet
2. Acceptable exterior materials are divided into Class 1, Class 2, and Class 3
categories as presented in the table below. Facades facing public right-ofway
or residential district must be composed of at least 65 percent of Class
1 or 2 materials, with Class 1 materials comprising at least 25 percent of the
total façade. Side and rear facades not visible from public right-of-way or
residential districts may use any combination of Class 1, 2, or 3
Classes of Material
Class 1 Class 2 Class 3
? Brick
? Natural Stone
? Glass
? Seamless metal panels
? Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by
the City Administrative
? Masonry Stucco
? Decorative Concrete Block
? Decorative Concrete Panels
? Tile
? Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by
the City Administrative
? Industrial grade concrete
panels
? Smooth concrete
? Scored concrete
? Ceramic
? Wood
? Aluminum or vinyl Siding
? Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by
the City Administrative
E. Lot Requirements and Setbacks:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the OPI district subject to
additional requirements and modifications set forth in this ordinance.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.4 – Industrial Zoning Districts Page 6
Minimum Lot Area 2 Acres
Lot Width 200 feet
Setbacks – Public Right of Way 50 feet
Setbacks – Side 25 feet
50 feet from residential property
Setbacks – Rear Yard 25 feet
50 feet from residential property
Maximum Impervious Surface 70%
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: October 2000, April 2005, October 2006, November 2008, January
2012)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.5 – Planned Development Districts – PUD, PMD, PID Page 1
4.5 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
4.5.1 ADMINISTRATION
A. Purpose: The purpose of utilizing Planned Development Districts (PDD) for guiding
new development is to place emphasis upon a more flexible regulatory process as
compared to rather rigid development regulations common to traditional zoning
districts. The Planned Development process provides for a joint planning/design
effort by developers and City officials rather than the City establishing maximum
limits within which developers may perform.
There are two Planned Development Districts, and PUD process which are all
included within this chapter. Each district and process will adhere to the general
PDD process defined within this section. The three PDD in this ordinance include:
Planned Unit Development (PUD), Planned Mixed-use Development (PMD), and
Planned Industrial Mixed-use (PID). Benefits resulting from a more flexible
regulatory process include an opportunity to protect and preserve valuable natural
resources and amenities through negotiations and discussion between developer
and City. The Planned Development process also assures a higher quality manmade
environment because the developer and City work together to find solutions.
In addition, Planned Development assures planning and development on a more
comprehensive scale. It considers a complex set of associated uses and is
planned as a single entity which helps ensure compatibility of land uses and
consideration of relationships between different uses in the City.
a. Application Review Process
Procedures for applying for approval of a Planned Development project shall be
essentially the same for all Planned Development Districts whether residential,
commercial, industrial, and any combination thereof. All Planned Development
Projects shall require a PDD permit to be applied for at the time of Preliminary
Plan submittal. The permit shall be granted after the Final Plan and/or Plat are
approved. The approved plan shall be granted either a PDD/PUD, PDD/PMD,
or PDD/PID permit to proceed.
b. Pre-application Meeting
Prior to submission of any plan for consideration to the Planning Commission,
the potential applicant shall meet with the City Planner and City Administration
or their designated representative to discuss the proposed project relative to
community development objectives for the area in question to learn what
procedural steps and exhibits shall be required. During this meeting the
Applicant shall be required to identify how the proposed PDD plan will support
the goals and objectives as set forth in the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
c. Preliminary Plan Submittal Procedure
1. The applicant shall file a Letter of Intent with the City stating their intention
to develop property under the PUD provisions along with the application fee
and escrow deposit to cover all administrative, legal, engineering, planning
and other costs required for review of the project. The amount to be
deposited shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based on an
estimate of the costs to be incurred and fee schedule. Any escrow amount
remaining after administration, planning, engineering and legal costs have
been paid will be refunded to the applicant. If the deposit is not sufficient,
the applicant must submit an additional amount to the Zoning Administrator
before Preliminary approval will be granted.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.5 – Planned Development Districts – PUD, PMD, PID Page 2
2. The PUD Preliminary request shall be referred to the Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and process the
application. The applicant shall present at least eight (8) full size and
eighteen (18) 11 x 17 copies of the information listed in 4.5.1.4. The
Planning Commission and the City staff shall study such information and
shall make a recommendation to the City Council after the required public
hearing within forty-five (45) days.
3. The City Council shall approve or disapprove the preliminary PDD request
with consideration of the Planning Commissions recommendation.
4. Upon the applicant’s receipt of the preliminary approval from the City
Council and any modification to the plans required by the Council, the
applicant may proceed to file a request for final approval. Failure to do so
within twelve (12) months of the date of the receipt of the preliminary
approval shall make the preliminary approval null and void.
5. Preliminary approval shall not bind the City to subsequent final approval
unless all terms of preliminary approval are met.
d. Preliminary Plan Required Exhibits
The following exhibits are required for presentation to and review by City staff,
consultants, Planning Commission, and City Council at specified intervals during the
Planned Development process as described below.
1. A narrative description of the developer’s interest in the property in question. This
narrative should also address how the proposed development fits into the overall
vision for the community.
2. Abstractor’s certified property certificate showing the names and addresses of
property owners within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the property;
3. Location map showing property in relation to the City as a whole and to the City’s
primary facilities and infrastructure including, but not limited to: thoroughfares,
schools, parks, trails, and shopping areas;
4. A legal description of the property including approximate total acreage;
5. Boundary survey prepared by a registered surveyor of the property and 100 feet
beyond, showing:
a) Existing property lines and dimensions.
b) Ownership of all parcels with current zoning and uses.
c) Platting and easements
d) Street and railroad rights-of-way
e) Proposed and existing buildings
f) Future building expansion, if relevant
g) Utility lines and facilities, including fire hydrants
h) Estimate of monthly electric, water, and wastewater usage, if public
i) General topographic features (2 foot contours)
j) Location and extent of canopy tree cover
k) Slope analysis (0-15, 16-25, 35+%)
l) Location and delineation of swamps, wetlands, and streams
m) Significant rock out croppings
n) Existing drainage patterns and ponding areas
6. Natural features map or maps of the property in question and 100 feet beyond
showing:
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.5 – Planned Development Districts – PUD, PMD, PID Page 3
a) Description (visual or written) of relationship of proposed sites and conservation
framework adopted as part of the comprehensive plan Contour lines at no more
than two-foot intervals
b) Steep slopes of 18% and over
c) Hydrologic information including drainage patterns, wetlands and land subject to
periodic flooding
d) Soil and subsoil conditions
e) Vegetation including classification of tree cover by species
7. Map or maps of the property in question and 100 feet beyond, showing:
a) Land Use and occupancy
b) Existing Zoning
8. Map or maps and supporting narrative indicating in a schematic manner the
proposed development including:
a) Broad development objectives
b) Proposed land uses
c) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation
d) Housing types and densities
e) Open-space uses, ownership and method of maintenance, if applicable
f) Drainage and utility plans
g) Preliminary Plat
h) Preliminary Grading Plan
i) Preliminary Landscape Plan
9. Economic and related development data, if applicable (required as part of PMD or
PID proposal), including:
a) Method and schedule of development
b) Financial capability of owner and/or developer
c) Economic and fiscal resources available for development
d) Market area of project and demand trends within such area
10. Additional information that may be needed for clarification if requested by the
Planning Commission and/or the City Council.
e. Final Plan and Final Plat Submittal Procedures
If a Final Plan covering at least five (5) dwelling units, or ten percent (10%) of the area,
whichever is greater, has not been filed within six months from the date Council grants
Final Plan approval, the approval shall expire. The Council, at its discretion, may extend
the filing deadline for additional periods not in excess of six months each when such
extension is shown to be for good cause.
1. The applicant shall file with the City a request for final approval along with the
required fee to cover the costs of plan checking and processing, plus an escrow
deposit to cover administration, planning, engineering, legal and other costs. The
amount to be deposited shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based on an
estimate of the costs to be incurred by the City. Any amount remaining after
administrative, planning, engineering and legal costs have been paid will be refunded
to applicant. If the deposit is not sufficient, the applicant must pay the additional
amount to the City before final approval will be granted.
2. The request shall be referred to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission
shall hold a public hearing if in the sole discretion of the Planning Commission there
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.5 – Planned Development Districts – PUD, PMD, PID Page 4
has been a change or changes in project. Eight (8) full size and eighteen (18) 11 x
17 copies of all information listed in section 4.5.1.6, and other data, as deemed
necessary by the Zoning Administrator, shall be submitted for final review. The
Commission shall make a recommendation to the Council within forty-five (45) days
of the submission of the final PDD plans.
3. The City Council may require additional information as deemed necessary. Radial
search be required and provided by the City.
4. The City Council shall evaluate the PDD request using all criteria consistent with this
ordinance, the needs of the City of Chisago City, the adopted Comprehensive Plan
Goals and Policies, and common land use planning principles and standards, and
shall make its decision within sixty (60) days of the date of the Public Hearing.
f. Final Plan Required Exhibits
The following exhibits are required for presentation to and review by City staff and
consultants, Planning Commission, and City Council at specified intervals during the
Planned Development process as described in this chapter.
The Final Plan submittal has essentially the same information as presented in the
Preliminary Plan, however, shall include a more finalized plan and updated and/or
recommended changes included for review by both the Planning Commission and/or the
City Council. The submittal shall include:
1. Plan or plans at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet and supporting narrative
description depicting in a detailed manner the proposed site development including:
? Broad development objectives
? Proposed land uses
? Location of structures
? Location of future expansion (if applicable)
? Vehicle and pedestrian circulation facilities
? Parking area and number of stalls (multifamily, commercial, and industrial)
? Open space uses, ownership and method of maintenance
? Grading plan
? Landscaping plan including species and size
? Tree Preservation
? Lighting plan
2. Utility plans at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet indicating size and placement of
water, sanitary lines, and stormwater management plans, fire hydrants, drainage
facilities, and any other pertinent utility related information;
3. Preliminary architectural plans at one-eight (1/8) inch equals one foot, showing floor
plans and elevations of all building types
4. A tabulation indicating the proposed number of dwelling units and gross density, if
applicable.
5. Final Plat, if applicable
g. Construction and Maintenance
1. Staging. It is recognized that certain PDD requests may involve construction over
several years. If it is proposed to develop a project during a period which will exceed
two years, the applicant may request approval for the entire project and permission to
submit detailed information respecting only the first stage or stages of the project. If
permission pursuant to such a request is granted by the City Council, a separate
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.5 – Planned Development Districts – PUD, PMD, PID Page 5
Public Hearing may nevertheless be required for each successive stage of the
project and detailed plans shall be submitted in accordance with the approved
phasing schedule outlined in the concept PDD approval.
2. Covenants, Easements and Restrictions. The final Plan shall contain such proposed
covenants, easements, and other provisions relating to the bulk, location and density
of residential units, non-residential uses and public facilities as are necessary for the
welfare of the PDD and are consistent with the best interest of the entire City.
3. Streets, Utilities, Services and Public Facilities. The uniqueness of each proposal for
Planned Development requires that specifications and standards for streets, utilities
and services shall be subject to minor modifications from the specifications and
standards established in this and other City ordinances governing their construction.
The City Council may therefore waive or modify the specifications or standards
where it is found that they are not required in the interest of the PDD occupants or of
the entire City. The plans and profiles of all streets, utilities and services shall be
reviewed, modified, if necessary, and approved by the City Engineer, Fire Chief, and
Building Official, prior to approval of the Final Plan by the City Council. All PDD
projects shall be served by public or community water and sewer systems.
h. Planned Development District Review/Revision
1. Review. The zoning administrator shall review all PDDs as deemed necessary, and
shall update the City Council and the Planning Commission as to the status of the
development. The purpose of the review is to ensure that development is happening
in a reasonable amount of time and to make sure that the development is consistent
with the goals of the PDD agreement and the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
2. Final Plan Revisions and Amendments to Planned Developments. Minor changes
that respond to requirements made by engineering related to location, placement,
and heights of buildings and structures may be authorized by the Zoning
Administrator if the circumstance does not significantly alter the approved plan. All
other changes are subject to review by the City Council and Planning Commission
and shall be approved by the necessary authority to ensure the proposed changes
are consistent with the approved Final Plan. If major changes to the approved plan
are proposed, the Applicant may be asked to submit a set of full size plans and
resubmit for formal review by the Planning Commission and the City Council.
3. Certificate of Occupancy Permit. Occupancy of a Planned Development will not be
allowed until the Building Official authorizes issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy
Permit.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.5 – Planned Development Districts – PUD, PMD, PID Page 6
4.5.2 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
a. Purpose. The purpose of a PUD is to provide a means for ensuring variety, innovation
and flexibility in the development of land and its improvements, and for purposes of this
section focuses primarily on residential development but may be applied to small
commercial and light industrial development.
The PUD process is intended to encourage a mixture of uses and unit styles in an
integrated and well planned area to improve neighborhood design and promote a better,
and healthier living environment. The PUD provides a more comprehensive development
plan which promotes attention to the relationship between buildings and the environment,
and buildings and people. Oftentimes developments become overly focused on site
regulations and ultimately the best design is not permitted because of these restrictions.
The purpose of the PUD is to avoid such situations, and to consequently allow a strong
and joint relationship between the City and the developer, and ultimately create the best
development which considers the environment, the site, the relationship with the greater
City which will improve and enhance the City.
b. Qualifications and Requirements
The following criteria will either promote or require an applicant to utilize the PUD process
when proposing a development in the City.
1. Land to be improved that MUST be a PUD shall include:
a) Any parcel split resulting in 3 or more lots including outlots; or
b) At least (3) acres in size, and in the R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 Zoning District, or
c) At least (1) complete City block in size, or
d) Have a density of more than 9 dwelling units per acre, or
e) Contains unusual physical features, or
f) Contains land also included in the Conservation Overlay as defined on the Zoning
Map, or
g) Is of special historical interest.
2. Permitted uses in a Residential PUD may, at the city’s discretion, include detached,
attached, clustered or multi-storied dwelling unit structures, or any combination
thereof, and any nonresidential use designed to serve the residents of the PUD and
the vicinity, and approved by the City Administrator.
3. Permitted uses in nonresidential PUD’ s shall be limited to those permitted either
specifically or by Conditional Use Permit in the zoning district in which the proposed
PUD is to be located.
4. The density of structures and maximum building heights on privately or commonly
owned property shall not exceed the limits imposed by the zoning district in which the
structures are located.
5. Copies of all covenants and easements relating to the provision, use and
maintenance of common open space shall be filed with the City Clerk and approved
by the City Council. The requirements of these provisions shall be legally binding
upon all who are a party to them. When a homeowners association or other entity is
formed to maintain open space or facilities, the City shall be empowered to abate any
nuisance resulting from the lack of maintenance and shall have the authority to
assess the cost of the abatement of the nuisance to all property owners holding
membership in the association. The City reserves the right to file a lien against
property which is in violation of the city nuisance ordinance.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.5 – Planned Development Districts – PUD, PMD, PID Page 7
6. The PUD development shall be designed and constructed to harmonize with both
existing and proposed developments including the trail network, sidewalks, parks and
open space in the area surrounding the site. All developments shall be reviewed by
the City’s Comprehensive Plan and Park Board, and shall be subject to their review
and recommendation.
7. Land shall be dedicated to the City of Chisago City for recreation or other open space
purposes consistent with the standards and criteria contained in the subdivision
ordinance, Park Plan or Comprehensive Plan. Trails shall be designed, located and
improved as contained in the Comprehensive Plan and the Park and Trailway
Ordinance. All public utilities and communications transmission facilities shall be
installed underground. (Utility and drainage easements shall be as approved by City
Council.) Landscaping, sidewalks, natural area buffering and trails shall be provided
according to the approved plan and consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. All
private or public streets, sidewalks, parking areas, parks and storm sewer systems
shall be built in accordance with the City’s established subdivision ordinance and
utility design standards and specifications.
8. A building setback from the property line which is adjacent to the PUD site and which
is zoned or being used for a less intensive use shall be at least equal to twice the
proposed building’s height for the building adjacent line.
c. Performance and Architectural Standards
1. For all residential developments the following shall apply:
a) No two same or similar facades shall be permitted adjacent to each other; and
b) All proposed PUD developments having 25 units or more shall have a minimum
of 4 different unit types that shall be of considerable difference, which shall apply
to all developments including single family, townhome, multi-family and/or any
combination thereof, and
c) All proposed structures shall have a primary façade, however, attention to all
sides of the structure shall be required. Each side shall have a minimum of ten
percent (10%) of the surface area dedicated to fenestration, or accessory
materials (i.e. brick, stone, etc.) to encourage attractive structures from all sides.
d) Any PUD development may be required to connect the development to the
community trail system, even if that requires the developer to construct trails
outside of its development boundaries.
e) All PUDs shall follow the landscaping requirements as set forth in the Subdivision
ordinance Section 5.00
f) Housing choice and variety at a mix of income levels shall be considered a
priority
2. All proposed PUDs shall have sidewalks on both sides of each street and shall be
connected to the community trail system
3. All structures shall have a clearly defined entrance and should be easily navigable
4. Each structure should have a clearly marked house number that is visible from the
primary road.
d. Lot Requirements and Standards
1. All proposed structures shall meet and follow the regulations as defined in the
applicable zoning district.
2. Residential Clustering and Open space development shall be encouraged for all
developments, and shall be required for those developments that have a minimum of
50 percent of the property located in the Conservation Overlay corridors as defined in
the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.5 – Planned Development Districts – PUD, PMD, PID Page 8
3. The residential density in a PUD shall be equal to the density of the residential zone
district. In a residential PUD density shall be calculated by subtracting wetlands and
sloped areas with slopes of 25% or greater, parks, drainage areas, and road right-ofways
from gross land area and dividing that net developable area by the minimum lot
size requirement.
4. All proposed lots and structures shall have a buildable area exclusive of steep
slopes, wetlands, woodlands, and other natural amenities to encourage conservation
and preservation of natural resources in the community.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.5 – Planned Development Districts – PUD, PMD, PID Page 9
4.5.3 PLANNED MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PMD)
a. Purpose. The purpose of a PMD is to provide areas in the community where a mix of
residential and commercial and/or retail services can be accommodated in an integrated
pattern. The district will allow different unit types in the community and shall permit
development of housing in conjunction with commercial opportunities to create a unique
and diverse land use pattern on paved roads where PMD development is well suited.
This zoning district is identified geographically on the adopted Zoning Map which clearly
identifies areas in the community that are suited for this type of development and
proposed intensification.
b. Qualifications and Requirements
Properties zoned on the official zoning map as PMD shall be required to utilize the
standards and requirements in this chapter. If a property is adjacent to a PMD, and is
owned by the same owner, and the Applicant is proposing a master planned PMD area,
the applicant may be permitted to do so after approval from the Zoning Administrator
and/or the Planning Commission.
c. Performance and Architectural Standards
1. All proposed structures included in a PMD shall be of similar architectural quality and
integrity so as to present a consistent style and sense of place.
2. The following shall apply to the residential development in the PMD district:
a) No two same or similar facades shall be permitted adjacent to each other; and
b) A minimum of 25 percent of planned residential structures should be attached
c) All structures shall have articulation, fenestration, and architectural details to
promote four-sided architectural interest
d) All structures shall have a clearly defined entrance and should be easily navigable
and lighted for safety
e) Each structure shall have a clearly marked house number that is visible from the
primary road.
3. A minimum of 25 percent of all PMD areas must be allocated for commercial or retail
uses, and the following shall apply:
a) All commercial and retail businesses shall be oriented to pedestrians and shall be
accessible to adjacent residential properties also a part of the proposed PMD.
b) The combined gross floor area of all buildings within any single NC District shall
not exceed 50,000 square feet and the gross floor area of any single business
establishment shall not exceed 20,000 square feet to promote smaller scale
establishments and support of the goals and policies identified in the adopted
Comprehensive Plan.
c) All facades of such structures shall have a minimum of 30 percent of their façade
dedicated to fenestration, or articulation of some nature to promote architectural
interest.
d) Articulation shall occur a minimum of every 25 feet across the primary façade to
encourage visual interest and to avoid long facades with little or not detail.
e) All parking requirements shall be applied based on industry standards for the
proposed use of the structure and shall meet the requirements set forth in Section
6.06 of this ordinance.
4. Trail connections shall be encouraged between residential and non-residential uses
in a PMD area.
5. Bicycle facilities shall be provided at all business and retail establishments design as
a part of the PMD
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.5 – Planned Development Districts – PUD, PMD, PID Page 10
d. Lot Requirements and Standards
1. The residential development proposed as a part of the PMD shall follow minimum lot
size requirements and density limitations based on the requirements set forth as a
part of section 4.2.6. The following regulations apply to all single family detached,
and attached homes located or proposed in the PMD district. The regulations are as
follows:
a) Permitted and Conditional Uses in the PMD district shall be consistent with
those uses identified in the R-3 zoning district founding section 4.2.6.
b) All detached homes shall have a minimum of 6,000 Square Feet per dwelling
unit.
c) All attached townhomes, defined as units with private entry, shall have a
minimum of 4,500 square feet of lot per unit and shall meet all setback
requirements and lot standards.
d) All attached or multifamily homes shall have a minimum 3,500 square feet of lot
area per unit.
2. All proposed residential development shall be compatible with proposed retail and
commercial uses in the PMD District.
3. Screening and vegetation shall be used between residential and commercial uses to
help create a transition between uses.
4. The following uses are allowed for commercial and retail establishments within the
PMD district:
a) Permitted uses
1. All permitted uses in the Highway Commercial District
2. Motor fuel stations
3. Strip commercial retail centers including sale of general retail
merchandise
4. Liquor store – off sale
5. Physical Fitness Center
6. Day care facilities including pre-school
7. Recreational entertainment
b) Conditional Uses
1. On and off-sale drinking establishment
2. Retail with majority warehouse
3. Laundromat
4. Convention Center
5. Setbacks
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for Commercial development
within the PMD District subject to the additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth:
Lot Area 20,000 square feet
Lot Width 150 feet
Setbacks – Front Yard 40 feet
Setbacks – Rear Yard 30 feet
Setbacks – Side Yard 20 feet
Setbacks – Public Right of Way 30 feet
Setbacks – Highway 8 Right of Way 50 feet
Maximum Impervious Surface 70%
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.5 – Planned Development Districts – PUD, PMD, PID Page 11
4.5.4 PLANNED INDUSTRIAL MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT (PID)
a. Purpose. The purpose of a PID is to provide areas in the community where a mix of
residential and light industrial services can be accommodated in an integrated and
compatible pattern. The district will provide opportunities for different residential unit
types in the community and shall permit development of housing in conjunction with Light
Industrial uses. The purpose of providing an area suitable for master planning residential
and light industrial uses is to encourage residents to live near downtown and near jobs.
The PID district is an extension of the Light Industrial area that provides opportunities for
future mixed residential and light industrial development.
This zoning district is identified geographically on the adopted Zoning Map which clearly
identifies areas in the community that are suited for this type of development and
proposed intensification.
b. Qualifications and Requirements
Properties zoned on the official zoning map as PID shall be required to utilize the
standards and requirements in this chapter. If a property is adjacent to a PID, and is
owned by the same owner, and the Applicant is proposing a master planned PID area,
the applicant may be permitted to consider the area comprehensively after approval from
the Zoning Administrator and/or the Planning Commission.
c. Performance and Architectural Standards
1. The entire acreage of the PID district shall be considered and applied to the following
requirements:
a) Of the entire PID acreage, a minimum of 50% of the developable land shall be
dedicated to light industrial uses
2. All residential development shall implement the following:
a) No two same of similar facades shall be permitted adjacent to each other; and
b) A minimum of 15 percent of planned structures should be attached residential
structures; and
c) All structures shall have articulation, fenestration, and architectural details on all
sides of a structure to promote four-sided architectural interest; and
d) All structures shall have a clearly defined entrance and should be easily navigable
and lighted for safety
e) Each structure shall have a clearly market house number that is visible from the
primary road.
3. All light industrial development shall implement the following standards:
a) All proposed light industrial development shall provide adequate buffers between
light industrial uses and residential structures; and
b) Light industrial structures, when facing a residential unit, shall be required to
soften the visual impact through upgraded façade treatments, fenestration, or
architectural detail so as to present a more compatible relationship
c) Structures nearest to residential units shall be required to construct their facility of
bricks and mortar, with a foundation
d) Temporary, structures may be permitted in the interior of an industrial area
provided such structure is not adjacent or visually connected to a residential
structure.
e) Light industrial uses shall be required to provide vegetation and landscaping in
accordance with the City’s landscape ordinance.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.5 – Planned Development Districts – PUD, PMD, PID Page 12
d. Lot Requirements and Standards
1. The residential development proposed as a part of the PID shall follow minimum lot
size requirements and density limitations based on the requirements set forth as a
part of section 4.2.5. The following regulations apply to all single family detached
and attached homes located or proposed in the PID district. The regulations are as
follows:
a) Permitted and Conditional Uses in the residential development in a PID shall be
consistent with those used defined in the R-3 residential zoning district.
b) All detached homes shall have a minimum of 6,000 Square Feet per dwelling
unit.
c) All attached townhomes, defined as units with private entry, shall have a
minimum of 4,500 square feet of lot per unit and shall meet all setback
requirements and lot standards.
d) All attached or multifamily homes shall have a minimum 3,500 square feet of lot
area per unit (6 units or greater).
e) Parcels containing a residential structure and a light industrial structure shall be
required to have a minimum of 5 acres, and shall be limited to a single family
structure. All lot requirements stated in the RR-1 district shall apply.
2. Screening and vegetation shall be used between residential and light industrial uses
to help create a transition between uses.
3. Light Industrial establishments shall be held to the minimum lot standards and
requirements defined in the Light Industrial District, which is found in Section 4.4.1.
Permitted and Conditional Uses in the Light Industrial district shall be consistent with
those identified as a part of the Light Industrial District.
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: October 2006, June 2007, February 2013)
4.6 PUBLIC SEMI PUBLIC
4.6.1 Public Semi Public – Open Space (PSP-OS)
a. Purpose. It is the general intent of this section of the Ordinance to preserve
significant natural features and amenities such as lakes, rivers, marshes, steep hills
and extensive woodlands in their natural state in order to assure continuation of the
high natural resource areas. These areas also contribute to preservation and
conservation of existing natural drainage systems, prevention of soil erosion, and
maintenance of ecological balance. This zoning designation also identifies parks
and recreational opportunities for residents that support a healthy lifestyle and
encourages a higher quality of life.
b. Permitted Uses
1. Public parks and recreation areas except for high intensity use facilities such as
indoor hockey arenas;
2. Trails, paved or unpaved;
3. Park Pavilions;
4. Picnic Areas with impervious surfaces;
5. Agriculture except for potentially offensive uses such as feed lots;
6. Signs as regulated by the City Ordinance;
7. Other uses identified as permitted in the Conservation Overlay District.
c. Conditional Uses
1. Recreational facilities of a commercial nature such as riding stables or
concessions;
2. High intensity facilities such as an indoor hockey arena.
3. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
4.6.2 Public Semi Public – Facilities (PSP- F)
a. Purpose. To identify and provide sites for public facilities which serve the city’s
population. These areas are integral to the community with respect to educating
youth, opportunities to participate in local government, and places for residents to
learn and congregate.
b. Design Review Procedure. A formal design review procedure is required subject to
the requirements of Section 3.4. The Planning Commission shall make
recommendation for the design review to the City Council and final action from the
City Council is required.
c. Permitted Uses
1. Schools
2. Libraries
3. Churches
4. Municipal Buildings or facilities
5. Service buildings
6. Parks
7. Community Center
8. Recreation center
9. Signs as regulated by the City Ordinance
d. Conditional Uses
1. Community gardens
2. Privately owned recreational facilities
(Adopted January 2000. Amended: October 2006)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.6 – Public/Semi Public Zoning Districts Page 1
4.7 OVERLAY DISTRICTS
4.7.1 Conservation Overlay District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the conservation overlay is to protect significant natural areas
as identified in the natural resources inventory prepared and adopted in the
Comprehensive Plan. The City finds protection and conservation of natural areas of
significance to be important and as such has designated this overlay as a means to
identify and protect those areas.
B. General Provisions and Definitions.
1. Compliance. The Conservation Overlay shall be defined by the natural resource
inventory. This shall be depicted on the Official Zoning Map graphically to
geographically identify properties included in said overlay. The following shall apply
to properties with land area in the conservation overlay:
a. All property which is 50-percent or more included within the overlay shall be
required to develop in accordance with the Rural Cluster method of subdivision
described in subsequent sections of this chapter.
b. All property which has less than 50-percent but more than 5-percent of their
land area included within the Conservation Overlay may utilize the Rural
Cluster method of subdivision to enhance or preserve key natural resources as
defined in the overlay district.
2. Enforcement. The Zoning Administrator is responsible for the administration and
enforcement of this ordinance. Any violation of the provisions of these regulations or
failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with variances, grants, or conditional uses
(shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.
3. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these
regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed
in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by state statues.
4. Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of these
regulations shall not be affected.
5. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants of deed restrictions, the
provisions of these regulations shall prevail. All other sections of the Zoning
Ordinance inconsistent with these regulations are hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only.
6. All proposed development shall follow the Rural Cluster process for subdivision and
shall be subject to the regulations and standards identified in section 4.5.1.2.
4.7.1.2 Residential Cluster.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the Rural Cluster subdivision method is to address the
subdivision of properties included within the Conservation Overlay area. This method
seeks to maintain the rural character of Chisago City by preserving agricultural land,
woodlands, natural corridors and other significant natural features while allowing
residential development consistent with the goals and objectives of the City’s
Comprehensive Plan. This type of development will allow an alternative to large lot,
single-family housing and will reduce the cost of constructing and maintaining public
facilities and infrastructure. Protected open space will enhance and preserve the
natural character of the community and create distinct neighborhoods.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.1 – Conservation Overlay District Page 1
1. Intent. The City of Chisago City’s intent is to accomplish the stated purpose of
the Conservation Overlay District by utilizing Rural Cluster subdivision to
accomplish the goals and policies adopted in the Comprehensive Development
Regulations contained herein: and by requiring property within the newly created
Conservation Overlay District to be developed in compliance with these
regulations and the City’s Comprehensive Plan. The RC subdivision
methodology should be used for those areas that are geographically included
within the Conservation Overlay District. In return for requiring open space as
contained herein, it is the intent of the City to allow density bonuses that will
provide a development density equal or greater than the underlying zoning.
2. Definitions. Unless specifically defined in the sections, common definitions,
words and phrases used in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them
the same meaning as they have in common usage throughout this code.
3. Use Regulations. Within the RC, the following uses are allowed:
a. Permitted Uses.
1) Uses listed in underlying zoning
2) Single-family dwellings
3) Open space
4) Conservation easements
5) Agricultural
6) Public Park / General Government
b. Uses allowed by Conditional Use Permit
1) Cooperative gardening
2) Horticultural and Floriculture uses (non-retail)
3) Private stables
c. Accessory Uses. Uses that are typically found accessory to a permitted use.
d. Prohibited Uses. All others uses are hereby prohibited.
4. RC Development Permit Required. No property within the Conservation Overlay
District may be developed unless approval is obtained from the following its
approval of the Preliminary Plan, Preliminary Plan and Final Plan described
herein. Applications for City Council approval shall be submitted on forms
provided by the City Administrator together with all required fees, maps, surveys
and planning data. Only completed applications shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for review.
5. Development Standards. RC Developers shall comply with the following
minimum standards unless otherwise modified by four affirmative votes of the
City Council based on recorded findings that the proposed modification (s) would
better enhance the rural character more so than the strict interpretation of the RC
regulations of the City and would otherwise be consistent with purpose and intent
of the Comprehensive Plan and Residential Cluster District.
a. Land Area. Applications for a residential development in the RC District shall
meet all the following criteria:
1) The minimum land area for an RC Development Permit is five (5) acres.
The total number of dwelling units permitted shall be according to the
development density criteria contained in the Comprehensive Plan. The
total number of dwelling units within an RC Development shall not exceed
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.1 – Conservation Overlay District Page 2
the density limitations contained in the Comprehensive Plan for the
underlying zoning district, unless said standards below are met and
therefore allow a density bonus approved and granted by the City Council.
2) The total open space area within the RC Development shall be at least
thirty (30) percent of the total buildable land area. The land that is not
buildable shall be considered open space but shall not count toward the
buildable area. Dwelling units shall be grouped so that at least thirty (30)
percent of the buildable land of the proposed development remains open
space in a large contiguous pattern. The open space shall consist of
agricultural lands, natural habitat, pedestrian corridors, or neighborhood or
community recreational areas.
b. Open Space
1) All open space shall be subject to a conservation easement and used
for the purposes as defined by this ordinance. The land shall be
controlled in one or more following manners as determined in the City’s
sole discretion:
a) Owned by an individual or legal entity who will use the land for open
space purposes as provided by permanent conservation restrictions
(in accordance with Chapter 84C.01-05 of Minnesota Statutes), to an
acceptable Land Trust as approved by the City.
b) Deeded to the City of Chisago City for public purposes with
permanent conservation restrictions (in accordance with Chapter
84C.0 1-05 of Minnesota Statutes) to an acceptable Land Trust as
approved by the City: or
c) Deeded to the city for open Space purposes or conveyed by
easement to the City.
d) Title to areas dedicated for private pathways and steep sloped areas
may be held by private property owners(s) with a conservation
easement dedicated to the City, but shall not be counted as the
required open space.
2) Neighborhood recreational facilities shall be provided within each RC
Development or as specified in the Chisago City Parks Plan. At least
nine (9) percent to twelve (12) percent of the total open space land
areas shall be dedicated for neighborhood recreational purposes
including tot-lots. playgrounds and pathways as specified in the Park
Dedication Policy.
3) The open space land shall be maintained for the purposes for which it
was set aside. If open space was set aside for agricultural purposes or
for natural habitat, a plan shall be submitted which will indicate how the
land will be maintained or returned to a natural state and who will be
responsible for plan implementation. Developers shall provide copies
of deed covenants to prospective purchases and conservation
easements to the City describing land management practices to be
followed by the party or parties responsible for maintaining the open
space.
c. Lot Design. Lot shall be designed to achieve the following objectives (listed
in order of priority)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.1 – Conservation Overlay District Page 3
1) For those developments located in the RR-1 and RR-2 area, not
served by City services, lots shall be laid out on the most suitable soils
for sub-surfaces septic disposal. Community septic systems shall be
considered and encouraged for such subdivisions.
2) In areas served by City services, lots shall be laid out to receive
services in the most efficient matter and as to maintain the largest
portion of contiguous land for open space.
3) Preserve natural lakeshore and woodlands in open fields.
4) Within any woodland contained in the parcel or along the far edges of
the open fields, adjacent to any woodland (to reduce impact upon
agriculture, to provide summer shade and shelter from winter wind, and
to enable new construction to be visually absorbed by natural
landscape features).
5) In locations least likely to block or interrupt scenic vistas, as viewed
from Highway 8 and County Roads 22, 23, 24, 36, 77, 84, and 80 and
other local roads as designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
6) Away from woodlands in open fields.
d. Structures. It is desired that the structures within neighborhoods convey a
particular architectural style with similar building components, materials, and
roof pitches. Architectural and performance standards as stated in the
individual zoning district shall be applied to all proposed developments in the
Conservation Overlay and shall be subject to review by the City Council.
e. Buffer Zones. Buffer zones of at least one hundred (100) feet shall be
required between residential structures and agricultural uses. The buffer
areas shall be thickly planted with fast-growing native grasses, shrubs and
trees. Roads may be substituted for the buffer that will create an effective
barrier separating yards from fields and pastures.
f. Landscaping. Landscaping is required along all streets outside of designated
right of way to consist of at least one (1) tree per every thirty (30) feet or
placed in clusters at the same ratio. A landscape plan for the entire site is
required and shall consist of at least two trees per lot, 2 ½ inch in caliper per
building site. The landscaping plan will be given flexibility if the plan
incorporates the placement of buildings on the site to minimize and preserve
existing landscaping and trees.
g. Pathway. A pathway system or sidewalks shall be identified which will
extend through the buildable land area or through the open space land to
connect to a planned or developed pathway on adjacent parcels or to a local
road as defined in Chisago City’s Park, Bike Trail, and Sidewalk Plan and
Subdivision Ordinance.
h. Densities. The Zoning Map identifies zoning for each parcel of land. The
Conservation Overlay is applied to the underlying zoning. The base density
shall be consistent with the regulations stated in the zoning district of the
parcel. To require open space and preserve historic structures, the following
density bonuses shall apply, but shall not exceed thirty (30%) percent:
1) One (1) additional unit per 5 gross acres of land, or 10-percent increase,
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.1 – Conservation Overlay District Page 4
which ever is greater, for preserving the land in open space with a
conservation easement by a qualified land trust.
2) One (1) additional unit per 5 gross acres of land or 10-percent increase,
which ever is greater, for the development of common gardens and/or
village green.
3) If a proposed development in the A, RR-1, or RR-2 district utilize a
community septic and well, such development shall be granted a 10-
percent bonus.
4) Developments which preserve additional open space beyond the
requirements of this ordinance shall be qualified for a density bonus. The
development shall receive a density bonus of half the additional
percentage of open space preserved. For example, each development
is required to preserve 30-percent of the land in open space. If the
development has 50-percent of its land in open space, the developer is
qualified for an additional 10 percent density bonus. (1/2 * (50%-30%) =
10%)
i. Minimum District Requirements.
Residential Cluster District (RC)
Single Family Two Family
Maximum Building
Height
Primary Structure
2 ½ stories of 35 feet 2 ½ stories or 35 feet
Maximum Building
Height
Accessory Structures
26 26
Minimum Lot Width
½ acre lot
1 acre lot
N/A N/A
Maximum Lot
Coverage
10 % N/A
Front Yard
Side Yard
Corner Lot Front
Corner Lot Side Yard
Well from Septic
System
Minimum Lot Size
Minimum Lot Width
Minimum Lot Depth
Shoreline Setback
See applicable zoning district regulations.
Communal and
Individual
Well and Septic
System
1 acre 1 acre
j. Utilities.
1) RC Development may be platted to accommodate home site lots with
either individual septic tanks or drain fields or with individual septic tank,
communal drain fields, or city services. Developments not receiving city
services shall have the following regulations: Single-family lots under one
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.1 – Conservation Overlay District Page 5
(1) acre shall be constructed with an individual septic tank and a
communal drain field. The preferred sewer is municipal and must be
determined by the City council to be unfeasible, followed by communal.
2) All septic systems shall conform to the performance standards of the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s standards for sewage treatment
systems WPC-7080 and its appendices or the MPCA standards in effect
at the time of installation and septic system regulations of the Chisago
City Municipal Code.
3) Communal drain fields may be partially or completely located in an area
designated as natural habitat/open space provided:
a) The ground cover is restored to its natural condition after installation.
b) Recreational uses are prohibited above or within fifty (50) feet of
communal drain fields or as approved by the City Council.
c) Community systems shall be required to hook up to city systems if
within 300 ft. and must be completed within two years.
d) Drain fields shall be located in a manner that will allow them to be
within three hundred (300) feet of a projected path of future municipal
waste water lines.
k. Streets, Roads, and Right-of-Ways
1) Roads shall be designed to minimize the visual size and scale of the
development and help discourage excessive speeds.
2) Street widths and alignments should be carefully scaled to neighborhood
size and be patterned after the character of existing residential streets.
Future connections shall be identified and platted as an easement to
encourage future connections so as to avoid long cul-de-sacs and
potential congestion as development and density increases throughout
the City.
3) The use of one-way roads is encouraged where practical to reduce the
ratio of pavement to buildings and open spaces.
4) The applicant must demonstrate that access from a primary road to the
site is adequate has the capacity to handle traffic generated by the
proposed project and will not endanger the safety of the general public.
5) Direct automobile links or pathways should be made to the Central
Business District to emphasize the connection between existing and new
development.
6) Streets shall be designed according to the following standards:
pavement shall be 14 ft. wide for one-way streets: pavement shall be 28
ft. for two-way streets: and the pavement width shall be 24 ft. for streets
where homes are located on one side of the street.
7) The minimum street right-of-way for a one-way street shall be 40 feet
and the minimum right-of-way for a two-way street shall be 60 feet.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.1 – Conservation Overlay District Page 6
7. Historic Preservation. Historic Structures on the site shall be identified. If
applicable, historic structures shall be restored or rehabilitated according to the
Secretary of Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation.
8. Concept Plan
a. Required Submittals —Concept Plan. The applicant shall submit an
application for a RC permit which shall be consistent with the requirements of
this code. The applicant shall review and submit all materials to City Staff for
preliminary discussion and review. The applicant shall submit 5 full size plans
and 18 11 x 17copies of a Preliminary Plan for a development of a RC in the
Conservation Overlay and shall include the following information:
1) An existing conditions plan which identifies the following (Drawn to scale
of 1 “=100’):
a) Primary Conservation Areas.
b) Secondary Conservation Areas.
2) A general site plan to include all platted lots, streets, and open space
areas, building locations, trails, common open spaces and parks building
locations, trails, common open spaces and parks: (Drawn to scale of 1”=
l00”)
3) The application shall submit a schedule of site characteristics, calculated
in acres which shall include the following:
a) Include map and calculated acreage of the following:
i. Total Site
ii. Acres in Conservation overlay; and
iii. Protected Wetlands
iv. Wetland buffer/setback area
v. 12% - 24% sloped area
vi. 25% + sloped area
vii. Net developable acres are equal to the Total Site (1) minus
Protected Wetlands (iii minus areas with slopes exceeding 25%
(v).
b) Public Improvements. Include map and calculated acreage of the
following:
i. Public road right of way
ii. Drainage way and ponding areas
iii. Trails/bikeways and sidewalks (outside of road right of way
iv. Utility easements (water and sewer not used for private
development purposes)
v. Public Parks
vi. Public open Space (excluding park)
c) Proposed Development. Include map and calculated acreage of the
following
i. Total residential area
ii. Total commercial land area
iii. Total private open space (greens. commons. and greenways)
d) A General Landscape Plan.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.1 – Conservation Overlay District Page 7
e) Statement of Intent. If applicable, provide a statement of intent
establishing a homeowners association with bylaws and deed
restrictions to include, but not be limited to the following:
i. Ownership, management and maintenance of defined open
space both private and public, and private stables.
ii. Maintenance of public and private utilities
iii. General architectural guidelines for principal
iv. Structures, accessory structures and any other structures
constructed on open space lots.
f) Proposed Staging Plan.
g) Historic Preservation Plan. Where applicable, a historic preservation
plans for any historic structures on the site.
b. Planning Commission Review. Upon receipt of a completed Concept Plan to
the City Planner, the Planning Commission shall review the RC Development
Preliminary Plan application at a public hearing preceded by ten (10) days
published notice and two (2) weeks mailed notice to the recorded owners of
each parcel located within 350 ft. of the perimeter of the proposed
development. The Planning Commission shall make its recommendations to
the Applicant who shall respond to all comments prior to submitting a
Preliminary Plat. The Concept Plan shall demonstrate consistency with the
following:
1) The Concept Plan is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of
the Comprehensive Plan.
2) The Concept Plan is consistent with the purpose of the Conservation
Overlay and the RC methodology.
3) The Concept Plan complies with the development standards.
4) The Concept Plan preserves the required Open space.
c. Preliminary Plan and Plat. Unless an RC Development Preliminary Plat is
submitted within twelve (12) months from the date on which the Planning
Commission made its recommendations regarding the Concept Plan, the
Applicant shall be required to resubmit a concept plan. The Applicant shall
be required to submit the following information for Preliminary Plat Approval.
1) RC Development Preliminary Plat.
a) Submittals. The RC Development Preliminary Plan shall include the
following
i. A statement of City action necessary for implementation of the
proposed plan.
ii. Ten (10) sets of site plans drawn to scale on a reproducible size
of 11 x x17. Five (5) full sized sets of not less than one (1) inch
equals one hundred (100) feet containing at least the following
information:
a. Proposed name of the development (which shall not
duplicate nor be similar in pronunciation to the name of any
plat previously recorded in Chisago County).
b. Property boundary lines and dimensions of the property and
any significant topographical or physical features of the
property that may have an impact on the open space or the
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.1 – Conservation Overlay District Page 8
development.
c. Location, dimensions and number of all driveways,
entrances, curb cuts, parking stalls, loading spaces and
access aisles, and all other circulation elements including
bike and pedestrian trails, and the total site coverage of all
circulation elements.
d. Location, designation and total area of all open space.
e. Location, designation and total area proposed to be
conveyed or dedicated for public open space, including
parks, playgrounds, school sited and recreational facilities.
f. Proposed lots and blocks, if any, and numbering system.
g. The location, use and size of structures and other land use
on adjacent properties.
h. Preliminary sketches of proposed landscaping.
i. General grading and drainage plans for the developed RC
Development.
j. Such Development plans shall also indicate the results of
deep soil test pits and percolation tests, at the rate of no
fewer that two (2) successful test results for each proposed
septic disposal area.
k. Any other information that may have been required by the
City Council in conjunction with the approval of the RC
Development Concept Plan.
iii. An accurate legal description of the entire area within the RC
Development for which development plan approval is sought.
iv. Architectural and performance standards for the development.
v. Preliminary grading and site alteration plan illustration changes
to existing topography and natural vegetation. The Plan should
clearly reflect the site treatment and its conformance with the
approved concept plan.
vi. A Preliminary Plat prepared in accordance with Chapter 505 of
the statutes of Minnesota and other applicable laws and
illustrating stages of development where appropriate.
vii. A Soil Erosion Control Plan acceptable to the city, watershed
districts. Department of Natural Resources or any other agency
with the review authority clearly illustration erosion control
measures to be used during construction and as permanent
measures.
viii. Homeowner’s Association Documents including bylaws, deed
restrictions, covenants, and proposed conservation easements.
b) Planning Commission Review. Upon receipt of a complete RC
Development Preliminary Plan by the City Planner, and at least
fifteen (15) days before the Planning Commission meeting, at which
the Preliminary Plan shall be reviewed, the City Planner shall refer
the Preliminary Plan to the appropriate City Staff, consultants, and
other special review agencies including the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources if the proposed development is within a
designated shoreland. The Planning Commission shall review the
RC Development. Preliminary Plan and shall schedule public
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.1 – Conservation Overlay District Page 9
hearings as required for a Preliminary Plat and rezoning review
within thirty (30) days of the City Planner’s receipt of a completed
application and shall make its recommendations to the City Council
regarding the Preliminary Plans Preliminary Plat and rezoning.
c) City Council Review. Within sixty (60) days of the City Planner’s
receipt of a completed application the City Council shall review the
RC Development Preliminary Plan, and the Preliminary Plat. The RC
Development Plan and Preliminary Plat require three (3) affirmative
Council votes for approval. Upon approval, the City Council shall
instruct the City Attorney to draw up an RC Development Agreement
that stipulates the specific terms and conditions established and
approved by the City Council and accepted by the applicant. This
agreement shall be signed by the Mayor, City Administrator and
applicant within thirty (30) days of Council approval of the RC
Development Preliminary Plan.
d) Limitation on Preliminary Plan Approval. Unless a Final Plan
covering the area designated in the Preliminary Development Plan
as the first stage of the RC Development has been filed within six (6)
months from the date Council grants approval or in any case where
the applicant fails to file Final Plans and to proceed with
development according to the provisions of the Ordinance, the
Preliminary Development Plan shall expire. The Council may at its
discretion extend the filing deadline for any Final Plan when, for good
cause shown, such extension reasonable. In case where
Preliminary Development Plan approval expires, the Concept Plan
approval and Preliminary Development Plan approval for the portion
of the RC Development that has not received Final Plan approval is
repealed.
9. RC Development Final Plan. The purpose of the Final Plans is to provide a
complete, thorough and permanent public record of the RC Development and the
manner is which it is to be developed. It shall incorporate all prior approved plans
and all approved modifications thereof resulting from the RC Development
process. It shall serve in conjunction with other city ordinances as the land use
regulation applicable to the RC Development
a. Submittals Required. After approval of the Concept Plan and Preliminary
Plan for an RC development, the applicant shall submit the following material
for review by the City Staff prior to the issuance of any building related
permits:
1) A detailed landscaping plan.
2) Proof of recording any easements and restrictive conservation covenants
prior to the sale of any land or dwelling unit with the RC Development
and of the organization of any legal entity that is to be responsible for the
management and maintenance of any public or common open space or
service facility.
3) All certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of land
and recording of documents.
4) General architectural working drawings of all structures along with
architectural standards.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.1 – Conservation Overlay District Page 10
5) Final engineering plans and specification for streets, utilities and other
public improvements, together with all required development agreements
for the installation of such improvements and financial guarantees for the
completion of such improvements.
6) Any other plans, agreements, or specifications reasonably necessary, for
the City Staff to review the proposed construction.
7) Final Plat.
b. City Council Review. Upon approval of the Preliminary PIat, and within the
time established, the applicant shall file with the City Planner a competed
Final Plan consisting of the information and submissions required for the
entire RC Development or for one or more stages. Within 45 days, the City
Planner shall forward the Final Plan to the appropriate City Staff for review
and approval. The Final Plan is intended only to add administration detail to
and to put in final form, the information contained in the Concept Plan and
the Preliminary t Plan and shall conform to the Concept Plan and Preliminary
Development Plan. The City shall review and approve the plan within 60
days of receipt of a completed final RC Development Plan.
c. Recording of Final Plat. Within ten (10) days of approval by the City Council
and notification by the City Administrator, the applicant shall cause the Final
Plat, or such portions thereof as are appropriate, to be recorded with the
County Recorder or Register of Titles.
d. Building and Other Permits. Except as otherwise expressly provided herein,
upon receiving written notice from the City Administrator and the City
Attorney that the approved final plan has been recorded and all conditions of
approval satisfied, the City Building Official may issue building and other
permits to the applicant for development, construction. and other work in the
area encompassed by the approved final plan: provided, however, that no
such permit shall be issued except upon proper application and after the
requirements of all other applicable codes and ordinances have been
satisfied.
e. Limitation on Final Plat Approval. Within eighteen (18) months after approval
of a final plan for RC Development, or such shorter time as may be
established by the approved development schedule, construction shall
commence according to such approval plan. Failure to commence
construction within such period shall automatically render void the RC
Development permit and all approvals for the final RC Development Plan.
The City Council may, at its discretion, extend the construction time as
necessary when good cause is shown.
f. Method of Amending an RC Development Permit. Any desired change
involved structural alteration, enlargement, or intensification of the use not
specifically allowed by the specific terms of a previously passed RC
Development permit, shall require that an application be filed for and
amended permit and all procedures shall then apply as if a new permit was
applied for.
10. Information Requirements: Additions/Exceptions.
a. Records. The City Administrator shall maintain a record of all permits issued
including information on the use, locations, conditions imposed, time limits,
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.1 – Conservation Overlay District Page 11
review dates, and such other information as may be appropriate. RC
Development permits granted shall be clearly noted on the community zoning
map and shall be recorded with the Chisago County Recorder or Registrar of
Tiles.
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: October 2000, January 2005, October 2006)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.1 – Conservation Overlay District Page 12
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 1
4.7.2 FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
The floodplain regulations are an overlay zoning district. In addition to the regular zoning
designation and regulations, these regulations apply when a property is located in the
regulatory floodplain.
A. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, and Purpose.
1. Statutory Authorization. The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in
Minnesota Statutes Chapter 103F and Chapter 462 and Chisago City
Zoning Ordinance has delegated the responsibility to local government
units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore,
the City Council of Chisago City, Minnesota does ordain as follows:
2. Finding of Facts:
a. The flood hazard areas of Chisago City, Minnesota, are subject to
periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures or flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
b. Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards. This Ordinance is
based upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards
which is consistent with the standards established by the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
c. National Flood Insurance Program Compliance. This Ordinance is
adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 Code of Federal
Regulations Parts 59-78, as amended, so as to maintain the
community’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
3. Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses
described in Section 4.7.2.A(2) by provisions contained herein.
B. General Provisions.
1. Lands to Which Ordinance Applies. This Ordinance shall apply to all
lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Chisago City shown on the
Official Zoning Map and/or the attachments thereto as being located
within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Flood
Plain Districts.
2. Establishment of Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map together
with all materials attached thereto is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this Ordinance. The attached material shall
include the Flood Insurance Study, Chisago County, Minnesota And
Incorporated Areas, , and Flood Insurance Rate Map panels therein
numbered 27025C0275D, 27025C0288D, 27025C0360D and
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 2
27025C0375D, all documents being dated April 17, 2012 and prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The Official Zoning Map
shall be on file in the Office of the City Clerk and the Zoning
Administrator.
3. Reserve for future use.
4. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. The regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation
of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a
floodway.
5. Interpretation.
a. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body and shall not be
deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by
State Statutes.
b. The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by
scaling distances on the Official Zoning Map. Where interpretation
is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the district
as shown on the Official Zoning Map, as for example where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions and there is a formal appeal of the decision of the
Zoning Administrator, the City Council shall make the necessary
interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations on the
regional (100 year) flood profile, ground elevations that existed on
the site at the time the Community adopted its initial floodplain
ordinance or on the date of the first National Flood Insurance
Program map showing the area within the 100-year floodplain if
earlier, and other available technical data. Persons contesting the
location of the district boundaries shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present their case to the Planning Commission and
to submit technical evidence. City reserves the right to require
property owners to secure letter of map amendment from the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
6. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this Section to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this Section imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this Section shall prevail. All other sections of the Zoning
Ordinance inconsistent with this Section are hereby repealed to the extent
of the inconsistency only.
7. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability: This Ordinance does not imply that
areas outside the flood plain districts or land uses permitted within such
districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Section shall not
create liability on the part of Chisago City or any officer or employee
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 3
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance
or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
8. Severability: If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this Section is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of this Section shall not be affected thereby.
9. Definitions: Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this Section shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as
they have in common usage and so as to give this Section its most
reasonable application.
a. Accessory Use or Structure – a use or structure on the same lot with,
and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal
use or structure. A building is considered an accessory structure if
the footprint exceeds 25 square feet and/or 6 feet in height. An
attached or detached garage is considered an accessory structure.
b. Basement - means any area of a structure, including crawl spaces,
having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four
sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level.
c. Conditional Use - means a specific type of structure or land use listed
in the official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth
review procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as
provided in the official zoning controls or building codes and upon a
finding that:
(1)Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist.
(2)The structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive land
use plan and is compatible with the existing neighborhood.
d. Equal Degree of Encroachment - a method of determining the location
of encroachment lines so the hydraulic capacity of flood plain lands on
both sides of a stream are reduced by an equal amount when
calculating the increases.
e. Flood - a temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the
stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry
areas.
f. Flood Frequency - the frequency, statistically determined, for which it
is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or
exceeded.
g. Flood Fringe - that portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway.
Flood fringe is synonymous with the term floodway fringe” used in the
Flood Insurance Study, Chisago County, Minnesota and Incorporated
Areas.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 4
h. Flood Plain - the beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake
or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regional flood.
i. Flood Proofing - a combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily
for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.
j. Floodway - the bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a
watercourse and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are
reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.
k. Lowest Floor - the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor.
l. Manufactured Home - a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include the
term “recreational vehicle.”
m. Obstruction - any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert,
building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in,
along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or
regulatory flood plain which may impede, retard, or change the
direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting
debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the flow of water
might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property.
n. Principal Use or Structure – means the primary or main use of land or
buildings as distinguished from subordinate, incidental or accessory
uses or structures.
o. Reach - a hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made
obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river
between two consecutive bridge crossings would most typically
constitute a reach.
p. Recreational Vehicle - a vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for amusement,
vacation, recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the
purposes of this Ordinance, the term recreational vehicle shall be
synonymous with the term travel trailer/travel vehicle.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 5
q. Regional Flood - a flood which is representative of large floods known
to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic
of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the
magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is
synonymous with the term "base flood."
r. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation - The regulatory flood
protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot
above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood
elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from
designation of a floodway.
s. Structure - anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, attached
decks, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins,
manufactured homes, recreational vehicles not meeting the
exemption criteria specified in Section 9.31 of this Ordinance and
other similar items, except aerial or underground utility lines, such as
a sewer, electric, telephone, telegraph, or gas lines, including towers,
poles, and other supporting facilities. The building or appurtenance
can include portable or temporary structures.
t. Substantial Damage - means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure where the cost of restoring the structure to it before
damaged condition would equal or exceeds 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
u. Substantial Improvement - within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and
repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred
“substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions.
(2) Any alteration of an “historic structure,” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation
as an “historic structure.” For the purpose of this Ordinance,
“historic structure” shall be as defined in 44 Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 59.1.
v. Variance - means a modification, variation, or exception of a specific
permitted development standard required in an official control
including this Ordinance to allow an alternative development standard
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 6
not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only as applied to a
particular property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship, practical
difficulty or unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in a
community's respective planning and zoning enabling legislation. A
variance is not intended to be granted for uses which are not listed as
permitted or conditionally permitted within a zoning district.
10. Annexations: The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by
reference into Section 4.7.2.B(2) above may include floodplain areas that
lie outside of the corporate boundaries of the City of Chisago City,
Minnesota at the time of adoption of this Ordinance. If any of these
floodplain land areas are annexed into the City of Chisago City,
Minnesota after the date of adoption of this Ordinance, the newly
annexed floodplain lands shall be subject to the provisions of this
Ordinance immediately upon the date of annexation into the City of
Chisago City, Minnesota.
C. Establishment of Zoning Districts.
1. Districts.
a. Floodway District. The Floodway District for lakes, wetlands and
other basins shall include those areas designated as Zone AE on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted in Section
4.7.2.B(2) that are at or below the ordinary high water level as
defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.005, subdivision 14.
b. Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District for lakes, wetlands
and other basins shall include those areas designated as Zone AE
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted in Section
4.7.2.B(2) that are below the 1% annual chance flood elevation
(100-year flood elevation) but above the ordinary high water level
as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.005, subdivision
14.
c. General Flood Plain District. The General Flood Plain District shall
include those areas designated as Zones A and Zone AE (without
floodway) on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in Section
4.7.2.B(2) which are not subject to criteria in Section 4.7.2.C(1a-b)
above.
2. Compliance. No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered
without full compliance with the terms of these regulations and other
applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these
regulations. Within the Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Flood Plain
Districts, all uses not listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in
Sections 4.7.2.D, 4.7.2.E and 4.7.2.F that follow, respectively, shall be
prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here that:
a. New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 7
certain travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general
provisions of this Ordinance and specifically Section 4.7.2.I.
b. Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal
maintenance and repair, or repair after damage to existing
nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures
or land are regulated by the general provisions of this Title and
specifically Section 4.7.2.M.
c. As-Built elevations for elevated or flood proofed structures must
be certified by ground surveys and flood proofing techniques must
be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect as specified in the provisions of this Title and specifically
as stated in Section 4.7.2.J of this Ordinance.
D. Floodway District (FW).
1. Permitted Uses:
a. General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop
harvesting.
b. Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport
landing strips.
c. Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges,
archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming
areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet
ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or multiple purpose
recreational trails.
d. Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
2. Standards for Floodway Permitted Uses:
a. The use shall have low flood damage potential.
b. The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one
exists.
c. The use shall not obstruct flood flows, or increase flood elevations
and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or
storage of materials or equipment.
3. Conditional Uses.
a. Structures accessory to the uses in 4.7.2.D(1) and the uses listed
in 4.7.2.D(3b -3h) subject to standards listed below:
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 8
b. Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.
c. Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control
structures.
d. Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines.
e. Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
f. Placement of fill or construction of fences.
g. Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of record or in
existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type
campgrounds, subject to the exemptions and provisions of Section
4.7.2.I(3) of this Ordinance.
h. Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and
floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect
individual structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to
protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or
less than the 10-year frequency flood event.
4. Standards for Floodway Conditional Uses:
a. All uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill
for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or
equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that
will cause any increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional
flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or
reaches affected.
b. All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures
and standards contained in Section 3.1 and 4.7.2.L of the Zoning
Ordinance.
c. The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning
district if one exists.
5. Fill:
a. Fill, dredge spoils and all other similar materials deposited or
stored in the flood plain shall be protected from erosion by
vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
b. Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be
allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan
is submitted which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention
element to the plan.
c. As an alternative, and consistent with Section 4.7.2.D(5b)
immediately above, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 9
operations may allow temporary, on-site storage of fill or other
materials which would have caused an increase to the stage of
the 100-year or regional flood but only after the City has received
an appropriate plan which assures the removal of the materials
from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available.
The Conditional Use Permit must be title registered with the
property in the Office of the County Recorder.
6. Accessory Structures:
a. Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
b. Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed
on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the
flow of floodwaters.
(1) Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow, and
(2) So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately
on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining
structures.
c. Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry
flood proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an
accessory structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4
flood proofing classification in the State Building Code provided
the accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does
not exceed 500 square feet in size, and for a detached garage,
the detached garage must be used solely for parking of vehicles
and limited storage. All flood proofed accessory structures must
meet the following additional standards:
(1) The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and
shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls; and
(2) Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must
be elevated to or above the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation or properly flood proofed; and
(3) To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there
must be a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the
outside walls of the structure having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be
openings on at least two sides of the structure and the
bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 10
human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding
will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.
7. Storage of Materials and Equipment:
a. The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
b. Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood
warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the Governing
Body.
8. Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or
cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be subject to
the provisions of Minnesota Statute, Chapter 103G. Community-wide
structural works for flood control intended to remove areas from the
regulatory flood plain shall not be allowed in the floodway.
9. A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not cause an
increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis must
assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
E. Flood Fringe District (FF)
1. Permitted Uses. Permitted Uses shall be those uses of land or structures
listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s). If no preexisting,
underlying zoning use districts exist, then any residential or nonresidential
structure or use of a structure or land shall be a permitted use
in the Flood Fringe District provided such use does not constitute a public
nuisance. All Permitted Uses shall comply with the standards for Flood
Fringe “Permitted Uses” listed in Section 4.7.2.E(2) and the “Standards
for all flood Fringe Uses” listed in Section 4.7.2.E(5).
2. Standards for Flood Fringe Permitted Uses:
a. All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above
the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. The finished fill
elevation for structures shall be no lower than one (1) foot below
the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation and the fill shall extend
at such elevation at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the outside limits
of the structure erected thereon.
b. As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that
constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed 500
square feet for the outside dimension at ground level may be
internally flood proofed in accordance with Section 4.7.2.D(6c).
c. The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time is in
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 11
excess of one-thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill is located on the
parcel shall be allowable only as a conditional use, unless said fill
is specifically intended to elevate a structure in accordance with
Section 4.7.2.E(2a).
d. The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill
to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
e. The provisions of Section 4.7.2.E(5) of this Ordinance shall apply.
3. Conditional Uses. Any structure that is not elevated on fill or flood
proofed in accordance with Section 4.7.2.E(2a-b) and/ or any use of land
that does not comply with the standards in Section 4.7.2.E(2c-d) shall
only be allowable as a Conditional Use. An application for a Conditional
Use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and evaluation
procedures specified in Section 4.7.2.E(4 and 5) and Section 4.7.2(L) of
this Ordinance.
4. Standards for Flood Fringe Conditional Uses:
a. Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be
utilized to elevate a structure’s lowest flood above the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation. These alternative methods may
include the use of stilts, pilings, parallel walls, etc., or abovegrade,
enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under
garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be
considered above-grade and not a structure’s basement or lowest
floor if: 1) the enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of
the structure; 2) it is designed to internally flood and is constructed
with flood resistant materials; and 3) it is used solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage. The above-noted alternative
elevation methods are subject to the following additional
standards:
(1) Design and Certification - The structure’s design and asbuilt
condition must be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect as being in compliance
with the general design standards of the State Building
Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities must be at or above the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation or be designed to prevent flood
water from entering or accumulating within these
components during times of flooding.
(2) Specific Standards for Above-grade, Enclosed Areas -
Above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or
tuck under garages must be designed to internally flood
and the design plans must stipulate:
(i) A minimum area of openings in the walls where
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 12
internal flooding is to be used as a flood proofing
technique. There shall be a minimum of two openings on
at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one-foot above grade.
The automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered
professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller
net area would suffice. The automatic openings may be
equipped with screens, lovers, valves, or other coverings
or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters without any form of human
intervention; and
(ii) That the enclosed area will be designed of flood
resistant materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4
classifications in the State Building Code and shall be
used solely for building access, parking of vehicles or
storage.
b. Basements, as defined by Section 4.7.2.B(9) of this
Ordinance, shall be subject to the following:
(1) Residential basement construction shall not be
allowed below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
(2) Non-residential basements may be allowed below
the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation provided the
basement is structurally dry flood proofed in accordance
with 4.7.2.E(4c) immediately below.
c. All areas of nonresidential structures including basements
to be placed below he Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation shall be flood proofed in accordance with the
structurally dry flood proofing classifications in the State
Building Code. Structurally dry flood proofing must meet
the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing classification in the State
Building Code and this shall require making the structure
watertight with the walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components having
the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures flood proofed
to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be permitted.
d. When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or
other similar material is located on a parcel for such
activities as on-site storage, landscaping, sand and gravel
operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil disposal or
construction of flood control works, an
erosion/sedimentation control plan must be submitted
unless the community is enforcing a state approved
Shoreland Management Ordinance. In the absence of a
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 13
state approved Shoreland Ordinance, the plan must clearly
specify methods to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a
flood event at a minimum of the 100-year or regional flood
event. The plan must be prepared and certified by a
registered professional engineer or other qualified
individual acceptable to the Governing Body. The plan
may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the
material from the flood plain if adequate flood warning time
exists.
e. Storage of Materials and Equipment:
(1) The storage or processing of materials that are, in
time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially
injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.
(2) Storage of other materials or equipment may be
allowed if readily removable from the area within the time
available after a flood warning and in accordance with a
plan approved by the City.
f. The provisions of Section 4.7.2.E(5) of this Ordinance shall
also apply.
5. Standards for All Flood Fringe Uses:
(a) All new principal structures must have vehicular access at
or above an elevation not more than two (2) feet below the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. If a variance to this
requirement is granted, the City Council must specify
limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the
structure for times of flooding and only after determining
that adequate flood warning time and local flood
emergency response procedures exist.
(b) Commercial Uses - accessory land uses, such as yards,
railroad tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower
than the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. However,
a permit for such facilities to be used by the employees or
the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a
flood warning system that provides adequate time for
evacuation if the area would be inundated to a depth and
velocity such that when multiplying in the depth (in feet)
times velocity (in feet per second) the product number
exceeds four (4) upon occurrence of the regional flood.
(c) Manufacturing and Industrial Uses - measures shall he
taken to minimize interference with normal plant operations
especially along streams having protracted flood durations.
Certain accessory land uses such as yards and parking
lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 14
out in Section 4.7.2.E(5b) above. In considering permit
applications, due consideration shall be given to needs of
an industry whose business requires that it be located in
flood plain areas.
(d) Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be
properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or
other acceptable method. The Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for
certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-
year flood elevation - FEMA’s requirements incorporate
specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards
for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These
standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of
site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area
designation will be requested.
(e) Flood plain developments shall not adversely affect the
hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining flood plain
of any tributary watercourse or drainage system where a
floodway or other encroachment limit has not been
specified on the Official Zoning Map.
(f) Standards for recreational vehicles are contained in
Section 4.7.2.I(3).
(g) All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system that resists
flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state or local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
F. General Flood Plain District.
1. Permitted Uses:
a. The uses listed in Section 4.7.2.D(1) of this Ordinance shall be
permitted uses.
b. All other uses shall be subject to the floodway/flood fringe
evaluation criteria pursuant to Section 4.7.2.F(2) below. The
Floodway regulations shall apply if the proposed use is in the
Floodway District and Flood Fringe regulations shall apply if the
proposed use is in the Flood Fringe District.
2. Procedures for Floodway and Flood Fringe Determinations within the
General Flood Plain District.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 15
a. Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within
the General Flood Plain District, the applicant stall be required to
furnish such of the following information as is deemed necessary
by the Zoning Administrator for the determination of the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation and whether the proposed
use is within the Floodway or Flood Fringe District.
(1) A typical valley cross-section(s) showing the channel of the
stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the
channel, cross-sectional areas adjoining each side of the
channel, cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the
proposed development, and high water information.
(2) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations; size,
location and spatial arrangement of all the proposed and
existing structures on the site, and the location and
elevations of streets.
(3) Photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation
upstream and downstream; and soil type.
(4) Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or
flow line of the stream for at least 500 feet in either
direction from the proposed development.
b. The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the
above information to a designated engineer or other expert person
or agency for technical assistance in determining whether the
proposed use is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District and to
determine the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. Procedures
consistent with Minnesota Regulations, Parts 6120.5000-
6120.6200 and 44 Code of Federal Regulations Part 65 shall be
followed in this expert evaluation. The technical evaluation
methodology shall be reviewed with the respective Department of
Natural Resources’ Area Hydrologist prior to commencing the
analysis. The designated engineer or expert shall:
(1) Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.
(2) Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood
based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and
overbank areas.
(3) Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the
regional flood without increasing flood stages more than
0.5 foot. A lesser stage increase than 0.5 foot shall be
required if, as a result of the additional, stage increase,
increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of
encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach
shall be assumed in computing floodway boundaries.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 16
c. The zoning administrator shall present the technical evaluation
and findings of the designated engineer or expert to the City
Council. The City Council must formally accept the technical
evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood Fringe
District boundary or deny the permit application. The City Council,
prior to official action, may submit the application and all
supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, the Department of Natural Resources or the
Planning Commission for review and comment. Once the
floodway and flood fringe boundaries have been determined, the
City Council shall refer the matter back to the Zoning
Administrator who shall process the permit application consistent
with the applicable provisions of Section 4.7.2.D-E of this
Ordinance.
G. Subdivisions. (This section is in addition to the City’s Subdivision Ordinance.)
1. Review Criteria: No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the
reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage
treatment facilities. All lots within the flood plain districts shall contain a
building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation. All subdivisions shall have water and sewage
treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this Ordinance and
have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building
sites no lower than two feet below the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation. For all subdivisions in the flood plain, the Floodway and Flood
Fringe boundaries, the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation and the
required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all
required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
2. 1% chance annual flood (100-Year Elevations) and/or Floodway/Flood
Fringe Determinations. In the General Flood Plain District, applicants
shall provide the information required in Section 4.7.2.F of this Ordinance
to determine the 100-year flood elevation, the Floodway and Flood Fringe
District boundaries and the regulatory flood protection elevation for the
subdivision site as applicable.
3. Removal of Special Flood Hazard Area Designation: The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope
protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These
standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if
a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
H. Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads, and Bridges.
1. Public Utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical,
sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the flood plain shall be
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 17
flood-proofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to
above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
2. Public Transportation Facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be
located within the flood plain shall comply with Section 4.7.2.D-E of this
Ordinance. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be
provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities
would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such
facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or
auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where
failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety.
3. On-site Sewage Treatment and Water Supply Systems: Where public
utilities are not provided:
a. On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
b. New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into
the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters
and they shall not be subject to impairment or contamination
during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed
in accordance with the State’s current statewide standards for onsite
sewage treatment systems shall be determined to be in
compliance with this Section.
I. Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks and Placement of
Recreational Vehicles.
1. New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured
home parks shall be subject to the provisions of Section 4.2.7 and to the
provisions placed on subdivisions by Section 4.7.2.G of this Title.
2. The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located
in flood plain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be
placed only if elevated in compliance with Section 4.7.2.E of this
Ordinance. If vehicular road access for preexisting manufactured home
parks is not provided in accordance with Section 4.7.2.E(5a) then
replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the property
owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the City
Council.
a. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 18
3. No new commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are
allowed. Recreational vehicles as defined in Section 4.7.2.B(9) of this
ordinance may be stored in the flood plain and are subject to the
following:
a. Must have current license required for highway use.
b. Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal jacking
system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle
parks and the recreational vehicle has no permanent structural
type additions attached to it.
c. There shall be no development on the site associated with the
recreational vehicle including decks, patios, storage buildings,
gazebos additions, fuel storage, tanks, and other similar items.
There shall be no development on the site that hinders the
removal of the recreational vehicle to a flood free location should
flooding occur.
J. Administration.
1. Zoning Administrator: The Zoning Administrator or other official
designated by the City Council shall administer and enforce this
Ordinance. If the Zoning Administrator finds a violation of the provisions
of this Section the Zoning Administrator shall notify the person
responsible for such violation in accordance with the procedures stated in
Section 4.7.2.N of this Ordinance.
2. Permit Requirements:
a. Permit Required. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in
conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be secured
prior to the erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation (including
normal maintenance and repair), or alteration of any building,
structure, or portion thereof; prior to the use or change of use of a
building, structure, or land; prior to the construction of a dam,
fence, or on-site septic system; prior to the change or extension of
a nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a structure that has
been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source; and
prior to the placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the
storage of materials or equipment within the flood plain.
b. Application for Permit. Application for a permit shall be made in
duplicate to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the
Zoning Administrator and shall include the following where
applicable: plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot; existing or
proposed structures, fill, or storage of materials; and the location
of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 19
c. State and Federal Permits. Prior to granting a permit or
processing an application for a conditional use permit or variance,
the Zoning Administrator shall determine that the applicant has
obtained all necessary state and federal permits.
d. Certification of zoning Compliance for a New, Altered, or
Nonconforming Use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, altered, or
enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning
compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator
stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the
requirements of this Ordinance.
e. Construction and Use to be as Provided on Applications, Plans,
Permits, Variances and Certificates of Zoning Compliance.
Permits, conditional use permits, or certificates of zoning
compliance issued on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications,
and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use,
arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall
be deemed a violation of this Ordinance, and punishable as
provided by Section 4.7.2.N of this Ordinance.
f. Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit certification
by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or
registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building
elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of
this ordinance. Flood-proofing measures shall be certified by a
registered professional engineer or registered architect.
g. Record of First Floor Elevation. The Zoning Administrator shall
maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new structures and alterations or additions to
existing structures in the flood plain. The zoning administrator
shall also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures or
alterations and additions to structures are flood-proofed.
h. Notifications for Watercourse Alterations. The Zoning
Administrator shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent
communities and the Commissioner of the Department of the
Natural Resources prior to the community authorizing any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has
applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant
to Minnesota Statute, Chapter 103G, this shall suffice as adequate
notice to the Commissioner of natural Resources. A copy of said
notification shall also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office
of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 20
i. Notification to FEMA When Physical Changes Increase or
Decrease the 100-year Flood Elevation. As soon as is
practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such
supporting information becomes available, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of
the changes by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific
data.
K. Board of Adjustment:
1. Rules. The City Council shall adopt rules for the conduct of
business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such
Boards by State law.
2. Administrative Review. The Planning Commission and City
Council shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of
this Ordinance.
3. Variances. The City Council may authorize upon appeal in specific
cases such relief or variance from the terms of this Ordinance as
will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those
circumstances such as hardship, practical difficulties or
circumstances unique to the property under consideration, as
provided for in the respective enabling legislation for planning and
zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In the granting of such
variance, the City Council shall clearly identify in writing the
specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria
specified in this Ordinance, any other zoning regulations in the
Community, and in the respective enabling legislation that justified
the granting of the variance. No variance shall have the effect of
allowing in any district uses prohibited in that district, permit a
lower degree of flood protection than the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation for the particular area, or permit standards
lower than those required by State law. The following additional
variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency
must be satisfied:
a. Variances shall not be issued by a community within any
designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
b. Variances shall only be issued by a community upon (i) a
showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that
failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the
granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of
the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 21
c. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
4. Hearings. Upon filing with the Planning Commission from a
decision of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a
variance, the Planning Commission shall fix a reasonable time for
a hearing and give due notice to the parties in interest as specified
by law. The Planning Commission shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for
proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the
Commissioner will receive at least ten days’ notice of the hearing.
5. Decisions. The Board of Adjustment shall arrive at a decision on
such appeal or variance within 60 days unless extended under
applicable state statutes. In passing upon an appeal, the Board of
Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Zoning Administrator or other public official. It shall make its
decision in writing setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons
for its decisions. In granting a variance the Board of Adjustment
may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards such as
those specified in Section 4.7.2.L(6), which are in conformity with
the purpose of this Ordinance. Violations of such conditions and
safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance
and punishable under Section 4.7.2.N. A copy of all decisions
granting variances shall be forwarded by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such
action.
6. Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board of Adjustment
may be made, and as specified in this community’s official
controls and also by Minnesota Statutes.
7. Flood Insurance Notice and Record Keeping. The Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant for a variance that: 1) The
issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage and 2) Such construction below the 100-year or regional
flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification
shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. The City
shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in
its annual or biennial report submitted to the Administrator of the
National Flood Insurance Program.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 22
L. Conditional Uses. The Planning Commission shall hear and decide applications
for conditional uses permissible under this Ordinance. Applications shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator who shall forward the application to the
City Council for Consideration. .
1. Hearings. Upon filing with the Planning Commission an
application for a conditional use permit, the Planning Commission
shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a
copy of the application for proposed conditional use sufficiently in
advance so that the Commissioner will receive ten days’ notice of
the hearing.
2. Decisions. The City Council shall arrive at a decision on a
conditional use within 60 days unless extended under applicable
state statutes. In granting a conditional use permit the City
Council shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those specified in Section 4.7.2.L(6), which are in
conformity with the purposes of this Ordinance. Violations of such
conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under
which the conditional use permit is granted, shall be deemed a
violation of this Ordinance punishable under Section 4.7.2.L. A
copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits shall be
forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources
within ten (10) days of such action.
3. Procedures to be Followed by the City Council in Passing on
Conditional Use Permit. Applications within All Flood Plain
Districts.
a. Require the applicant to furnish the following information as
deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator for
determining the suitability of the particular site for the
proposed use:
(1) Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, floodproofing
measures, and the relationship of the above to the
location of the stream channel; and
(2) Specifications for building construction and materials,
flood-proofing, if applicable, filling, dredging, grading,
channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply
and sanitary facilities.
b. Transmit one copy of the information described in
4.7.2.L(3a)above to a designated engineer or other expert
person or agency for technical assistance, where necessary,
in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights
and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the use,
the adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 23
matters.
c. Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated
engineer or expert, the City Council shall determine the
specific flood hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability of
the proposed use in relation to the flood hazard.
4. Factors upon Which the Decision of the City Council shall be
Based. In passing upon conditional use applications, the City
Council shall consider all relevant factors specified in other
sections of this Ordinance, and:
(1) The danger to life and property due to increased flood
heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
(2) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
or downstream to the injury of others or they may block
bridges, culverts or other hydraulic structures.
(3) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination,
and unsanitary conditions.
(4) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner.
(5) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
(6) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
(7) The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use.
(8) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the
foreseeable future.
(9) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and flood plain management program for the area.
(10) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.
(12) Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of
this Ordinance.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 24
5. Time for Acting on Application. The City Council shall act on an
application in the manner described above within 60 days from
receiving the application, except that where additional information
is required pursuant to Section 4.7.2.L(3a) of this Ordinance. The
City Council shall render a written decision within 30 days from the
receipt of such additional information.
6. Conditions Attached to Conditional Use Permits. Upon
consideration of the factors listed above and the purpose of this
Ordinance, the City Council shall attach such conditions to the
granting of Conditional Use Permits as it deems necessary to fulfill
the purposes of this Ordinance. Such conditions may include, but
are not limited to, the following:
(1) Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
(2) Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
(3) Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.
(4) Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective
measures.
(5) Flood proofing measures, in accordance with the State
Building Code and this Ordinance. The applicant shall
submit a plan or document certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the flood-proofing
measures are consistent with the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation and associated flood factors for the
particular area.
M. Nonconforming Uses.
1. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before
the passage or amendment of this Section but which is not in conformity
with the provisions of these regulations may be continued subject to the
following conditions. Historic structures, as defined in Section 4.7.2.B(9)
of this Ordinance, shall be subject to the provisions of Section
4.7.2.M.1(a-e) below.
a. No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in
a way that increases its nonconformity.
b. Any alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood
damage potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the
Regulatory Flood Protection elevation in accordance with any of
the elevation on fill or flood proofing techniques (i.e. FP-l thru FP-4
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 25
flood proofing classifications) allowable in the State Building Code,
except as further restricted in 4.7.2.M(1c and f) below.
c. The cost of any structural alterations or additions to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not
exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure unless the
conditions of this Section are satisfied. The cost of all structural
alterations and additions must include all costs such as
construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all
manpower or labor. If the current cost of all previous and proposed
alterations and additions exceeds 50 percent of the current market
value of the structure, then the structure must meet the standards
of Section 4.7.2.D-E of this Ordinance for new structures
depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood
Fringe, respectively.
d. If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive
months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to
this Ordinance. The Assessor shall notify the Zoning
Administrator in writing of instances of nonconforming uses that
have been discontinued for a period of 12 months.
e. If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as
defined in Section 4.7.2.B(9) of this Ordinance, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of these
regulations. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or
new structures in Sections 4.7.2.D-F will apply depending upon
whether the use or structure is in the Floodway, Flood Fringe or
General Flood Plain District, respectively.
f. If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in Section
4.7.2.B(9u) of this Ordinance, from any combination of a building
addition to the outside dimensions of the existing building or a
rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration, or other improvement to
the inside dimensions of an existing nonconforming building, then
the building addition and the existing nonconforming building must
meet the requirements of Section 4.7.2.D and 4.7.2.E of this
Ordinance for new structures, depending upon whether the
structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
N. Violations.
1. Violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any
of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of Variances or Conditional Uses)
shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by
law.
2. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Chisago City from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. Such actions may include but are not limited to:
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 26
a. In responding to a suspected Ordinance violation, the Zoning
Administrator and City may utilize the full array of enforcement
actions available to it including but not limited to prosecution and
fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective
measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program
for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The
community must act in good faith to enforce these official controls
and to correct ordinance violations to the extent possible so as not
to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
b. When a violation of these regulations is either discovered by or
brought to the attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning
Administrator shall immediately investigate the situation and
document the nature and extent of the violation of the official
control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this information will be
submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural Resources’
and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office
along with the Community’s plan of action to correct the violation
to the degree possible.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the
requirements of these regulations and all other Official controls
and the nature and extent of the suspected violation of these
controls. If the structure and/or use are under construction or
development, the Zoning Administrator may order the construction
or development immediately halted until a proper permit or the City
grants approval.
d. If the construction or development is already completed, then the
Zoning Administrator may either (1) issue an order identifying the
corrective actions that must be made within a specified time
period to bring the use or structure into compliance with the official
controls, or (2) notify the responsible party to apply for an afterthe-
fact permit/development approval within a specified period of
time not to exceed 30 days.
e. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the
Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each
additional day that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of
these regulations and shall be prosecuted accordingly. The
Zoning Administrator shall also upon the lapse of the specified
response period notify the landowner to restore the land to the
condition which existed prior to the violation of this Ordinance.
O. Amendments.
1. The flood plain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall not be removed from
flood plain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the
area has been filled to or above the elevation of the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the flood plain. Special exceptions to
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.2 – Zoning Districts – Flood Overlay District Regulations Page 27
this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if the
Commissioner determined that, through other measures, lands are adequately
protected for the intended use.
2. All amendments to this Ordinance, including amendments to the Official Zoning
Map, must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the Official zoning Map must meet the
Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Technical Conditions and
Criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The
Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given 10-day written notice of all
hearings to consider an amendment to these regulations and said notice shall
include a draft of the regulations amendment or technical study under
consideration.
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: October 2000, April 2012)
4.7.3 SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
A. Purpose. The City finds that the protection of lakes, rivers, steams and
watercourses within its boundaries is critical for the health, safety, order and
general welfare of its citizens and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface
water and preserve the economic and natural environmental values of
Shoreland. It is the intent of the city to preserve Shoreland areas for the purpose
of:
1. Regulating the areas of a lot and the length of water frontage suitable for
building sites.
2. Regulating the alteration of shorelines of public waters.
3. Regulating alterations of the natural vegetation and the natural
topography along shorelands.
4. Conserving and developing natural resources and maintaining a high
environmental quality.
B. General Provisions and Definitions.
1. Compliance. The use of any Shoreland of public waters; the use, size,
type and location of structures on lots; the installation and maintenance of
water supply and waste treatment systems, the grading and filling of any
Shoreland area; the cutting of Shoreland vegetation; and the subdivision
of land shall be in full compliance with the terms of the City Code and
other applicable regulations.
2. Enforcement. The Zoning Administrator is responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this ordinance. Any violation of the
provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses)
shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by
law.
3. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
these regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be
deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state
statutes.
4. Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of these regulations shall not be affected.
5. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this ordinance
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions, the provisions of these regulations shall prevail. All other
sections of the Zoning Ordinance inconsistent with these regulations are
hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 1
C. Administration.
1. Permits Required. A permit is required for the construction of buildings or
building additions (and including such related activities as construction of
decks and signs) alteration of sewage treatment systems and grading and
fill activities in the Shoreland area. The application shall include the
necessary information so that the Zoning Administrator can determine the
sites suitability.
2. Notification to the Department of Natural Resources. Copies of all notices
of any public hearing to consider variances, amendments to these
regulations or conditional uses for those lakes which are classified with
the criteria found in Minnesota Regulations Part 6 120.3300 and the
Protected Waters Inventory Map for Chisago County, Minnesota, must be
sent to the Commissioner or the Commissioner’s designated
representative and postmarked at least ten days before the hearing.
Notice of the hearing to consider proposed subdivisions/plats must
include copies of the subdivision/plat.
3. Variances. Variances may only be granted in accordance with Minnesota
Statutes and the City Zoning Ordinance as applicable. A variance may
not circumvent the general purposes and intent of this ordinance. No
variance may be granted that would allow any use that is prohibited in the
zoning district in which the subject property is located. Conditions may be
imposed in the granting of a variance to ensure compliance and to protect
adjacent properties and the public interest. In considering a variance
request, the City Council must also consider whether the property owner
has reasonable use of the land without the variance, whether the property
is used seasonally or year-round, whether the variance is being
requested solely on the basis of economic considerations, and the
characteristics of development on adjacent property.
4. The Planning Commission shall hear and recommend to the City Council
for final decision requests for variances in accordance with the rules that
it has adopted for the conduct of business. When a variance is approved
after the Department of Natural Resources has formally recommended
denial in the hearing record. The notification of the approved variance
required in Section 3 above shall also include the Commission’s summary
of the public record/testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions
which supported the issuance of the variance.
5. The City will attempt to identify sewage treatment systems that are not in
conformance with the sewage treatment system design criteria identified
in item b. This will require reconstruction of existing nonconforming
sewage systems wherever a permit or variance of any structural type is
required for any improvement on or use of the property and will also use
the following approach:
a. A systematic review of existing records to determine which
systems in the jurisdictions are non-conforming and requirement
reconstruction when practical.
b. A systematic on-site inspection program including all properties
where adequate record of conformance does not exist, identifying
nonconforming or illegal systems and requiring reconstruction
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 2
when a appropriate;
c. A notification or education program that is oriented towards
convincing substantial numbers or property owners to evaluate
their sewage treatment systems and voluntarily upgrade the
sewage treatment system, if non-conforming; or other plans found
acceptable to the Council.
d. Reconstruction of Nonconforming Sewage Treatment Systems. A
permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure shall
stipulate that an identified nonconforming sewage treatment
system shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance with the
provisions of the Minnesota’s Septic Compliance Chapter 7080.
e. Certificate of Zoning Compliance. The Zoning Administrator shall
issue a certificate of compliance for each activity requiring a
permit. This certificate will specify that the use of land conforms to
the requirements of this ordinance. Any use, arrangement, or
construction at variance with that authorized permit shall be
deemed a violation of these regulations.
D. Shoreland Classification System and Land Use Districts. The public waters of
the City of Chisago City have been classified consistent with the criteria found in
Minnesota Regulations Part 6 120.3300 and the Protected Waters Inventory Map
for Chisago County, Minnesota.
1. Lakes and streams.
a. Natural Environment
School (north) (13 - 44)
Mattson Lake
Sam Lake
Birch (13-42)
Un-named (13-49)
Un-named (13-52)
School (south) (13-57)
Swamp (13-58)
Haukenson (13-107)
Bjorkman (13-108)
b. Recreational Development
Martha (13-40)
Ellen (13-47)
Whitestone
Emily (13-46)
c. General Development
Chisago (13-12)
S. Lindstrom (13-28)
Wallmark (13-29)
Green (13-4 1)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 3
Comfort Lake
Little Comfort Lake
d. Tributary Rivers
Sunrise River – from Little Comfort southeast to School Lake
(south) and from School Lake (south) southeast to Birch Lake.
2. Land Use Districts for Lakes. All properties within the Shoreland areas in
the City of Chisago City shall be regulated as identified on the zoning map.
E. Zoning and Water Supply/Sanitary Provisions.
1. Lot Area and Width Standards. The lot area and lot width standards for
single family residential riparian lots created after the date of enactment
of this Section for any lake classification are the following: Non-riparian
lots shall meet the lot size and dimension standards of the underlying
district. Riparian lots with city services shall be regulated as designated
on the zoning map. Riparian lots shall meet the following standards:
Unsewered/Lake
Type
Acres Lake Width
(measured at the OHW)
Natural Environment RR-1 2.0
All Other Districts 2.5
200 feet
Recreational
Development
RR-1 2.0
All Other Districts 2.5
200 feet
General Development RR-1 2.0
All Other Districts 2.5
200 feet
Tributary Rivers RR-1 2.0
All Other Districts 2.5
200 feet
Sewered/Lake Type Square footage Width
Natural Environment As regulated in the
zoning district
100 feet
Recreational
Development
As regulated in the
zoning district
100 feet
General Development As regulated in the
zoning district
100 feet
Tributary Rivers As regulated in the
zoning district
100 feet
F. Placement of Structures on Lots. When more than one setback applies to a site,
structures and facilities must be located to meet all setbacks.
1. Structure and on-site sewage system setbacks from the ordinary high
water mark.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 4
Exceptions to structure setback requirements. Where structure setbacks
exist on adjoining lots on both sides of a proposed building site, structure
setbacks may be altered without a variance to conform to the adjoining
setbacks provided the proposed building site is not located in a shore
impact zone or a bluff impact zone.
Classes of Public
Waters/Lakes
Structures
Unsewered
Structures
Sewered
Septic
System
Location
Natural Environment 150 100 150
Recreational
Development
100 75 100
General Development 75 50 100
Unclassified Public
Waters
100 50 100
Tributary Rivers 150 75 100
2. Additional Structure Setbacks. The following additional structure
setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the waterbody:
Setback From: Setback (in feet)
Top of Bluff 30
3. Each building must be hooked into a public sewer system where deemed
practical by the city.
4. Watercraft docking facilities for each lot must be centralized in one
location and serve all dwelling units in the building.
5. No more then twenty-five percent (25%) of a lake shoreline can be in
duplex. triplex and quad developments.
G. Design Criteria for Structures.
1. High Water Elevations. Structures must be placed in accordance with any
floodplain regulations applicable to the site. Where these controls do not
exist, the elevation to which the lowest floor, including basement, is placed
or flood proofed must be determined as follows:
a. For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a level at least three feet
above the highest known water level or three feet above the
ordinary high water level, whichever is higher.
b. For rivers and streams, by placing the lowest floor at least three
feet above the flood of record, if data is available. If data is not
available, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the
ordinary high water level or by conducting a technical evaluation
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 5
to determine effects of proposed construction upon flood stages
and flood flows and to establish a flood protection elevation.
Under all three approaches, technical evaluations must be done
by a qualified engineer or hydrologist consistent with the Chisago
City Floodplain regulations. If more than one approach is used,
the highest flood protection elevation determined must be used for
placing structures and other facilities.
c. Bluff impact zones. Structures and accessory facilities, except
stairways and landings, must not be placed within the bluff impact
zones.
2. Stairways, Lifts and Landings. Stairways and lifts are the preferred
alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and
down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet
all of the following design requirements.
a. Stairways and lifts must not exceed four (4) feet in width on
residential lots;
b. Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not exceed
32 square feet in area:
c. Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts or landings;
d. Stairways, lifts and landings may be either constructed above the
ground on posts or pilings or placed into the ground, provided they
are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil
erosion.
e. Stairways, lifts and landings must be located in the most visually
inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the
public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever
practical; and
f. Facilities such as ramps, lifts or mobility paths for physically
handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to
shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance
standards of sub items (a) to (e) are complied with an addition to
the requirements of Minnesota Regulations, Chapter 1340.
3. Significant Historic Site. No structure may be placed on a significant
historic site in a manner that affects the values of the site unless adequate
information about the site have been removed and documented in a public
repository.
4. Steep Slopes. The applicant must evaluate possible soil erosion impacts
and development visibility from public waters before applying for a permit
for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures
or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary,
condition must be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to
preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles and other
facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming summer,
leaf-on vegetation.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 6
5. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. An erosion and sediment control plan
is required of all new subdivisions and all new commercial and industrial
development within the City limits. In addition to the above requirements,
the following is required for subdivisions, commercial and industrial
development:
a. Property boundaries (lot lines).
b. Two (2) foot contours extending fifty (50) feet beyond property
lines.
c. A drainage plan of the site delineating the direction and rate
stormwater is conveyed from the site. The drainage plan shall
show directional site and drainage arrows, identify the location of
water quality treatment ponds and areas in which storm water will
collect.
d. A delineation of all waterbodies and watercourses development
noting the normal and high water levels for ponds, wetlands, and
lakes.
e. Percent of grade, and elevations for streets and parking areas.
f. Basement floor elevations.
g. Utility plans in the area proposed for development.
h. The limits of clearing and grading.
i. A site map that identifies vegetative and structural erosion and
sediment control measures to be installed, including temporary
and permanent sediment and nutrient basins designed according
to the procedure below for assessing predevelopment phosphorus
export and post-development export of phosphorus.
j. A narrative that describes the project, site, erosion and sediment
control measures. The narrative must include the sequence of
grading and sequence of installation, maintenance and disposition
of erosion and sediment control measures, and the construction of
permanent and temporary sediment and nutrient basins.
The requirements for erosion and sediment control plan approval
are detailed in the “Minnesota Construction Site Erosion and
Sediment Control Planning Handbook” (Minnesota Board of Water
and Soil Resources — 1988).
6. Height of Structures. All structures in residential districts, except churches
and nonresidential structures, must not exceed 30 feet in height.
7. Shoreland Alterations. Alterations of vegetation and topography is
regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve
Shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping and
protect fish and wildlife habitat.
8. Vegetation Alterations.
a. Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures
and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and
parking areas are exempt from the vegetation alteration standards
that follow.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 7
b. Removal or alteration of vegetation is allowed subject to the
following standards:
(1) Selective removal of natural vegetation shall be allowed,
provided sufficient vegetative cover remains to screen cars,
dwellings, and other structures when viewed from the water.
(2) No cutting or removal of trees over six inches in diameter
measured at breast height within the required building
setback shall be permitted unless the trees are dead or
diseased. A tree-trimming plan must be submitted and
certificate of compliance must be issued by the zoning
administrator prior to the removal of any trees.
(3) Natural vegetation shall be restored insofar as feasible after
any construction project is completed in order to retard
surface run-off and soil erosion.
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to allowed uses
which normally require the removal of natural vegetation or
to the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead,
diseased, or pose safety hazards.
9. Connections to Public Water. Excavations where the intended purpose is
connection to a public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and
harbors will only be allowed after the Department of Natural Resources
has approved the proposed connection to public waters.
10. Placement and Design of Roads, Driveways, and Parking Areas.
a. Public and private roads and parking areas must be designated to
take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve
maximum screening from view from public waters. Documentation
must be provided by a qualified individual that all roads and parking
areas are designed and constructed to minimize and control
erosion to public waters consistent with the field office technical
guides of the local soil and water conservation district, or other
applicable technical materials.
b. All new roads, driveways and parking areas must meet water body
structure setbacks and must not be placed within bluff and shore
impact zones.
c. Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads and
access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact
zones provided the vegetative screening and erosion control
conditions of this subpart are met and a certificate of compliance is
issued by the zoning administrator.
11. Specific Standards
a. Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed 30 percent
of the lot area for residential uses and 70 percent of the lot area
for commercial and industrial uses. The storm water management
ordinance shall apply to all shore land development.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 8
b. When constructed facilities are used for storm water management,
documentation must be provided by a registered engineer that
they are designed and installed consistent with the field office
technical guide of the local soil and water conservation district and
approved by City Engineer.
c. New constructed storm water outfalls to the public waters must
provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming
of surface debris before discharge.
d. Proximity to roads and highways. No structure may be placed
nearer than fifty (50 feet from the right-of-way line of any federal.
state. or county highways or twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way
of any town road, public street. or others not classified.
12. Standards for Public Uses.
a. Surface water-oriented public uses with similar needs to have
access to and use of public waters may be located on parcels or
lots with frontage on public waters. Those uses with wateroriented
needs must meet the following standards:
(1) In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits,
setbacks, and other zoning standards in this ordinance, the
uses must be designed to incorporate topographic and
vegetative screening of parking areas and structures.
(2) Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons
must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid
obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size
necessary to meet the need.
(3) Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may
use signs and lighting to convey needed information to the
public, subject to the following general standards:
(a) No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs
may be placed in or upon public waters. Signs
conveying information or safety messages may be
placed in or on public waters by a public authority or
under a permit issued by the county sheriff.
(b) Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the
shore impact zone if they are designed and sized to
be the minimum necessary to convey the location
and name of the establishment and the general type
of goods or services available. The signs must not
contain other detailed information such as product
brands and prices, must not be located higher than
ten feet above the ground, and must not exceed 32
square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights,
the lights must be shielded or directed to prevent
illumination out across public waters. A sign permit
must be obtained from the zoning administrator.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 9
(c) Other outside lighting may be located within the
shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used
primarily to illuminate potential safety hazards and is
shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct
illumination out across public waters. This does not
preclude use of navigational lights.
13. Agricultural Use Standards.
a. General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck
farming, sod farming and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses
if steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in
permanent vegetation or operated under an approved
conservation plan (Resource Management Systems) consistent
with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water
conservation districts or the United States Soil Conservation
Service, as provided by a qualified individual or agency. The shore
impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is
equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high water
level.
14. Standards for commercial, industrial, public and semi-public uses. Surface
water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public, or semi-public uses
with similar needs to have access to and use of public waters may be
located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. Uses without
water-oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels without public
waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage,
must either be set back double the public waters normal ordinary high
water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water
by vegetation or topography, assuming summer leaf-on conditions. Those
with water-oriented needs must meet the following standards.
a. In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and
other zoning standards presented elsewhere uses must be
designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of
parking areas and structures.
15. Forest Management Standards. The harvesting of timber associated
reforestation must be conducted consistent with the provisions of the
Minnesota Nonpoint Source Pollution Assessment-Forestry and the
provisions of Water Quality in Forest Management “Best Management
Practices in Minnesota.”
16. Conditional Uses. Conditional uses allowable with Shoreland areas shall
be subject to the review and approval procedures and criteria and
conditions for review of conditional uses established in the these
regulations. The following additional evaluation criteria and conditions
apply within Shoreland areas.
a. Evaluation Criteria. A thorough evaluation of the waterbody and
the topographic, vegetation and soil conditions on the site must be
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 10
made to ensure:
(1) The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of
public waters, both during and after construction.
(2) The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed
from public waters is limited.
(3) The site is adequate for public water supply and can be
provided public sewer services.
(4) The types, uses and numbers of watercraft that the project
will generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of
public waters to safely accommodate these watercrafts.
H. Nonconforming Uses/Standard Structures.
1. Legally Established Nonconformities. All legally established
nonconforming uses or structures as of the date of these regulations may
continue, but they will be managed according to applicable state statutes
and other regulations of the City of Chisago City for the subjects of
alterations and additions, repair after damages, discontinuance of use,
and intensification of use; except that the following standards will also
apply in Shoreland areas.
a. A lot or parcel of land which was of record as a separate lot or
parcel in the office of the Chisago County Recorder or Registrar of
Title, on or before January 1, 1973 which is in a residential or
agricultural district may be used for single family detached
dwelling purposes, without a variance, provided the area and
width thereof are within 60 percent of the minimum requirements
of these regulations, provided all setback requirements of this
ordinance can be maintained and provided it can be demonstrated
that either two safe and adequate sewage treatment systems can
be installed to service such permanent dwelling or the dwelling is
served by sanitary sewer.
b. If, in a group of two or more contiguous lots under the same
ownership, any individual lot does not meet the requirements of
this ordinance, the lot must not be considered as a separate
parcel of land of the purposes of sale or development. The lot
must be combined with the one or more contiguous lots so they
equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting the full
requirements of this ordinance.
c. Restoration of Nonconforming Uses and Substandard Buildings or
Structures. A nonconforming use or substandard building or
structure which is damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, wind,
earthquake or other calamity may be restored and the occupancy
or use of such building, structure or part thereof, which existed at
the time of such partial destruction, may be continued or resumed,
provided that the restoration is started within a period of 180 days
and is diligently pursued to completion, unless the damage to
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 11
such building or structure is equal to 50 percent or more of the
replacement cost thereof (as determined by the building official) in
which case, the reconstruction shall conform to the provisions of
this ordinance, not to exceed the gross square footage of the
previous structure.
d. Preservation of Nonconforming Uses. Any lawful use of land
existing on the effective date of this ordinance may be continued,
although such use is not allowed by this ordinance, however, such
use of structure shall not be expanded or intensified.
I. Additions/Expansions to Substandard Structures.
1. All additions or expansions to the outside dimensions (including upward
expansions) of an existing nonconforming structure must meet the
setback, height and other requirements of these regulations. Any
deviation from these requirements must be authorized by a variance
pursuant to these regulations.
2. Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a structure not
meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level if all of
the following criteria and standards are met:
a. The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks were
established.
b. A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no
reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing
ordinary high water level setback of the structure.
c. The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does
not exceed 15 percent of the existing setback of the structure from
the ordinary high water level or does not encroach closer than 30
feet, whichever is more restrictive.
d. No deck on a nonconforming structure shall exceed 10 feet in
width.
e. The deck is constructed primarily of wood and is not roofed or
screened.
f. A certificate of compliance is obtained from the Zoning
Administrator.
J. Exception to Building Setbacks.
1. Exceptions to the building setback from the ordinary high water mark for
substandard structures that are setback a minimum of 30 feet from the
ordinary high water mark on sewered lots or a minimum of 45 feet from
the ordinary high water mark on unsewered lots.
a. An extension, enlargement or alteration of an existing substandard
structure may be permitted on the side of the structure facing
away from the water body provided the improved structure is in
compliance with all other requirements of this ordinance.
2. Exceptions to the building from the side yard and street right-of-way.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 12
a. An extension, enlargement or alteration of an existing substandard
structure may be permitted on the side of the structure facing
away from the side yard or street provided the encroachment into
the side or front yard is not increased and the improved structure
is in compliance with all other requirements of this ordinance.
K. Nonconforming sewage treatment systems. A sewage treatment system not
meeting the requirements of the Chisago County Individual Sewage Treatment
System Ordinance (OLPCA Standards) must be upgraded, at a minimum, at any
time a permit or variance of any type is required for any improvement on, or use,
the property, with the exception of non-habitable spaces, (decks, porches). In
addition, at time of sale or upon receipt of a complaint, the property shall be
inspected and if the sewage system is found to be nonconforming, a new
conforming system must be installed within 90 days.
L. Subdivision Provisions.
M. Land Suitability. Each lot created through subdivision must be suitable in its
natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability analysis will
consider susceptibility to flooding, existence of wetlands, soil and rock formations
with severe limitations for development, sever erosion potential, steep
topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities, near
shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation, important fish
and wildlife habitat, presence of significant historic sites, or any other feature of
the natural land likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of future
residents of the proposed subdivision or of the city of Chisago City.
N. Platting. All subdivisions that create five (5) or more lots or parcels that are two
and one-half (2-1/2) acres or less in size must be in accordance with Minnesota
Statutes Chapter 505. The City will not approve parcels or issue building permits
for lots created after Minnesota Statutes 6120.2500 to 6120.3900 that are not
part of officially approved subdivisions.
O. Consistency with Other Controls. Subdivisions must conform to all requirements
of this Ordinance. A subdivision will not be approved where a later variance from
one (1) or more standards in the subdivision regulations would be needed to use
the lots for their intended purpose. In areas not served by publicly owned sewer
and water systems, a subdivision will not be approved unless domestic water
supply is available and a sewage treatment system consistent with Sections 5.2
and 5.8 can be provided for every lot. Each lot shall meet the minimum lot size
and minimum contiguous lawn area that is free of limiting factors sufficient for the
construction of two (2) standard soil treatment systems. Lots that would require
use of holding tanks must not be approved.
P. Information Requirements. Subdivision controls must require submission of
adequate information to make a determination of land suitability under Section
5.41. The information must include at least the following:
1. Topographic contours at two (2) foot intervals or less from the U.S.
Geological Survey maps or more accurate sources showing limiting site
characteristics:
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 13
2. The surface water features required in Minnesota Statutes, Section
505.02, Subdivision 1 to be shown on plats obtained from the U.S.
Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate
sources:
3. Adequate soil information to determine suitability for building and on-site
sewage treatment capabilities for every lot from the most current existing
sources, or from field investigations such as soil borings, percolation tests
or other methods:
4. Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply;
extent of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations, nearshore
aquatic vegetation; and proposed methods for controlling
stormwater runoff and erosion, both during and after construction
activities; and
5. Location of one hundred-year (100) flood plain areas from existing maps
or data.
Q. Dedications. Easements must be provided over natural drainage or ponding
areas for management of stormwater and significant wetlands.
R. Planned Unit Development.
S. Scope of Planned Unit Development Provisions. Planned unit developments
may occur as new projects on undeveloped land, redevelopment of previously
built sites, or conversions of existing building and land. Planned Unit
developments must meet the requirements of the provisions and must be
consistent with standards in this part.
T. Land Use District Designation. The land use districts in which they are an
allowable conditional use must be identified in consideration of the criteria in
Minnesota Statutes Section 6120.3200 and the following criteria:
1. Existing recreational use of surface waters and likely increases in use
associated with Planned Unit Developments:
2. Physical and aesthetic impacts of increased density:
3. Suitability of lands for the Planned Unit Development approach:
4. Level of current development in the area: and
5. Amounts and types of ownership on undeveloped land. Expansions to
existing commercial Planned Unit Developments involving up to six (6)
dwelling units or sites, unless the density determined under subpart “F,”
item “1” is exceeded, may be allowed as a permitted use. The date of
effect of official controls adopted by each local unit of government under
this part must be the base date for determination of expansions.
Expansions exceeding these limits must be processed as conditional
uses and meet the standards in this part.
U. Information Requirements. Provisions for submission of adequate information by
project proponents must be included in the application and must include at least
the following:
1. A site plan for the project showing property boundaries, surface water
features, existing and proposed structures, sewage treatment systems.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 14
topographic contours at two (2) foot intervals or less, and other facilities:
and
2. Documents that explain how the project is designed and will function.
These ordinarily include covenants that require membership in a property
owners association, various easements, a concept statement describing
the project, floor plans for structures, and various other drawings and
plans.
V. Dwelling Unit or Site Density Evaluation. Proposed new or expansions to
existing Planned Unit Developments must be evaluated using the following
procedures and standards:
1. The project parcel must be divided into tiers by locating one (1’) or more
lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high water
level at the following intervals, proceeding landward:
Shoreland Tier Dimensions
Sewered
(feet)
UnSewered
(feet)
General Development
Lakes – First Tier
200 200
General Development
Lakes – Second Tier &
additional tiers & Recreational
Development Lakes
267 267
Natural Environment
Lakes
320 400
2. The area within each tier is next calculated excluding all wetlands, bluffs,
or land below the ordinary high water level of public waters. This area is
then subjected to either the residential (Section 5.65) or the commercial
(Section 5.66) Planned Unit Development density evaluation steps to
arrive at an allowable number of dwelling units or sites.
W. Residential Planned Unit Development Density Evaluation Steps and Design
Criteria. The density evaluation steps and design criteria for residential Planned
Unit Developments are contained in items 1 to 4.
1. The area within each tier is divided by the single residential lot size width
standard for lakes. To calculate, multiply the single residential lot width
standard by the tier depth. Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling
units or sites for the locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for
each tier. Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 15
the Residential Planned Unit Development are then compared with this
data and map of the evaluation. Local governments may allow some
dwelling unit or site density increases for residential Planned Unit
Developments above the densities determined in the evaluation if all
dimensional standards in Minnesota Statutes parts 6120.3300 are met or
exceeded. Maximum density increases may only be allowed if all design
criteria in Section 5.65. sub B are also met or exceeded. Increases in
dwelling units or site densities must not exceed the maximums in the
following table. Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to any
other tier further from the Shoreland water body or watercourse, but must
not be transferred to any other tier closer.
Maximum Allowable Dwelling Unit or Site Density
Increases For Residential Planned Unit Developments
Density Evaluation Tiers Maximum Density Increase
within each tier
(percent)
First Tier 50%
Second Tier 100%
Third Tier 200%
Fourth Tier 200%
Firth Tier 200%
2. The design criteria is:
a. All residential planned unit developments must contain at least
seven (7) dwelling units or sites.
b. Residential planned unit developments must contain open space
meeting all of the following criteria:
(1) At least fifty percent (50%) of the total project area must be
preserved for open space.
(2) Dwelling units or sites, road right-of-ways. or land covered
by road surfaces, parking areas or structures, except water
oriented accessory structures, or facilities, are developed
areas and should not be included in the computation of
minimum open space.
(3) Open space must include areas with physical
characteristics unsuitable for development in their natural
state, and areas containing significant historic sites or
unplatted cemeteries.
(4) Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities for
use by owners of the dwelling units or sites to the public.
(5) The shore impact zone, based on normal structure
setbacks, must be included as open space. At least fifty
percent (50%) of the shore impact zone area of existing
developments, or at least seventy percent (70%) of the
shore impact zone area of new developments must be
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 16
preserved in their natural or existing state.
(6) Open space must not include commercial facilities or uses,
but may contain water-oriented accessory structures or
facilities.
(7) The appearance of open space areas including
topography, vegetation, and allowable uses, must be
preserved by the use of restrictive deed covenants,
permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance
or other equally effective and permanent means.
(8) Open space may include subsurface sewage treatment
systems if the use of the space is restricted to avoid
adverse impacts on the systems.
c. Centralization and design of facilities and structures must be done
according to the following standards:
(1) Residential planned unit development must be connected
to publicly owned water supply and sewer systems, if
available. On-site water supply and sewage treatment
systems must be centralized, designed, and installed to
meet or exceed applicable standards or rules of the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. On-site sewage
treatment systems must be located on the most suitable
area for development and sufficient lawn area free of
limiting factors must be provided for a replacement solid
treatment system for each sewage system.
(2) Dwelling unit or sites must be clustered into one (1) or
more groups and located on suitable areas of the
development. They must be designed and located to meet
or exceed the following dimensional standards for the
applicable Shoreland classification: setback from ordinary
high water level, elevation above the surface water
features, and maximum height. Setbacks from the ordinary
high water level must be increased for developments with
density increases. Maximum density increases can only be
allowed if structure setbacks from the ordinary high water
level are increased to at least fifty percent (50%) greater
than the minimum setback or the impact on the waterbody
is reduced an equivalent amount through vegetative
management, topography, or additional means acceptable
to the local unit of government and the setback is at least
twenty-five percent (25%) greater than the minimum
setback.
(3) Shore recreation facilities including, but not limited to,
swimming areas, docks, and watercraft mooring areas and
launching ramps must be centralized and located in areas
suitable for them. Evaluation of suitability must include
consideration of land slope, water depth, vegetation, and
soils depth to ground water and bedrock, or other relevant
factors. The number of spaces provided for continuous
beaching, mooring, or docking of watercraft must not
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 17
exceed one (1) of each allowable dwelling unit or site in
the first tier. Launching ramp facilities, including a small
dock for leading and unloading of occupants of dwelling
units or sites located in other tiers.
(4) Structures, parking areas, and other facilities must be
treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters
and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography,
increased setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to
the local unit of government, assuming summer leaf-on
conditions.
(5) Water-oriented accessory structures and facilities may be
allowed if they meet or exceed design standards contained
in Minnesota Statutes 6120.3300, Sub. 3, item H, and are
centralized.
d. Erosion control and stormwater management for residential
planned unit developments must:
(1) Be designed and the construction managed to minimize
the likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or
after construction. This must be accomplished by limiting
the amount and length of time of bare ground exposure.
Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment facilities,
vegetated buffer strips, or other appropriate techniques
must be used to minimize erosion impacts or surface water
features. Erosion control plans approved by a soil and
water conservation district may be required if project size
and site physical characteristics warrant.
(2) Be designed and constructed to effectively manage
reasonably expected quantities and qualities of stormwater
runoff.
3. Administration and Maintenance Requirements. Before final approval of a
planned unit development, adequate provisions must be developed for
preservation and maintenance in perpetuity of open and for the continued
existence and functioning of the development.
a. Open space preservation. Deed restrictions, covenants,
permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other
equally effective and permanent means must be provided to
ensure long-term preservation and maintenance of open space.
The instruments must include all of the following protections:
(1) Commercial uses prohibited (for residential S-PUD’s);
(2) Vegetation and topographic alterations other than routine
maintenance prohibited;
(3) Construction of additional buildings or storage of vehicles
and other materials prohibited; and
(4) Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft prohibited.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 18
b. Development organization and functioning. Unless an equally
effective alternative community framework is established, when
applicable, all residential planned unit developments must use an
owners association with the following features:
(1) Membership must be mandatory for each dwelling unit or
site purchaser and any successive purchasers;
(2) Each member must pay a pro rata share of the
association’s expenses, and unpaid assessments can
become liens on units or sites;
(3) Assessments must be adjustable to accommodate
changing conditions; and
(4) The association must be responsible for insurance, taxes,
and maintenance of all commonly owned property and
facilities.
4. Conversions. Local governments may allow existing resorts or other land
uses and facilities to be converted to residential planned unit
developments if all of the following are met:
a. Proposed conversions must be initially evaluated using the same
procedures and standards presented in this part for developments
involving all new construction. Inconsistencies between existing
features of the development and these standards must be
identified.
b. Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage treatment,
structure color, impervious coverage, open space, and shore
recreation facilities must be corrected as part of the conversion or
as specified in the conditional use permit.
c. Shore and bluff impact zone deficiencies must be evaluated and
reasonable improvements made as part of the conversion. These
improvements must include, where applicable, the following:
(1) Removal of extraneous buildings, docks, or other facilities
that no longer need to be located in shore or bluff impact
zones;
(2) Remedial measures to correct erosion sites and improve
vegetative cover and screening of buildings and other
facilities as viewed from water; and
(3) If existing dwelling units are located in shore or bluff impact
zones, conditions are attached to approvals of conversions
that preclude exterior expansions in any dimension of
substantial alterations. The conditions must also provide
for future relocation of dwelling units, where feasible, to
other locations, meeting all setback and elevation
requirements, when they are rebuilt or replaced.
d. Existing dwelling unit or dwelling site densities that exceed
standards in this part may be allowed to continue, but must not be
allowed to be increased, either at the time of conversion or in the
future. Efforts must be made during the conversion to limit
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 19
impacts of high densities by requiring seasonal use, improving
vegetative screening, centralizing shore recreation facilities,
installing new sewage treatment systems, or other means.
X. Commercial Planned Unit Developments Density Evaluation Steps and Design
Criteria. The density evaluation steps and design criteria for commercial planned
unit developments are contained in items 1 & 2 of this section.
1. Density evaluation steps:
a. Determine the average inside living area size of dwelling units or
sites within each tier, including both existing proposed units and
sites. Computation of inside living area sizes need not include
decks, patios, stoops, steps, garages, porches, or basements,
unless they are habitable space.
b. Select the appropriate floor area ratio from the following table:
Commercial Planned Unit Development
Floor Area Ratios*
Public Waters Classes
Average
Unit
Floor
Area (sq.
ft.)
Sewered General
Development
Lakes: First Tier
on unsewered
general
development lakes
Second and
additional tiers
on unsewered
general
development
lakes;
recreational
development
Natural
Environment
Lakes
200 .040 .020 .010
300 .048 .024 .012
400 .056 .028 .014
500 .065 .032 .016
600 .072 .038 .019
700 .082 .042 .021
800 .091 .046 .023
900 .099 .050 .025
1000 .108 .054 .027
1100 .116 .058 .029
1200 .125 .064 .032
1300 .133 .068 .034
1400 .142 .072 .036
1500 .150 .075 .038
* For average unit floor area less than shown, use the floor area
ratios listed for two hundred (200) sf. For areas greater than
shown, use the ratios listed for one thousand five hundred
(1.500) sf. For recreational camping areas, use the ratios four
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 20
hundred (400) sf. Manufactured home sites in recreational
camping areas must use a ratio equal to the size of the
manufactured home, or if unknown, the ratio listed for one
thousand sf. (1,000).
c. Multiply the usable area within each tier by the floor area ratio to
yield total floor area for each tier allowed to be used for dwelling
units or sites.
d. Divide the area computed in sub item “c” by the average
determined in sub item “a.” This yields a base number of dwelling
units and sites for each tier.
e. Determine whether the project is eligible for any additional density
increases. To be eligible, projects must meet all of the design
standards in item “2” and exceed one (1) or more of them. The
local unit of government may decide how much, if any increase in
density to allow for each tier, but must not exceed the maximum
allowable density increases listed in the following table.
Maximum Allowable Dwelling Unit
or Site Density Increase for
Commercial Planned Unit Developments
Tier
Maximum Density
Increase within each tier
(percent)
First 50%
Second 100%
Third 200%
Fourth 200%
Fifth 200%
f. Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to any other
tier further from the Shoreland lake or river, but must not be
transferred to any other tier closer.
2. The design criteria are:
a. Open Space. Commercial planned unit developments must contain
open space, meeting all of the following criteria:
(1) At least fifty percent (50%) of the total project area must be
preserved as open space.
(2) Dwelling units or sites, road rights-of-ways, or land covered
by road surfaces, or parking areas, except water oriented
accessory structures or facilities, are developed areas and
should not be included in the computation of open space.
(3) Open space must include areas with physical
characteristics unsuitable for development in their natural
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 21
state and areas containing significant historic sites or
unplatted cemeteries.
(4) All shore impact zones within commercial planned unit
developments must be included as open space and at
least fifty percent (50%) of these areas must be preserved
in their natural or existing state.
(5) Open space may include outdoor recreation facilities for
use by guests staying in dwelling units, sites, or the public.
(6) Open space may include subsurface sewage treatment
systems if use of the space is restricted to avoid adverse
impacts on the systems.
b. Design of structures and facilities must be done according to the
following standards:
(1) Commercial planned unit developments must be
connected to publicly owned water supply and sewer
systems, if available. On site water supply and sewage
treatment systems must be designed and installed to meet
or exceed applicable rules of the Minnesota Department of
Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. Onsite
sewage treatment systems must be located on the
most suitable areas of the development and sufficient lawn
area free of limiting factors must be provided for a
replacement soil treatment system for each sewage
system.
(2) Dwelling units or sites must be located on suitable areas of
the development. They must be designed and located to
meet or exceed the following dimensional standards for the
relevant Shoreland classifications: setback from the
ordinary high water level, elevation above surface water
features, and maximum height. Maximum density
increases may only be allowed if structure setbacks from
the ordinary high water level are increased at least to fifty
percent (50%) greater the minimum setback or the impact
on the watershed is reduced an equivalent amount through
vegetative management, topography or other means
acceptable to the local unit of government and the setback
is at least twenty five percent (25%) greater then the
minimum setback.
(3) Structures, parking areas, and other facilities must be
designed and located in a manner that minimizes their
visibility from surface water features, assuming summer
leaf-on conditions. The structure, dwelling unit, accessory
structure, or parking area must be treated to reduce
viability as viewed from public waters and adjacent
shorelands be vegetation, topography, increased setbacks,
color, or other means acceptable to the local unit of
government assuming summer leaf-on conditions.
Vegetative and topographic screening must be preserved,
if existing, or may be required to be provided.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 22
(4) Water-oriented accessory structures and facilities may be
located within shore impact zones if they meet or exceed
design standards contained in Minnesota Statutes
6120.3300, subpart 3, item H.
(5) Shore recreation facilities, including but not limited to
swimming areas, docks, and watercraft mooring area and
launching ramps, must be centralized and located in an
area suitable for them. Evaluation of suitability must
include consideration for land slope, water depth,
vegetation soils, and depth to groundwater and bedrock, or
other relevant factors. The number of watercraft allowed to
be continuously beached, moored or docked must not
exceed one (1) for each allowable dwelling unit or site in
the first tier, notwithstanding existing mooring sites in an
existing harbor. Launching ramp facilities, including a small
dock for loading and unloading equipment, may be
provided for use by occupants of dwelling units or sites
located in other tiers.
c. Erosion control and stormwater management for commercial planned
unit developments must:
(1) Be designed, and the construction managed to minimize
the likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or
after construction. This must be accomplished by limiting
the amount and length of time of bare ground exposure.
Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment facilities,
vegetated buffer strips, or other appropriate techniques
must be used to minimize erosion impacts on surface
water features. Erosion control plans approved by a solid
and water conservation district may be required if project
size and site physical characteristics warrant.
(2) Be designed and constructed to effectively manage
reasonably expected quantities and qualities of storm
water runoff. Impervious surface coverage within any tier
must not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the tier area,
except thirty five percent (25%) impervious surface may be
allowed in the first tier of general development lakes with
an approved stormwater management plan and
consistency with Minnesota Statutes 6120.3300, subpart 4.
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: October 2000, June 2007, June 9, 2009)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 4.7.3 – Zoning Districts – Shoreland Overlay District Page 23
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 1
6.0 COMMUNITY DESIGN
6.1 SITE SIZE AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
A. Building Size and Architectural Requirements. The following building size and
architectural standards shall apply to all districts unless otherwise specified.
B. Height Exceptions. The zoning district building height limits shall not apply to belfries,
cupolas, domes, spires, monuments, radio or television towers, flag poles, chimneys,
or flues, nor to elevators, water tanks, poles, towers and other structures for
essential services as approved by the City, These exception structures cannot be
used for human habilitation.
C. Architectural Requirements. The following architectural requirements shall apply to
all dwellings in the Agricultural and residential districts.
1. Principal dwellings shall have a width of not less than twenty-five (25) feet
excluding garage.
2. Dwellings shall be placed on a permanent foundation forming a complete
enclosure under exterior walls, unless specifically required by the MN
Building Code.
3. Accessory Structures shall be located behind the Principals structure,
excluding attached garages and riparian lots. Accessory Structures shall be
constructed in accordance of Section 6.3 of this ordinance.
4. Dwellings shall be placed on a permanent foundation forming a complete
enclosure under exterior walls, unless specifically required by the MN
Building Code.
5. The roof pitch shall be a minimum of 4/12 in all residential districts excluding
the Mobile Home Residential District (R-4).
6. Exterior walls on dwellings shall have the appearance of wood or masonry
regardless of their actual composition.
7. Dwellings shall be constructed on site in all residential districts excluding the
Mobile Home Residential District (R-4). Additions to manufactured homes
shall not be considered in determining dimensional requirements.
Construction of manufactured homes is prohibited without a Conditional Use
Permit.
8. All fronts or dwellings when positioned on the lot shall face a dedicated local
street. On corner lots, one of the streets will be designed as the front street
and the dwelling will face this street or may be angled toward the
intersection of the streets. Under no condition shall the back of the house
face or angle toward the street.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 2
D. Minimum House Size Requirements.
1. The minimum size of the outside foundation of any detached dwelling unit
shall be at least eight hundred fifty (850) square feet, with no less than 850
finished square feet with a minimum of an additional 350 square feet
available for future expansion.
2. The minimum size of the outside foundation of any attached dwelling unit
shall be at least seven hundred (700) square feet, with no less than 700
finished square feet.
E. Retail Size Requirements.
1. Retail establishments exceeding 150,000 square feet in floor space are
allowed in the Highway Commercial District with a Conditional Use Permit
and meet or exceed performance standards listed in Section 4.3.3.
F. Maximum Total Lot Coverage.
1. The total area of all buildings on residential lots shall not exceed more than
twenty-five (25%) percent of the total buildable lot area and 50% for
commercial or industrial lots.
2. The total area of all impervious surface including building area on a
residential lot shall not exceed thirty-five (35%) percent of the total buildable
lot area for residential district lots, sixty (60%) percent for Neighborhood
Commercial (NC) lots, ninety percent (90%) for Central Business District
(CBD) lots and seventy (70%) percent for all other commercial and industrial
lots.
3. Credit may be given for those areas that are not considered buildable which
are permeable surfaces. (This requirement shall not apply to the CBD zone
district).
4. Onsite drainage ponds shall not be considered as permeable surface, but
may be given fifty percent (50%) credit. This does not apply to Planned Unit
Developments Districts (PUD), Subdivisions and Conservation Overlay
Districts.
5. Alternative methods may be used and must mitigate additional storm water
runoff to a level consistent with the required impervious surface coverage as
indicated in the zoning district under a 2.0 inch rainfall design storm. Design
must be completed by a certified engineer or qualified professional and
approved by the City Engineer.
6. Additional impervious surface credit of up to ten percent (10%) may be
granted in the Commercial and Industrial Districts. This may be granted
when alternative infiltration systems are used on the site to filter storm water
run-off. The infiltration system may include, but is not limited to, rain water
gardens, infiltration swales, and vegetative buffer strips. The design and
additional credit shall be reviewed by city staff and the Planning Commission
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 3
and approved by the City Council. Credit cannot be granted in the Central
Business District (CBD). Design must be completed by a certified engineer
or qualified professional and approved by the City Engineer.
G. Driveways. Any new driveways, additions, and replacement of driveways shall
require a driveway permit prior to construction. Residential district and uses shall
meet the following driveway requirements:
1. All new construction within the city must be paved with impervious
surface or pervious asphalt, pavers, concrete or similar material as
approved by the City Administrator or designee. This includes new
garage additions to existing structures.
2. Residential driveways that are one-hundred (100) feet or greater shall
pave at least forty (40) feet from street entrance, measured adjacent to
the back of curb or edge of the public road.
3. Gravel or unfinished driveways are allowed when the public road is of
gravel material.
4. When new garages or garage additions are constructed, existing or new
residential driveways shall be improved to an impervious surface or
approved pervious material as indicated in 6.1.G(1).
5. Driveway access may be the width of the garage but shall not exceed
thirty-six (36) feet width out in the public right-of-way.
6. Garages less than twenty-four (24) feet wide may have an access up to
twenty-four (24) feet measured adjacent to the back of curb or edge of
public road.
7. Any right-of-way repairs or street reconstruction, the city will only be
responsible for replacing up to twenty-four (24) feet of the opening. The
cost to replace the remainder of the driveway opening is the responsibility
of the property owner.
8. Driveways shall have a minimum five (5) foot side yard setback.
9. Waterlines from the curb stop must be placed in the yard and not the
driveway unless the setbacks cannot be met. The placement of the
waterlines will be approved by the City Administrator or designee.
H. Setbacks. The front building setback in residential subdivisions shall be varied
and not a uniform minimum setback.
I. Garages. A two-car garage shall be the minimum required for all new singlefamily
residences.
J. Minimum Building Site Size. Each building site in each zoning district shall be
planned and arranged so as to occupy only that portion of a lot not otherwise
required as a yard, setback, easement, right of way or other legally established
open space.
1. Lot Area Requirement.
a. For purposes of measuring lot size and area, public and private
easements contained within the lot lines, other than Street or alley
easements may be included.
b. For purposes of determining buildable lot area only contiguous land with
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 4
a slope of less than 24% and not a wetland or located within a 100-year
Flood Plain or stream or other water body shall be considered buildable.
c. Where public services are not provided the minimum lot size is two (2)
acres in the RR-1 district and 2.5 acres in all other districts.
2. Frontage Requirements. The construction, erection, conversion, alteration or
enlargement of any structure on any real property is prohibited unless the
property has frontage on an improved public street or improved public access
way.
K. Bike Paths/Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks and/or asphalt bike paths shall be
provided as required by the City.
(Amended 02/26/2013, 02/24/2015)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 5
6.2 YARD REGULATIONS
A. General Statement. No yard, or other open space setback shall be reduced in
area or dimension so as to make such yard or open space less than a minimum
required by this ordinance, and if the existing yard or other open space is less
than the minimum required it shall not be further reduced.
B. Yard Requirements. The minimum setback distances from the appropriate lot
lines are set forth within the zoning district provisions of this ordinance.
1. Corner Lots
a. Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, the
yard setback along each street shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet or as
specified in this ordinance, whichever is greater.
b. On a corner lot, nothing shall be placed or allowed to grow in such a
manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and onehalf
(2-1/2) and ten (10) feet above street level for a distance of thirty (30)
feet from intersecting streets
2. Through Lots. On a lot fronting on two (2) parallel streets, both street lines
shall be considered front lot lines for applying the yard regulations of this
ordinance.
3. Earth Sheltered Buildings. Computations for yard requirements shall be
based upon measurements from the exposed exterior surface of the building.
4. Exceptions.
a. Architectural projections including chimneys, flues, leaders, sills, pilasters,
lintels, ornamental features, mechanical devices, cornices, eaves, gutters,
and the like, provided they do not extend more than three (3) feet and are
not located over a public right of way, a drainage or utility easement.
b. Yard Lights and signs provided they are located (3) feet or more from all
lot lines. Lights for illuminated parking or loading areas or yards for safety
and security purposes may be installed where necessary provided the
light source is directed down. No light from private property shall be
disruptive to neighboring residents or the general public.
c. Off-street parking spaces except as hereinafter regulated.
d. Fencing or buffering materials as hereinafter regulated.
e. In front and side yards: balconies that extend a distance of four (4) feet or
less provided they are seven (7) feet or more above grade at the building
line. Also steps, terraces, driveways, stoops, decks, and patios which do
not extend in elevation above the ground floor level of the principal
building or to a distance of less than five (5) feet from any lot line.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 6
f. In rear yards: recreational, picnic tables, open arbors and trellises,
balconies, breezeways, porches, detached outdoor living rooms and
decks, and outdoor eating facilities, as allowed, provided these are five
(5) feet from any lot line.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 7
6.3 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
A. Accessory Buildings and Structures must meet the following requirements:
1. Definition: Accessory buildings and structures is a subordinate structure that is
located on the same lot on which the principal building is situated and is
reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary or principal
use of such building. A building is considered an accessory structure if the
footprint exceeds twenty-five (25) square feet and/or six (6) feet in height at the
peak of the roof. An attached or detached garage is considered an accessory
structure. This does not include playhouse(s), or structures that promote
tourism, does not exceed 80 square feet, and cannot be used for storage. The
dimensions to be measured will apply to the foundation size or footprint of the
accessory structures. Additional square footage of second story “bonus rooms”,
or lower level below grade “tuck under garages”, do not apply as additional
square footage area unless they exceed the foundation size.
2. Permits: A building permit is required for any accessory buildings that will be
permanently anchored or 120 square feet or larger. Any structures smaller than
120 square feet do not require a building permit, but do require a zoning permit.
3. Use: Accessory buildings may not be used as a space for the unregulated
operation of any business venture including, but not limited to, the storage of
materials or manufacturing of products. No detached garages or accessory
structures shall be used for human habitation. Sanitary facilities may include a
sink, one toilet or urinal, and one shower.
4. Time of Construction: No accessory buildings or structures shall be constructed
on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is
accessory.
5. Location: All permanently anchored accessory buildings must be placed on the
side or rear yard. Accessory buildings placed in the front yard must meet the
underlying zoning setbacks.
6. Setbacks: Accessory structures shall not be placed within any easements. No
accessory building, which is not attached to a principle structure, shall be located
within ten (10’) feet of a principal structure or six (6’) feet of another accessory
building. All accessory structures must meet all required setbacks.
Table: 1
Rear yard 10 feet
Side yard 10 feet
Corner yard 10 feet
7. Driveways: When new garages or garage additions are constructed, existing or
new residential driveways must be paved with impervious surface or pervious
asphalt, pavers, concrete or similar material before the garage is completed.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 8
Residential driveways that are one hundred (100) feet or greater shall pave at
least forty (40) feet from street entrance.
8. Maximum Structures: No more than three (3) accessory structures may be placed
on a parcel on five (5) acres or less.
9. Temporary Structures: Use of temporary storage structures maybe allowed in
residential districts and shall require a temporary structure permit. Temporary
storage structures include but are not limited to the following: lean to structures
and tubular metal framed structures with canvass or similar coverings.
Temporary structures are allowed for up to eighteen (18) months. Said structure
shall be removed if they become torn, discolored, or in any way damaged that
modify their original appearance.
10. Design: Galvanized steel buildings are prohibited as accessory structures in all
districts except for Agricultural districts and uses on lots greater than 5 acres. If
the lot is sub-divided to less than 5 acres the accessory structures will need to
be removed or brought into compliance. All accessory buildings shall resemble,
in style, materials, color roofline, and siding type, the principal building on the lot,
except the following building types may vary from this standard:
a) Accessory structures located in the Agricultural District or on lots greater
than five (5) acres.
b) Accessory structures under 120 square feet in size.
c) Horse stables and riding arenas
d) Greenhouses
e) Gazebos and decorative shelters
f) Historic buildings
g) Buildings constructed in the PUD or RC District which are subject to an
overall site plan review.
11. Height: Accessory buildings shall not exceed twenty-six (26) feet in height or
exceed the height of the principal structure whichever is less.
B. Zoning District Regulations
1. Residential Districts
a) Lots less than One (1) acre
1) Accessory buildings must not exceed (1,000) square feet or one
hundred percent (100%) of the square footage of the foundation size
of the principal structure, excluding the foundation of the attached
garage, whichever is greater.
2) The sum of the accessory structures must not exceed one hundred
and twenty five percent (125%) of the square footage of the
foundation of the principal structure.
b) Lots One (1) acre or more
1) Accessory garages attached to the principal structure must not
exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet or one hundred percent
(100%) of the square footage of the foundation of the principal
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 9
structure, excluding the foundation of the attached garage, whichever
is greater.
2) The sum of the accessory structures must not exceed two (2%)
percent per buildable acre or one hundred and twenty five percent
(125%) of the square footage of the foundation of the principal
structure, whichever is greater.
(Table 2 is an example of the calculations.)
Table: 2
Lot A Lot B
1.5 acres
Buildable lot – 43,560 s.f.
Principal Structure – 1,000 s.f.
43,560 s.f. x 2% buildable = 871.20 s.f.
125% of principal structure = 1,250 s.f.
10 acres
Buildable lot – 5acres (217,800 s.f.)
Principal Structure – 1,000 s.f.
217,800 s.f. x 2% Buildable = 4,356 s.f.
125% of principal structure = 1,250 s.f.
Lot A may have a total sum of 1,250 s.f.
of accessory structures
Lot B may have a total sum of 4,356 s.f.
of accessory structures.
2. Commercial and Industrial Non-Residential Districts
a) All Non-Residential Districts, excluding Agriculture districts and uses,
must proceed through a design review process.
(Amendment: 02/24/2015)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 10
6.4 TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
A. Purpose. The City of Chisago City acknowledges the legal right of wireless
communications providers to locate within the City. However, the City wishes to
implement its legal authority to adopt zoning requirements which are nondiscriminatory,
not intended to prohibit telecommunications service, and based on potential health
effects of radio frequency emissions. In order to establish uniform, nondiscriminatory
regulations that protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the City, these
regulations are intended to:
1. Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design, landscaping,
and siting standards.
2. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure and weather
related occurrences through structural standards and setback requirements.
3. Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to accommodate
new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to reduce the number of
towers needed to serve the community.
4. Utilize business, industrial and public land, buildings and structures for wireless
communications whenever possible and/or appropriate.
5. Provide for the appropriate location and development of towers and antennas to
accommodate the communication needs of the residents and businesses in the
City.
B. Definitions. The following words and terms wherever they occur in this code, shall be
defined as follows:
1. Antenna. Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrial
and/or orbital-based structures, including, but not limited to, directional antennas,
such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omnidirectional
antennas, such as whip antennas.
2. Commercial Receiving/Transmitting Antenna. Any antenna erected for the
commercial use of the information.
3. Wireless Communication Signal: Any commercial non-broadcast communication
signals transmitted via wireless technology to and/or from a fixed customer
location, which may include the following: audio, video and data communications.
This definition does not include broadcast communication signals such as AM
radio, FM radio, amateur (“ham”) radio, citizens band (CB) radio, and digital
audio radio service (DARS) signals.
4. Satellite Dish Antenna. A combination of (1) a dish-shaped antenna for receiving
communication or other signals from orbiting satellites and other extraterrestrial
sources; (2) a low-noise amplifier (LNA) situated at the focal point of the
receiving component for magnifying and transferring signals; and (3) a coaxial
cable for carrying the signals into the interior of the building.
5. Municipal Antenna Site. A location in the City on which is located one or more
radio or television antennas available for connection and use by any person, firm
or corporation in accordance with the provisions of this Title.
6. Private Receiving and/or Transmitting Antenna: Any antenna erected for the noncommercial
use of the information.
7. Tower: Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination
thereof taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 11
masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological
device, or similar apparatus above grade.
C. Exemptions. No antenna, dish antenna, or tower of any kind shall be erected,
constructed, placed, re-erected, re-constructed, or replaced anywhere within the City
without first making an application for an obtaining a permit from the City. Provided,
however, no permit or building permit shall be required for the following:
1. Dish antennas not greater than nine (9) square feet in cross sectional area,
which do not exceed six (6) feet in height as measured from the base of the
dish antenna to the highest point of the dish antenna.
2. All towers or other antennas which do not exceed six (6) feet in height as
measured from the base of the antenna or tower to the highest point of the
antenna or tower.
3. Antennas, dish antennas, and towers erected or constructed by the City for City
purposes.
D. Permit Application, Conditional Uses, Connection to Municipal Antenna Site:
Any new structures or towers constructed for the purpose of providing wireless
communication signals in the City must first demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
City that the applicant’s needs for a new tower cannot be accommodated on an
existing approved tower structure within the city.
1. Towers are a permitted use with an administrative permit for the following:
a. Towers and/or antennas erected temporarily for test purposes, or for
emergency communications, interim periods, or for broadcast remote pickup
operations. Temporary antenna shall be removed within 72 hours
following installation.
b. Adjustment, placement or replacement of the elements of an antenna array
affixed to a tower or antenna.
2. Conditional Use Permit is required for the following as regulated in Section 3.1.
a. Private receiving or transmitting antennas more than twenty feet (20 ft) in
height above a man-made structure or more than fifty feet (50 ft.) in height
above the ground if constructed on the ground.
b. Commercial receiving or transmitting antennas regardless of height or size
with the exception of satellite dish antennas shall first connect to and use
the Municipal antenna site, if use of such facilities is technically feasible.
The applicant shall provide proof to determine that a municipal location is
not feasible.
c. Any commercial receiving or transmitting antennas and/or towers not
located on the Municipal antenna site.
3. Building Permit. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, place, erect, replace, or make structural repairs to any tower without
first making application for and securing a building permit. A building permit is
not required for the following:
a. Adjustment, repair, or replacement of existing antennas or the elements of
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 12
an antenna affixed to a tower provided that adjustments or replacement
does not reduce the safety factor.
b. Routine maintenance and other nonstructural related repairs to towers.
c. Public utility structures supporting wireless antennas and conforming to all
provisions of this code that are located within public right-of-way allowed
pursuant to a lease or master agreement with the city provided for review of
the location, height and safety of the structure and antenna.
E. Height Restrictions
1. Height Determination: The height of towers shall be determined by measuring
the vertical distance from the tower’s point of contact with the ground or rooftop
to the highest point of the tower, including all antennas or other attachments.
When towers are mounted upon other structures, the combined height of the
structure at the tower’s point of attachment and tower must meet the height
restrictions of this section.
2. In residential zoned property, the maximum height of any tower, including all
antennas and other attachments, shall not exceed seventy-five feet (75 ft.).
The Planning Commission shall review and the City Council may allow towers
up to one hundred fifty feet (150 ft.) high if the applicant can demonstrate,
based upon the topography of the site and surrounding area, siting of the
antenna, antenna design, surrounding tree cover and structures and/or through
the use of screening that off-site views of the tower will be minimized.
3. In all nonresidential zoning districts, the maximum height of any tower,
including all antennas and other attachments, shall not exceed on hundred fifty
feet (150 ft.). The Planning Commission shall review and the City Council may
allow towers up to two hundred feet (200 ft.) high if the applicant can
demonstrate, based upon the topography of the site and surrounding area,
siting of the antenna, antenna design, surrounding tree cover and structures
and/or through the use of screening that off-site views of the tower will be
minimized.
F. Location. Commercial and wireless communication signal antennas and/or towers
and satellite dishes over 9 square feet may be located in any commercial or
industrial zoning district in the City. The Planning Commission may recommend,
and the City Council may consider residential areas if the applicant demonstrates to
the satisfaction of the City Council that no reasonable alternative location exists in
another zoning district. The decision of the City Council shall take into consideration
the following:
1. Spacing and locational needs to achieve adequate service coverage.
2. Possibility of placement of antenna on a pre-existing structure.
3. Design and height of any proposed tower.
4. Topography and other potential service impediments within the necessary
locational radius.
5. Proximity tower to existing residences or future residential properties.
6. Efforts made to make the tower compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
7. Availability of other potential sites within a reasonable locational radius.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 13
G. Setbacks
1. The setback of a free-standing tower shall be the total height of the tower plus
10 feet from the property line or public right of way.
2. The setback requirement may be reduced upon documentation from a licensed
Engineer that the tower is so designed that any debris in the event of a
collapse or failure will be confined to the area of property under the control of
the Provider or in any case will not seriously endanger adjacent property.
3. The structure and/or equipment used by the Provider shall be located as close
as possible to the base of the tower or other structure on which the antenna is
located unless another location is approved by the permit issuer.
H. Standards
1. All antennas, dish antennas, and towers shall be designed and situated to be
visually unobtrusive, shall be screened as appropriate, shall not be multicolored.
2. Dish antennas greater than nine (9) square feet in cross section area shall not
be located on the roof or exterior wall of a principal or accessory building.
3. Dish antennas greater than nine (9) square feet shall only be located in the rear
yard.
4. No antenna, dish antenna, or tower shall be located in the front yard.
5. No antenna, dish antenna, or tower shall be constructed, located, or
maintained, at any time, permanently or temporarily, closer to the allowed
buildable area of a principal building on any adjacent lot than it is to the
principal building on the lot on which it is located.
I. General Requirements. All antennas, dish antennas, and towers for which a permit
is required shall comply with the following requirements:
1. The applicant must demonstrate to the City that the proposed antenna
structure will reasonably meet the radio frequency and spacing needs of the
applicant and anticipated co-locators to provide wireless communication
service with the area.
2. Antennas, dish antennas, and towers shall be grounded for protection against a
direct strike by lightning and shall comply, as to electrical wiring and
connections, with all applicable provisions of this Code and State law.
3. No antennas, dish antennas, or towers shall exceed a height equal to the
distance from the base of the antenna, dish antenna, or tower to the nearest
overhead electrical power line (except individual service drops), less five (5)
feet.
4. Antennas, dish antennas, or towers shall be protected by a City approved
barrier to discourage climbing by unauthorized persons.
5. No antennas, dish antennas, or towers shall have affixed to it in any way any
signs, banners, or placards of any kind, except one sign not over ten (10)
square inches may be affixed indicating the name of the manufacturer,
installer, or required by any state and federal regulations. Lighting may be
permitted by the City, for safety purposes only.
6. No tower shall have constructed on it, or attached to it in any way, any
platform, catwalk, crow’s nest, or similar structure.
7. All towers shall be constructed of corrosive-resistant steel or other corrosiveChisago
City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 14
resistant, non-combustible materials. Towers shall not be constructed or made
of wood, including timbers or logs.
8. No part of any antenna, dish antenna, or tower, or any lines, cables,
equipment, wires, or braces used in connection with any tower or antenna
shall, at any time, extend across or over any part of a street, sidewalk, or alley.
9. The applicant shall present documentation of the possession of any required
license by any Federal, State, or local agency.
J. Existing transmitting and receiving facilities and towers at the time of the adoption of
this Title may remain in service. However, at such time as any material change or
additions is made in the facilities or towers, full compliance with this Title shall be
reviewed.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 15
6.5 OUTDOOR STORAGE, DISPLAY, OR SALE OF MERCHANDISE
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect and promote the public health,
safety and welfare through the general establishment of standards and
regulations governing the outdoor storage, display or sale of merchandise.
B. General Prohibition. Subject to Section 6.5.C, all merchandise storage, display
or sales areas in the commercial and industrial districts shall be wholly within a
completely enclosed building or structure or shall be screened as practicable so
as not to be visible from an adjacent public street or across the street from
residential properties. The screening shall consist of earth mounds, fences or
walls, plant material or landscape fixtures used in combination so as to block
access to the merchandise.
1. Exceptions. The following outdoor sales and commercial activities shall not
be subject to the provisions of this section to the extent otherwise allowed by
the City Ordinance:
a. Building material and supplies areas in the light industrial district.
b. Fruit and vegetable sales.
c. Horticultural nurseries.
d. Vending machines.
e. Gasoline pumps.
f. Sidewalk sales when sponsored by business or civic organizations and
approve by the City Council.
g. Garage sales when conducted on residential property for a period not to
exceed three (3) days during a six (6) month period.
2. Conditional Use Permit. Permanent or temporary outdoor sale of
merchandise not already specified may be permitted subject to review and
approval of the conditional use permit. Outdoor sales or storage areas shall
be located and screened from residential areas.
C. Highway 8 Prohibition. Notwithstanding Section 6.5.B, it is unlawful for a real
property owner to display for sale any merchandise, including but not limited to
automobiles, boats, trailers, motorcycles, motor driven vehicles and accessory
buildings, on any real property abutting within 200 feet of the R.O. W. and visible
from Highway 8. For the purpose of this subsection, display for sale means
placing or storing merchandise on real property that either abuts or is visible from
Highway 8 with a sign or notice on or near said merchandise indicating the
merchandise is for sale.
1. Exceptions. The following outdoor storage and sales shall not be subject to
the provisions of Section 6.5.C.1.c to the extent otherwise allowed by the City
Ordinance:
a. Merchandise displayed on real property that is specifically zoned and
permitted for such display.
b. Real estate sales.
c. Products for sale via peddler/produce permit.
d. Automobiles, boats, trailers, motorcycles or motor driven vehicles
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 16
displayed in the established residential/commercial or driveway/parking
lot of the item’s owner and limited to two items at a time.
e. Garage sales when conducted on residential property for a period not to
exceed three (3) days during a six (6) month period.
D. Exterior Storage and Parking in Residential Districts and Uses.
1. All material, machinery, and equipment located in residential districts and
uses shall be stored within a building or fully screened so as not to be visible
from public streets, adjoining or adjacent lands.
2. Parking visible to neighboring properties and public streets in residential
districts within a subdivision and in one and one-half (1.5) acres or less shall
be subject to the following requirements:
a. All motorized vehicle and utility trailer parking shall be parked or stored
upon those areas that have been legally improved for driveway or offdrive
parking area purposes with an approved paved or gravel surface in
the front and side yard.
b. No more than four (4) vehicles or one and half (1.5) vehicles per current
licensed driver within the household, whichever is greater, may be stored
or parked outside on a residential property. All vehicles shall be currently
registered to a member of the household. This does not pertain to guest
parking.
c. No commercial vehicle, with a gross vehicle weight rating of 16,001 lbs.
or greater, may be parked at the residence of the owner or operator of the
vehicle.
d. Only one utility trailer shall be parked or stored on a lot outside. This
does not include trailers for watercrafts.
e. Only one recreational vehicle may be stored outside and must be
currently registered to a family member.
f. Only one off-road vehicle may be stored outside and must be currently
registered to a family member.
g. A maximum of 5 watercrafts or snowmobiles may be stored outside in the
rear and must be currently registered to a family member.
h. A maximum of 2 ATV, go-carts, golf carts, motorcycles, or off-road
motorcycles may be stored outside.
3. Exceptions.
a. Construction and landscaping materials and equipment currently being
used on the premises.
b. Tow trucks or other similar service on-call vehicles that are 26,000 lbs. or
less. The vehicle must be currently registered to a business and must be
parked on private property, during such time that the vehicle driver
residing at the residence is on-call.
c. Agricultural equipment and materials in agricultural zoning districts and
uses.
d. Firewood piles that are neatly stacked shall be stored in the rear and side
yards only.
e. Parking in the rear yard does not require a paved or gravel surface.
(Amended: 11/25/2014)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 17
6.6 SIGNS
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to protect and promote the public health,
safety, order, and general welfare through the general establishment of standards,
regulations and procedures governing the erection and uses of signs and other
devices:
1. Establish standards that would permit businesses in the city a reasonable and
equitable opportunity to advertise.
2. Preserve and protect the value of land and buildings and also preserve and
protect landscapes.
3. Prevent hazards to life and property.
4. To assure the continued attractiveness of the City.
B. Definition: See Section 9.0 (Definitions)
C. General: The following are minimum requirements.
1. Off-Premise Signs. All off-premise signs along Highway 8 shall not be erected
unless regulated in this chapter.
2. It is unlawful to erect or maintain any sign on any property, public or private,
without the consent of the property owner thereof.
3. Signs may be erected or maintained by the leasee with the consent of the owner.
4. Illuminating signs. Illuminating signs in all districts shall meet the following
standards:
1. No sign may be brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate
visibility.
2. Sign shall be constructed and maintained that the source of light is not
visible from the public right-of-way or residential property, does not
interfere with or obstruct any official traffic sign or signal, nor is illuminated
by rotating light except for signs giving public service information.
3. All illuminated signs shall have a sun relay switch or similar device.
4. Illuminating signs must not exceed a maximum illumination of 5,000 nits
(candelas per square meter) during daylight hours and a maximum
illumination of 500 nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk to
dawn.
5. Signs shall not operate at a brightness level of more than one (1)
footcandle meter above ambient light in all districts or five-tenths (.5) a
footcandle meter above ambient light where it is adjacent to a residential
property. Measurement may be taken at the property line.
5. Electronic Signs. Changeable electronic signs are allowed subject to the
following conditions:
1. Changeable electronic signs are allowed only on freestanding signs.
2. The images and messages displayed must be static, and the transition
from one static display to another must be instantaneous without any
special effects.
3. Electronic signs shall not have distracting flashing or moving light so
designed or lighted as to be a traffic hazard, except public informational
signs such as signs stating time and temperature.
4. The message on an electric sign may change at a rate of no less than 6
seconds.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 18
5. The images and messages displayed must be complete in themselves,
without continuation in content to the next image or message or to any
other sign.
6. Electronic signs must be designed and equipped to freeze the device in 1
position if a malfunction occurs. The displays must also be equipped with
a means to immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions, and the
sign owner must immediately stop the dynamic display when notified by
the city that it is not complying with the standards of this chapter.
6. All signs shall conform to the building setback regulations for the district in which
they are located except as may be otherwise specified in this Section. Those
free-standing signs located within Commercial districts may have a support
structure located no closer than ten (10) feet from the property line or public rightof-
way.
7. All new, rebuilt, and reface monument or pylon signs must be constructed to
meet wind loads of at least 80 mph.
8. Plans must be submitted to show how the sign will be anchored to the building
for all wall and projecting signs.
9. Signs must be located at least five hundred (500) feet from a park, historical site,
or rest area, nor within one hundred (100) feet of a church or school.
10. Signs shall not be closer to any other sign on the same side of the highway
facing traffic proceeding in the same direction than one hundred (100) feet. This
spacing between signs does not apply to structures separated by buildings or
other obstructions in such a manner that only one sign facing located within the
above spacing distances is visible from the highway at any one (1) time.
11. At least one address sign identifying the correct address shall be required on
each principal building in all districts. The numbers shall be at least three- and
one-half (3 ½ ) inches in height and shall be distinctively in contrast to the color
of the principal building.
D. Prohibited Signs and sign structures: No sign shall be erected or maintained:
1. Which purports to be or resembles an official traffic control device, sign, or signal,
or railroad sign or signal; or which hides from view or interferes in any material
degree with the effectiveness of any traffic control device, sign, or signal, or
railroad sign or signal, or which obstructs or interferes with the driver’s view of
approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic for a distance not to exceed five
hundred (500) feet;
2. No sign shall be located within or over a public right of way unless otherwise
specifically permitted by this section or the City Council.
3. No signs shall be located on rooftops. Exceptions would be in cases where
applicant demonstrates difficulties in using a wall sign or freestanding signs. No
rooftop sign shall exceed forty (40) square feet.
4. No sign shall be erected or maintained which imitates or resembles any official
traffic sign, signal or device. Furthermore, no sign shall contain such wording
including, but not limited to STOP, WARNING, CAUTION or DANGER which
may be confused with traffic signing or controls unless such signs are approved
by the City.
5. Which contains statements, words, or pictures of an obscene, indecent or
immoral character, or such as would offend public morals or decency on any
right-of-way or the interstate system of highways, except as otherwise provided
by law or allowed by the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of
Transportation;
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 19
6. Which has distracting flashing or moving light so designed or lighted as to be a
traffic hazard, except public informational signs such as signs stating time and
temperature.
7. Which in the opinion of the City building inspector or City Administrator that are
structurally unsafe, are in disrepair, or abandoned.
8. No sign shall be painted, drawn or placed on a utility pole, tree, rocks or natural
features except those signs that provide public information concerning a school,
city, county, state, or federal event, unless approved by city staff.
9. No sign/structure shall be placed that will obstruct safe access to doors, windows
or fire escapes.
10. No signs shall be supported by guy wires.
E. Signs Permitted without or no-fee permit. Signs without a permit include signs on
owner’s private property, approved by the City Administrator or designee or political
and campaign signs permitted by Minnesota State Statutes. Signs requiring a no-fee
permit are signs located on City’s Public right-of-way.
1. Traffic signs as approved by the City Administrator or designee.
2. Public signs as approved by the City Administrator or designee.
3. Political and Campaign signs as permitted by Minnesota State Statutes. All
candidates and politically oriented groups may post their political and campaign
signs for sixty (60) days and shall be removed within seven (7) days after an
election. For the purpose of this Subdivision, the primary election and general
election held in the same year for the same offices(s) shall be considered one
election. Political and campaign signs may not be placed on the public right-ofway
or easement or on any other publicly owned property. Signs located on
public property in conflict with this Subdivision may be removed by the City and
the expense of said removal shall be paid by the candidate, group, or property
owner.
4. Real estate, lease, and rental signs not in excess sixteen (16) square feet of sign
may be placed within the front yard of such property to be sold or leased. Only
one (1) such sign is permitted per street frontage. Corner properties may contain
two (2) signs, one (1) per frontage. Such signage shall not be less than sixteen
(16) feet from the front lot line unless located against the structure. Failure to
remove said sign within ten (10) days of sale or lease of property or failure to
maintain said sign shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance.
5. One free-standing, per corner, off-site real estate sign announcing an “open
house” or similar activity for the purpose of showing or displaying real estate for
sale are permitted provided the off-site sign is located on private property with
the approval of the owner. The off-site sign shall be displayed only during the
“open house”. The maximum size of such sign shall be eight (8) square feet.
Said signs may be placed in the city boulevard area on the same day of the open
house and only during the open house.
6. One temporary, per corner, off-site directional signs for specific events, garage
sales, auctions or similar functions may not exceed three (3) square feet in area
and may be located on private property with the approval of the owner.
7. One temporary, on-site construction sign promoting a new residential
development, commercial, or industrial project may be located at a construction
site provided a final plat for residential development or concept plan in other
zoning districts has been filed for the period of construction only. Sign may not
exceed a hundred (100) square feet and six (6) feet above grade in height if
located in a residential district, and eight (8) feet above grade in height if located
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 20
in other districts. Said sign shall not be erected before issuance of a building
permit and shall be removed within seven (7) days following issuance of
certificate of occupancy for a single residence or when ninety-five percent (95%)
of a project is sold.
8. Signs stating the name and/or address of the owner, lessee or occupant of such
property or information not to exceed two (2) square feet.
9. Service club and religious notices.
10. No trespass/no hunting and similar signs not to exceed two (2) square feet in
size may be placed on private property.
11. Ribbons, banners, pennants, streamers, and similar devices are allowed in
commercial, industrial and public institution districts. Said signs shall be
removed if they become torn, discolored or in any way damaged to modify their
original appearance or within three (3) days after termination of the event or
function. A maximum of two (2) signs per lot is allowed for said signs.
F. Signs Requiring a Permit.
1. On-site portable signs for specific or special events, sales, and new item
promotions. Signs shall be authorized on a lot no more than four times in any
calendar year for a time period not exceeding a total of 40 days in any calendar
year. They shall be removed within 24 hours after expiration of the permit.
2. Agriculture, Residential, and Public/Semi-Public Districts
1) One free-standing identification sign not to exceed thirty-five (35) square
feet in size or five (5) feet in height for residential developments with six
or more single family or multiple family dwelling units.
2) One free-standing identification sign not to exceed a hundred (100)
square feet in size or five feet in height for each church, school, hospital
or residential care facility. Public/Semi-Public Districts visible on Highway
8 may have a sign height of 25 feet. Such sign shall be solely for the
purpose of displaying the name of the institution and its activities or
services.
3) Wall, Canopy, or Marquee. For signs in the Public/Semi-Public Districts a
total sign area on any one side of a building may not exceed forty (40)
square feet. Total sign area on any one side of a building with multiple
tenants may not exceed forty (40) square feet per business.
3. Highway Commercial, Business Park
1) One free-standing sign for each principle structure or legal parcel,
whichever is more restrictive, not to a hundred (100) square feet, per side,
twenty - five (25) feet in height.
2) One, per driveway entry, on site directional sign for campus type
buildings, businesses with multiple entryways, tenants and/or uses not to
exceed fifteen (15) square feet and six (6) feet in height.
3) Wall, Canopy, or Marquee. Total sign area on any one side of a building
or per business front, may not exceed six (6%) percent of the building
façade on which the sign is erected, or forty (40) square feet, whichever is
greater. Total sign area on any one side of a building with multiple tenants
may not exceed forty (40) square feet per tenant. The top of any sign,
including its super structure if any, shall be no higher than the wall height
of a building to which such sign may be attached or twenty - five (25) feet
above ground level, whichever height is less.
4. Downtown Commercial Business District: Area as designated in the Downtown
Design Guideline.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 21
1) For lots with at least twenty (20) feet of front yard, one monument sign for
each principle structure or legal parcel, whichever is more restrictive, not
to exceed a hundred (100) square feet or twenty - five (25) feet in height.
2) Wall, Canopy, or Marquee. Total sign area on any one side of a building
may not exceed six (6%) percent of the building façade on which the sign
is erected, or exceed forty (40) square feet, whichever is greater. Total
sign area on any one side of a building with multiple tenants may not
exceed forty (40) square feet per tenant.
3) Projecting signs. Total sign area may not exceed ten (10) square feet
and may not project more than five (5) feet. The sign shall be situated no
lower than ten (10) feet and no higher than eleven (11) feet above grade.
4) Projecting signs shall not be erected directly above wall signs. They may
be located along side of a wall sign.
5) Wall or projecting signs shall not be bare or painted plywood.
5. Industrial District
1) One monument sign for each principle structure or legal parcel, whichever
is more restrictive, not to exceed a fifty (50) square feet or six (6) feet in
height.
2) One, per driveway entry, on site directional sign for campus type
buildings, businesses with multiple entryways, tenants and/or uses not to
exceed fifteen (15) square feet.
3) Wall, Canopy, or Marquee. Total sign area on any one side of a building
may not exceed six (6) percent of the building façade on which the sign is
erected, or Forty (40) square feet, whichever is greater. The top of any
sign, including its super structure if any, shall be no higher than the wall
height of a building to which such sign may be attached or twenty - five
(25) feet above ground level, whichever height is less.
G. Permit Requirements.
1. A Building Permit shall be obtained for any structure governed by the Uniform
Building code supporting a sign.
2. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no sign or structure shall be
erected, constructed, altered, rebuilt or relocated until a permit has been issued
by the City.
3. Sign applications are available at Chisago City Hall. The applicant shall include
sign dimensions, height, colors, construction materials, method of anchoring,
content, and location. A sketch or photograph of the proposed sign is required
and a site plan that adequately illustrates the location of the sign. In addition, the
application shall include the location and size of all other signs at the subject
property/development.
4. No signs shall be erected along U.S. Highway 8 without first obtaining the
necessary permit(s) from the State of Minnesota. Said permit shall be for each
individual sign eligible under this Title.
5. Once a completed sign application is filed with the City, the City Administrator or
designee shall review the plans and specifications for the proposed sign(s). If
the proposed sign(s) meets ordinance requirements, the building code and all
other laws and ordinances of the City, a sign permit will be approved by the City
Administrator or designee.
6. The required fee as established by resolution of the City Council shall be paid to
the City before issuance of a sign permit.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 22
H. Abandoned Signs. Any sign on any building or freestanding sign on a business site
where the business has not been in operation for six (6) consecutive months shall be
considered abandoned. Abandoned signs must be promptly removed by the owner
or occupant of the premises on which the sign is placed. Seasonal signs may remain
if approved by city staff.
I. Unsafe and Unlawful Signs.
1. Any sign erected or maintained in violation of any provision of this part or any
other sign regulation or of any other ordinance or law is a public nuisance. Upon
receiving notice of noncompliance from the Zoning Administrator or Building
Official, the sign shall be removed or brought into lawful compliance. Signs found
by the Building Official to present a threat to public safety must be removed or
made safe immediately. Other non-complying signs must be brought into
conformity within thirty (30) days.
2. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked for failure to comply
with any provision herein.
3. The City has the right to remove illegal signs after 30-day notice and to charge
the costs of removal to the property owner where the sign is located.
J. Nonconforming and Illegal Signs. Signs which do not conform to the provisions of
this Section applicable thereto shall be a non-conforming use.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 23
6.7 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
A. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to reduce street congestion and
traffic hazard and to add to the safety and convenience of City residents by
incorporating adequate, attractively designed, and functional facilities for offstreet
parking as an integral part of every land use.
B. Scope of Regulations. No provision of any section of this ordinance shall be less
restrictive than those outlined in this section. The off-street parking requirements
and off-street loading requirements of this section shall apply within all zoning
districts.
C. Calculating Space.
1. Where calculations result in requiring a fractional space, any fraction less
than one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded and any fraction of one-half (1/2) or
more shall require one space.
2. The term “floor area” for the purpose of calculating the number of off-street
parking spaces required shall be determined on the basis of the exterior floor
area dimensions of the building structure or use times the number of floors,
minus ten percent (10%).
3. Should a building or structure contain two (2) or more types of uses, each
should be calculated separately for determining the total off-street parking
spaces required.
D. Site Plan. Except for single family dwellings, all applications for a building or an
occupancy permit shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and
dimension indicating the location of all off-street parking and loading spaces in
compliance with the requirement of this section. For permitted uses, such plan
shall be reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator. For conditional
uses, such plan shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission.
E. Reduction of Existing Parking and Loading Spaces. No parking or loading
spaces existing upon the effective date of this Ordinance shall subsequently be
reduced below the requirements of this Section.
F. Change of Use or Occupancy of Land or Buildings. No change of use or
occupancy of land, or of use or occupancy of any building shall be made until
there is furnished sufficient parking and loading spaces as required by this
section.
G. Use of Parking and Loading Space. Required parking or loading spaces shall
not be used for storage or sales of goods or for storage of vehicles that are
inoperable or for sale or rent.
H. Surfacing. All areas devoted for parking space and driveways shall be surfaced
with materials suitable to control dust and drainage, bituminous or concrete, or
other approved surfaces.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 24
I. Drainage. All parking stalls and driveways shall be graded for proper drainage.
Plans for surfacing and drainage or parking areas for five (5) or more vehicles
shall submit a drainage plan to the zoning administrator. Curbing shall be
provided to control runoff for all new commercial, industrial or multifamily
development.
J. Striping. Except for single-family, two-family, and townhouses, all parking stalls
shall be marked with white or yellow lines not less than four (4) inches wide.
K. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed
down away from abutting property and public right-of-ways.
L. Signs. No sign shall be so located as to restrict the sight, orderly operation, and
traffic movement within any parking lot.
M. Screening and Landscaping. Except for single-family, two-family, and
townhouses, all open parking areas of five (5) or more spaces and all commercial
and industrial uses shall be screened and landscaped from abutting or
surrounding residential uses or districts by a wall, fence, or densely-planted
compact hedge or tree cover not less than four (4) feet in height. Fences and
walls shall not exceed (8) feet in height. Earth mounding or berms may be used
but shall not be used to achieve more than three (3) feet of the required screen.
N. Maintenance. It shall be the joint and sole several responsibility of the lessee
and/or owner of the principal use, uses or building to maintain in a neat and
adequate manner, the parking area, striping, landscaping and screening.
O. Stall, Aisle and Driveway Design.
1. Except in the case of single family, two family, and townhouses, parking
areas shall be designed so that circulation between parking aisles or
driveways occurs within the designated parking lot and does not depend
upon a public street or alley, and such design does not require backing into
the public street. No parking spaces shall conflict with pedestrian movement
along adjoining sidewalks or pedestrian ways.
2. Except in the case of single family, two family, and townhouses, parking
areas shall comply with the following standards:
Angle of
Parking Stall Width (ft.)
Stall Length
(ft.)
Minimum
Driveway
Width (ft.)
0 (along curb) 10 22 12 ft. one way
30 10 19 11 ft. one way
45 10 21 13 ft. one way
60 10 22 24 ft. two way
90 10 20 24 ft. two way
3. No curb access shall be located closer than forty (40) feet from the
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 25
intersection of two (2) or more street right-of-ways for residential uses, and
sixty (60) feet for commercial and industrial areas. This distance shall be
measured from the intersection of lot lines.
4. Curb cut openings shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from the side property
line.
5. All property shall be entitled to at least one (1) curb cut. Single-family uses
shall be limited to one (1) curb cut access per property.
6. Driveway access in single-family, two-family, and townhome uses may be the
width of the garage but shall not exceed thirty-six (36) feet width at the public
right-of-way.
7. Residential uses with garages less than twenty-four (24) feet wide may have
an access up to twenty-four (24) feet in width as measured adjacent to the
back of curb or edge of public road.
8. Any right-of-way repairs or street reconstruction in residential districts, the city
will only be responsible for replacing up to twenty-four (24) feet of the
opening. The cost to replace the remainder of the driveway opening is the
responsibility of the property owner.
9. All parking spaces shall be served by access aisle or driveway connections to
a public right-of-way.
P. Letter of Credit. The City may require a letter of credit or other form of security
acceptable to the City to assure compliance with the City’s off-street parking
regulations.
Q. Number of Required Parking and Loading Spaces. The following minimum
number of off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided and
maintained:
USES
NUMBER OF REQUIRED PARKING
SPACES
Single-family, two-family townhouse dwelling
(off-street)
2 spaces per unit, in addition to required garage
Multiple family dwelling (off-street) 2 spaces per unit of which 1 space shall be an
enclosed garage
Animal Clinic 1 spaces for each kennel, plus 1 for each doctor
and employee in the building.
Automobile service station 4 spaces plus 2 spaces for each repair stall plus
adequate spaces for gas pump area
Auto-marine and auto sales mobile, boat (offstreet),
bus and taxi-terminals.
8 spaces plus 1 additional space per 800 sq. ft.
of floor area over 100 sq. ft.
Banks 1 space per 400 sq. ft.
Boarding house 2 spaces for each 3 persons.
Bowling alley 5 spaces per lane or alley plus such additional
spaces as required for affiliated uses.
Car wash
a. Automatic drive-thru
3 spaces per bay
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 26
b. Self service 2 spaces per bay
Church, theater, auditorium, gymnasium,
main assembly hall
1 space for each 4 seats
Clinics, Medical and Dental Two (2) spaces for each examining or treatment
room, plus 1 for each doctor and employee in the
building.
Dance hall, skating rink, and auction house 1 space for 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Drive-in establishment and convenience
foods
1 space for each 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area,
but not less than 15 spaces.
Funeral homes 1 space per 50 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Furniture, appliance, household equipment,
sales and repairs
1 space for 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Hospital 2 spaces per bed
Hotels
a. with no other facility
b. with other facility (restaurant, meeting
rooms)
1 space per rental room plus 1 space for each
employee on any shift plus spaces required for
restaurants
1 per room plus 1 per each 4 persons of capacity
in other facilities
Libraries and museums 1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of floor area.
Manufacturing, fabricating, or processing of a
product
1 space per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Miniature golf course, archery, golf and
driving range
10 spaces plus 1 additional space for each 150
s.f. of floor area
Motels
1 space per rental room plus 1 space for each
employee on any shift plus spaces required for
restaurants
Nursing home, sanitariums, or rest home 1 space per client
Office buildings, professional buildings, 1 space for 200 sq. ft of gross floor area
Restaurants, cafes, bars, and taverns
a. Without intoxicating liquor or dancehall
b. With intoxicating liquor
1 space per 60 sq. ft. gross floor area
1 space per 50 sq. ft. gross floor area
Additional parking maybe required for dance
floors larger than 100 sq. ft. and if bar area is
separate from the food service or other public
areas.
Retail store and service of floor establishment 1 space for 250 sq. ft. of floor area devoted to
show room or display of goods for sale and
services.
Retail sales and services with 50% or more of
floor area devoted to sales or devoted to
storage, warehouse and/or
1 space per 250 s.f. of gross floor area plus 1
space per 2000 s.f. of storage area
Senior Citizen Housing 1 space per unit, which shall be within an
enclosed garage
Self-service laundry 1 per 3 washing machines
Schools
Preschools, nursery, kindergarten
Elementary, Junior High/middle
Senior high & Post-Secondary
1 per classroom plus 1 for each 30 student
capacity
1 per classroom plus 2 for each 30 student
capacity
1 per classroom plus 1 per each 6 student based
on design capacity
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 27
Warehouse, storage or handling of bulk
goods
That space which is solely used as office shall
comply with office use requirements and 1
additional space for each 2,000 s.f. of floor area,
plus 1 space for each employee on maximum
shift and 1 additional space for each company
owned truck (if not stored inside principal
building)
Other uses (off-street) As determined by the Zoning Administrator
R. Credit for required parking spaces. Credit may be granted based on a review by
the Zoning Administrator and approval by the City Council. Credit is to promote
additional green space and reduce the impervious surface of the parking lot.
Pervious parking shall be promoted where feasible. Review of the credit will be
based on type of service, utilization of different modes of transportation by
employees or clients, ability to share adjoining parking and on-street parking.
The applicant must submit a site plan which will maintain sufficient land available
to reinstate all required parking if the applicant’s transportation plan should not
be implemented.
S. Compact Car.
1. A compact car space shall have a minimum width of eight (8) feet and a
minimum length of 16 feet not including access driveways and turnarounds
sufficient to permit a compact automobile to be parked in and removed
from the space without the necessity of moving other vehicles. The
minimum dimensions of compact stalls shall be as follows:
Angle Curb Length Stall Length
45° 10.0’ 16.0’
60° 8.5’ 17.5’
75° 8.0’ 16.5’
90° 8.0’ 16.0’
Parallel 16.0’ 8.0’
2. Compact car parking may be provided if the following conditions are met:
a. A maximum of 25 percent of the total number of required parking
spaces may be used for compact cars provided the total parking
area has at least 20 stalls.
b. Compact car stalls shall be clearly marked with directional signs as
approved by the city.
c. Compact car stalls shall be distributed throughout the parking area
to have reasonable proximity to the structure(s) served by and shall
not have generally preferential locations such that their use by noncompact
cars will be discouraged.
T. Joint Facilities. The City Council may, after receiving a recommendation from the
Planning Commission, approve a conditional use permit for one (1) or more
businesses to provide the required off-street parking facilities by joint use of one
(1) or more sites where the total number of spaces provided are less than the
sum of the total required for each business if the following conditions are
satisfactorily met:
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 28
1. The building or use for which the application is being made to utilize the offstreet
parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be located
within three hundred (300) feet of such parking facilities.
2. The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the operating
hours of the two (2) buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking
facilities is proposed.
U. Off-Street Loading Facilities. The regulations of this Section are not applicable in
the CBC district. Every lot used for commercial or industrial purposes and having
a building or buildings with a total floor area of at least ten thousand (10,000) sq.
ft. and every lot used for office or research purposes on which there is a building
or buildings having a total floor area of at least twenty thousand (20,000) sq. ft.,
shall have an off-street loading space. An additional off-street loading space shall
be required for lots used for commercial or industrial purposes where the floor
area of all buildings exceeds one hundred thousand (100,000) sq. ft.
1. Use Restrictions. Any space allocated as a loading berth or maneuvering
area so as to comply with the terms of this title shall not be used for the
storage of goods, inoperable vehicles or be included as a part of the space
requirements necessary to meet the off street parking area.
2. Hours of Loading and Unloading: Where noise from loading or unloading
activity is audible in a residential district, the activity shall terminate between
the hours of 7:00 PM and 7:00 AM.
3. Design standards:
a. Loading space required under this Section shall be at least
seventy-five (75) feet long and twelve (12) feet wide.
(Amended: 02/24/2015)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 29
6.8 FENCES
A. General. Fences greater than thirty-six (36) inches in height require a building
permit. Fences shall be maintained so as not to become unsightly, hazardous, or
less opaque than when originally constructed. The fence shall be constructed in
such a manner as to be capable of resisting the design wind loads for structures
as defined by the state building code.
B. Location. Fences may be located up to the property lines. No damage of any
kind should occur to abutting properties. Pedestrian trails adjacent to any
hazardous fences allowed by ordinance shall maintain a minimum five (5) foot
setback from the edge of the trail surface. Any hazardous fences allowed by
ordinance and placed adjacent to a pedestrian trail shall maintain a minimum five
(5) foot setback from the edge of the trail surface.
C. Materials. All fences built or maintained shall be constructed of materials
capable of providing a finished appearance on the outward side visible to the
public. All materials used to construct the fence shall be sound materials,
resistant to rot, and capable of accepting and maintaining a visually attractive
appearance. Exceptions to the fence materials are indicated in this section.
Fences shall be constructed of the following materials:
1. Wood
2. Simulated wood
3. Chain link
4. Decorative brick or stone
5. Wrought iron or aluminum designed to simulate wrought iron
6. Split rail
7. Other materials or fence types as approved by the city
D. Temporary Fences. Temporary fences such as snow fence or silt fence are
allowed without a permit and shall meet the following:
1. For the purpose of reducing or eliminating run-off, or as otherwise
required by city ordinance, a temporary silt fence shall be installed and
constructed as described by the Chisago City Standard Plate.
2. For the general purpose of reducing or eliminating snow drifts a snow
fence maybe installed and maintained during October 1 through May 1.
E. Prohibited Fences. Fences such as barbed wire, electric, chain link with barbs
exposed, and walls with protruding sharp edges thereof, and other fences and
walls designed for or likely to cause harm to persons are declared hazardous and
are prohibited in the city with the following exceptions:
1. Barbed wire, single strand wires, electric, chain link with barbs exposed
may be used to confine livestock, protect crops or as otherwise allowed
by ordinance.
2. Electrified fences shall use a UL approved for agricultural uses and
shall be installed so as to not have current going through said fence
except on an intermittent basis. Current shall not remain on longer
than three (3) seconds. Electrified fences adjacent to a pedestrian trail
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 30
or residential subdivision shall be clearly designated as an electrified
fence by the installation of one by one (1x1) square foot sign stating,
“this fence is electrified”.
F. Agricultural Uses. Fences may be located on any lot line up to a height of six (6)
feet for the purpose of confining livestock or protecting crops.
G. Residential Districts. Fences may be located on any lot line up to a height of four
(4) feet in the front or the front one-half of the side yard. A fence up to six (6) feet
may be constructed in the rear yard or the rear one-half of the side yard.
H. Commercial and Industrial Districts. Fences may only be located on the rear and
rear one-half (1/2) of the side yard; the fence may be up to eight (8) feet in
height.
I. Public/Semi-Public Districts. Height restrictions are exempt for the following:
1. In public parks, schools, or other educational facilities, public and
private, fences for playgrounds, athletic fields, outdoor swimming
facilities, and other similar uses
2. Cemeteries, public utilities, and holding ponds.
J. Swimming Pool. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing
that contains water over twenty-four (24) inches deep shall install a fully enclosed
fence as required in the municipal code Section 70.00.
K. Special Purpose Fences. A conditional use permit may be granted by the City
for special purpose fences and fences differing in construction, heights or
location for the following:
1. Any variations in height in all zoning districts to add architectural
design, confine livestock, protect crops or provide additional security.
2. In commercial, industrial and Public/Semi-Public – Facility districts the
use of barbed wire on the top one (1) foot of any fence along side or
rear lot lines may be constructed of barbed wire. Barbed wire may also
be placed on the top one (1) foot of fences in the Industrial or
Public/Semi-Public – Facilities districts when fronting a public street
and placed five (5) feet off the public right-of-way. Barbed wire shall
not be permitted adjacent to any residential districts.
(Amended: January 11, 2011)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 31
6.9 BED AND BREAKFASTS
A. Purpose. The City recognizes that Bed and Breakfasts are an asset to the
community for the preservation of historic homes. It is the intention of the City to
limit Bed and Breakfast uses to those homes whereby a special use would
benefit the City and surrounding area by allowing appropriate adaptive reuse for
such dwellings. Allowing Bed and Breakfasts is in recognition that the expense of
owning and maintaining historic homes has made them less suitable for singlefamily
dwellings.
Bed and Breakfast are allowed by a conditional use permit in RA and RB
residential zone districts subject to the following conditions:
1. At least two off-street parking spaces must be provided on-site for the
owner/manager and one parking space for each guest room. The parking
spaces shall be signed, and plan approved by the Zoning Administrator.
2. The dining facilities of a Bed and Breakfast establishment shall not be open
to the public but shall be used exclusively by the registered guest unless
allowed as a separate permitted or conditional use.
3. Bed and Breakfast uses in residential areas shall be located at least six
hundred (600) feet apart (approximately two (2) blocks).
4. No liquor is to be sold on the premises. If wine is served, a wine license must
be obtained from the City or State of Minnesota.
5. Bed and Breakfast establishments are allowed an identification sign not
exceeding four (4) square feet and shall be located on site. The sign must
match the architectural features of the structure.
6. A Bed and Breakfast establishment is only permitted in single family RA and
RB zoning districts. Bed and Breakfast establishments are prohibited in all
other districts.
7. The Bed and Breakfast structure will at least show proof of historic
significance to the character of the City as determined by the State Historic
Preservation office or local history preservation organization.
8. A maximum of five (5) guest rooms may be allowed in a residential Bed and
Breakfast.
9. Adequate lighting must be provided between the Bed and Breakfast and the
parking area.
10. Any additional external lighting is prohibited.
11. A Bed and Breakfast shall obtain required building permit, meet fire and
health code requirements and shall provide the Zoning Administrator with
required state sales and use tax number.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 32
12. Restoration or addition to a Bed and Breakfast shall meet Secretary of
Interior Standards for Rehabilitation.
13. Bed and Breakfast guest may stay a maximum of one (1) week.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 33
6.10 MINIMUM LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
A. Purpose. The City of Chisago City places a high value on landscaping and
greenery in both natural and the built environments. Landscaping and screening
provides many aesthetic, ecological, economical and health safety benefit.
B. Requirement. A detail landscape plan must be submitted to the Planning
Department in the following cases:
a. With any application for new development requiring site plan review.
b. When changes are made to an existing landscape plan on file with the City.
c. As requested by the City Administrator or designee when either substantial
redevelopment of a site is proposed or additions to an existing property.
C. Landscape Plan Component. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a
landscape architect, nursery designer or other qualified person. Landscape
plans shall be reviewed and approved by the City Administrator or designee. A
landscape plan shall include the following:
a. Name of project, owner and developer and street address of project.
b. Name, address, phone number of plan preparer and, if applicable, Minnesota
license/certification number of the Landscape Architect or Certified Nursery
and Landscape Professional (CNLP).
c. Scale and North arrow.
d. Locations of existing and proposed buildings and all other structures.
e. Location, height and materials of any existing and proposed screening.
f. Location, approximate size and common name of existing trees, shrubs and
other vegetation that are to be retained as part of the new landscaping and
description of how they will be protected during construction.
g. Location and details of irrigation systems.
h. Location, width and height of all proposed earth berms and retaining walls.
i. Planting details illustrating proposed locations of all new plant material.
j. Planting schedule containing:
1) Plant key
2) Common and botanical plant names
3) Quantity of plants for each species
4) Size of plant material at time of planting and at maturity
5) Root condition (balled and bur lapped, bare root, container, etc.)
6) Special planting instructions
k. Any other existing or proposed features that relate to or affect site finish and
landscaping.
D. All plant materials indicted on an approved landscaping plan that do not survive
three (3) growing seasons shall be replaced with identical plants during or before
the following season.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 34
E. Minimum Landscape Requirement. Deciduous trees shall be planted 50 feet on
center and coniferous street trees shall be planted 40 feet on center. The
following minimum landscape requirements shall be met for all projects:
Type of Tree/Shrub Minimum Size
Deciduous Trees 2-1/2 inch caliber
Deciduous Shrubs 24 inches high
Coniferous Trees 6 feet high
Coniferous Shrubs 1 gallon
6.10.1 Residential Building Requirements (1-6 units per building)
The Developer or Builder of any new residence (or substantial modification to an
existing residence) between 1- 6 housing units that is exclusively residential must
adhere to the following requirements.
A. Street tree requirements. A street tree shall be planted along all streets
according to the City street tree planting plan or as required by the Zoning
Administrator or designee. Street trees shall be set back a distance of
ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way.
B. Front yard tree requirements. A front yard tree shall be planted for every
unit. The tree shall be planted outside the public right-of-way.
C. Vegetative Cover Requirement. Vegetative Cover including sod, shrubs,
trees, and related landscaping materials must be established in all front
yard areas, and within the first 20 feet from the primary structure of all
side yard and rear yard areas. The vegetative cover requirement shall
not preclude the construction of the following provided minimum zoning
setback requirements are met: decks, patios, and placement of rock and
related landscape materials associated with foundation planting adjacent
to a structure.
D. Landscaping in Drainage and Utility Easements. Shallow root plantings
including sod, turf, grass and shrubs shall be established in drainage and
utility easement areas. The placement of landscaping or structures that
significantly changes or impedes the designed drainage pattern shall be
prohibited. The City reserves the right to review all landscaping plans.
6.10.2 Commercial and Industrial
Landscaping for all commercial, industrial, institutional, or multiple family
building greater than 6 units shall consist of a combination of deciduous,
coniferous, and ornamental trees, shrubs, hedges, flowers, sod, ground cover
and other natural materials. Landscaping shall cover all areas not used for
structures, drives, sidewalks, or parking.
A. A landscape plan shall be submitted with any commercial and industrial
site plan application.
B. The front yard lots shall be covered with sod and maintained in an
appropriate manner. Portions of lots intended to be utilized for expansion
of structures may be seeded with grass seed, mulched and fertilized
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 35
according to the recommendations of the zoning administrator instead of
being sodded.
C. Landscape islands shall be provided at each end of all rows of parking in
parking lots in excess of 40 parking stalls. Planting islands in parking lots
shall be planted with at least one (1) deciduous tree and at least two (2)
shrubs (shrubs not to exceed 18 inches in height) and shall be mulched
with a minimum of four (4) inches of rock, wood chips or similar material.
All planting islands shall be treated.
D. One (1) tube for feeding and watering shall be installed in each planting
island.
E. Where any commercial or industrial use (building, structure, parking or
storage) is adjacent to or across the street from residential property
screening shall be required along all boundaries of residential property.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 36
6.11 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
The provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to such exceptions, additions or
modifications as set forth in the following supplementary regulations:
A. Essential Services. Essential services, as defined in this ordinance, shall be
permitted in all districts.
B. Soil Stripping. No person, firm or corporation shall strip, excavate or otherwise
remove top soil for sale, or for use other than on the premises from which it is
taken, except in connection with the construction or alteration of a building on the
premises and excavation or grading incidental thereto.
C. Vacant Lots of Record. Notwithstanding the limitations imposed by any other
provisions of this ordinance, the Council may permit erection of a dwelling on any
lot (except a lot in an industrial district), separately owned or under contract of
sale and containing, at the effective day of this ordinance, an area or width
smaller than that required for a one family dwelling, provided that municipal
sewer and water service is available to the site.
D. Substandard Lots. No lot, yard, court or other open space, already containing
less area than the minimum required under this ordinance, shall be further
divided or reduced.
E. Satellite Dishes. Satellite dishes shall be regulated as described below unless
exempt by federal law. Satellite dishes shall be permitted in the rear or side yards
of all districts. A building permit is required for dishes over 2 ft diameter. All
district setbacks must be met in placement of dishes. Dishes shall not exceed
thirty (30) feet in height.
F. Bulk Storage (Liquid). Storage permitted only in the light industrial zone district.
All uses associated with the bulk storage of oil, gasoline, liquid fertilizer,
chemicals, and similar liquids shall require a Conditional Use Permit in order that
the City Council may have assurance that fire, explosion, water, or soil
contamination hazards are not present that would be detrimental to the public
health, safety and general welfare. All existing above-ground liquid storage tanks
having a capacity in excess over one thousand (1,000) gallons requires a
conditional use permit within twelve (12) months following enactment of this
Ordinance.
The City Council shall require the development of diking around said tanks and
appropriate monitoring systems. Diking shall be suitably sealed and shall hold a
leakage capacity equal to one hundred and fifteen percent (115%) of the tank
capacity. Any existing storage tank that, in the opinion of the City Council,
constitutes a hazard to the public safety must discontinue operations within one
(1) year following enactment of this Ordinance. The City Council may require
pressure testing of storage tanks on a periodic basis. Any liquid bulk storage
providers shall submit to the City copies of any hazardous material reports
submitted to Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) or by the Federal
Government.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 37
G. Structure Relocation. A building permit is required for all permanent relocation of
structures. Construction sheds and other temporary accessory structures to be
located on a lot for less than six (6) months do not require a building permit.
H. Fish houses and movable accessory buildings. One (1) moveable storage
accessory building (fish house) is allowed to be stored in either the side or rear
yard of a parcel, or on parcels with lake access in the back yard behind the
required setback.
I. Lighting. In all districts, any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area,
or other structure or area, shall be arranged not to be disruptive to neighboring
residents or the general public. This includes, but not limited to, direct or skyreflected
glare, whether from floodlights or from high temperature processes
such as combustion or welding. The source of light shall be hooded or controlled.
Bare light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public
rights-of-way. No light or combination of lights which cast light on a public street
shall exceed one (1) foot candle meter reading as measured from the centerline
of said street nor shall any light or combination of lights which cast light on
residential property exceed four/tenths (0.4) foot candles. Lighting standards
shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.
J. Keeping of Farm Animals. Every person who raises Farm Animals for sale,
profit, or pleasure on parcels must keep them confined on the premises at all
times, except for the purpose of when honeybees are pollinating, farm animals
are being transported, racing and used in ceremonies. This section of the
ordinance does not apply to the keeping of dogs, cats and other domestic
animals customarily kept as pets, or Kennel License as regulated in the
Municipal Code Chapter 151. Any persons keeping Farm Animals within the city
limits shall follow the guidelines within this section or as written in the Municipal
Code Chapter 151, whichever is more restrictive.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal which
habitually yaps, wails or cries. The habitual yap, wail, or cries shall exist
when repeated intervals of at least ten (10) minutes with less than one minute
of interruption over a period of one hour or more. Such yap, wail or cry must
also be audible off of the owner’s or caretakers’ premises.
2. The following animals are allowed on parcels of five (5) acres or larger. One
(1) animal unit is permitted per two acres. Pigeons and fowl maybe
combined to equal one (1) animal unit. Any other animals not listed below
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the City
Council.
The animal units are as follows:
1 Bovine = 1 animal unit
1 Horse = 1 animal unit
2 Swine = 1 animal unit
2 Beehives = 1 animal unit
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 38
5 Alpaca or llama = 1 animal unit
5 Sheep/Goat = 1 animal unit
20 Fowl = 1 animal unit
3. The following animals are allowed on parcels of five (5) acres or less.
a. Horses. Horses are permitted in the City on properties three (3) acres or
more. One (1) horse is equivalent to one (1) animal unit. One (1)
animal unit is permitted per two acres.
b. Pigeons and other Fowl. Pigeons and other fowl are permitted in the City
on properties that are less than one (1) acre. They shall be protected
from the weather and predators in a shelter or coop and have access to
the outdoors. Properties one (1) acre or less shall provide a run area that
is enclosed or fenced. Shelters, chicken coops and run area shall be
placed in the rear yard and be at least twenty-five (25) feet from any
residential dwelling on any other premises. The following are limitations
on Pigeons and other fowl within the City.
i. No person shall keep roosters on any property less than two (2)
acres.
ii. All premises on which the pigeons and fowl are kept or maintained
shall be kept clean from filth, garbage, and any substances which
attract rodents. The shelter, coop, and its surrounding must be
cleaned frequently enough to control odor. Manure shall not be
allowed to accumulate in a way that causes an unsanitary condition or
causes odors detectible on another property. Failure to comply with
these conditions may result in a violation of this section and municipal
code Chapter 151.
iii. Pigeons and other fowl are not allowed on properties with three (3) or
more dwelling units.
iv. Other fowl are allowed on properties less than one (1) acres. The
following animals are allowed:
Pigeons or Other Fowl
5 Pigeons or Other Fowl Less than one (1) acre
10 Pigeons or Other Fowl Greater than one (1) acre, but less than
two (2) acres
20 Pigeons or Other Fowl Greater than two (2) acres
c. Honey Bees. Keeping, maintaining, and raising of honey bees may be
allowed on properties one (1) acre or greater. Any person keeping,
maintaining, and raising honeybees shall comply with the following
restrictions:
i. Any Africanize strain species of honeybees is prohibited.
ii. The beehives shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from
any property line, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to
the property line.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 39
iii. The beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least
six (6) feet in height. The flyway barrier may consist of a wall, fence,
dense vegetation or a combination thereof, such that honeybees will
fly over rather than through the material to reach the colony. The
flyway barrier must be in proximity to the hive to ensure the
honeybees fly up and above head height. A flyway barrier is not
required if the property adjoining is undeveloped or is used for
agriculture or industrial; this does not include properties with horses
or pedestrian trails. A flyway barrier is not required if the hives are
located on the roof of a structure containing at least one (1) full story
if all hives are located at least five (5) feet from the side of the
structure and at least fifteen (15) feet from any adjacent and
occupied structure.
iv. No person is permitted to keep more than the following numbers of
colonies on any lot within the city:
Bee Hives
2 Bee Hives Larger than 1 acre, but less than 3 acres
4 Bee Hives Larger than 3 acres, but less than 5 acres
v. Any person keeping, maintaining, or raising of honeybees shall
comply with the following standards of practice:
1. Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames,
which shall be kept in sound and usable condition.
2. Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is
available to the colony prior to and so long as colonies remain
active outside of the hive.
3. Each beekeeper shall ensure that no wax comb or other material
that might encourage robbing by other bees is left upon the
grounds of the apiary lot. Such materials once removed from the
site shall be handled and stored in sealed containers or placed
within a building or other insect-proof container.
4. Each beekeeper shall maintain his beekeeping equipment in good
condition, including keeping the hives painted, and securing
unused equipment from weather, potential theft or vandalism and
occupancy by swarms. It shall be a violation of this section for
any beekeeper’s unused equipment to attract a warm, even if the
beekeeper is not intentionally keeping honeybees.
vi. If a beekeeper serves the community by removing a swarm or
swarms of honeybees from locations where they are not desired, a
beekeeper shall not be considered in violation of the portion of this
section limiting the number of colonies while temporarily housing the
swarm on the apiary lot in compliance with the standards of practice
established pursuant to this section if the swarm is so housed for no
more than thirty (30) days.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 40
4. Interim Use Permit Required. Any person who desires to exceed these
limitations shall first apply for an Interim Use Permit as outlined in Chapter
3.2 of this ordinance.
(Amended Chapter 6.11.J July 24, 2012)
K. Docks, Lifts and other Mooring Structures or Facilities.
Purpose: The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate docks, lifts and other
mooring structures or facilities, other than those owned or operated by the state
or a political subdivision, on all residential lots (Rural Residential RR-1 and RR-2,
Residential R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts)
1. General Requirements:
a. No person shall store fuel upon any dock.
b. Overnight use of watercraft as living quarters, beaching, docking, or
continuous mooring of watercraft may be allowed with a conditional use
permit.
c. Docks, moorings and other structures may be constructed of such materials
and in such a manner as the owner determines, provided that they shall be
so built and maintained that they do not constitute a hazard to the public
using the waters of the lake, and they shall be maintained in a workmanlike
manner.
d. Docks or mooring facilities are only allowed on approved single-family lots. A
minimum of a ten (10) foot easement is allowed for docks or other mooring
structures on lakeshore properties that are at least a hundred (100) feet wide
at the highest point of the OHW and with a Conditional Use Permit (CUP).
The owner of the lakeshore property is allowed one (1) easement for one (1)
individual owner.
e. Consideration of a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) must include consideration
of lot width, lot depth, land slope, water depth, vegetation, soils, depth to
groundwater and bedrock, compatibility with adjacent land uses and/or other
relevant factors.
f. It is at the discretion of the Planning Commission and City Council as to
whether to approve any Conditional Use Permits (CUP) and they may place
additional appropriate conditions on such facilities as they deem appropriate.
g. Except as modified by the requirements in this chapter, all other provisions of
Minnesota Rules 6115.0210 shall apply.
h. Docks that are non-compliant and are removed before freeze-up shall be
allowed to place their dock back into the water (grandfather clause).
However, the landowners shall make every effort to comply with the
requirements of this ordinance.
2. Location: No dock, mooring or other structure shall be so located as to:
a. Obstruct the navigation of any lake
b. Obstruct reasonable use or access to any other dock, mooring or other
structure authorized under this chapter
c. Present a potential safety hazard.
d. Be detrimental to significant fish and wildlife habitat or protected vegetation.
3. Dimensions: Docks and other mooring structures must meet the following
requirements located on Single-Family lots.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 41
a. No dock shall exceed six (6) feet in width.
b. No dock shall exceed fifty feet (50’) in length or the minimum straight-line
distance necessary to reach a water depth of five (5) feet, whichever is
greater. The width, but not the length, of the crossbar of any T- or L-shaped
dock shall be included in the computation of length. The crossbar of any
such dock shall not measure in excess of twenty-five (25) feet in length.
c. No dock shall encroach upon any dock setback zone, however; the owners of
any two abutting lakeshore sites may erect one common dock within the dock
setback to the abutting lakeshore sites, if the common dock is the only dock
on the two lakeshore sites and if the dock otherwise conforms with the
provisions of this chapter.
4. Detached Single Family: Docks or other mooring structures located on singlefamily
lots in all Rural Residential and Residential Districts do not need a permit
from the City but must meet the following requirements
a. Docks shall be located so that moored watercraft and equipment are at least
five (5) feet from the extended property line. Docks located on an easement
maybe less than five (5) feet on the extended property line in which the
easement was granted. Existing non-conforming docks shall be centered,
and every attempt must be made to stay incompliance.
b. Mooring is limited to five (5) registered watercraft.
c. All registered watercrafts must be registered to a family member. No more
than one (1) watercraft that is not registered to a family member can be
moored for no more than four (4) consecutive days.
d. Rental of slips is not allowed.
e. Docks must be removed before freeze-up. For extenuating circumstances or
difficult terrain, a dock may be moved as close to the lakeshore as possible.
f. All docks must be marked with reflective material on the front (facing the
water) and each side of the structure. The reflective material must measure a
total area of no less than nine (9) square inches every ten (10) feet on each
side of the dock.
g. No docks shall use flashing lights or bright lights that are disruptive to
neighboring residents.
5. Twin-home, Townhomes, Multi-family, Commercial, and Planned Development
Districts (PDD): Docks or other mooring structures in twin-homes, townhomes,
multi-family, commercial, and Planned Development Districts (PDD) shall apply
for a permit at the time of initial platting or subsequent to plat approval. If owners
apply for additional docks, lifts, or other mooring structures after initial platting, a
Conditional Use Permit (CUP) process outlined in this ordinance shall apply.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 42
6.12 RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS
The renewable energy regulations are intended to supplement existing zoning ordinances and
land use practices, and ensure these systems are appropriately designed, sited and installed.
The regulations are in place to balance the need to improve energy sustainability through
increased use of renewable energy systems with concerns for preservation of public health,
welfare, and safety, as well as environmental quality, visual and aesthetic values, and existing
neighborhood social and ecological stability.
A. Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)
1. Definitions
a. Large WECS. A WECS of equal to or greater than 100kW in total nameplate
generating capacity. The energy must be used on-site with excess energy
distributed into the electrical grid.
b. Small WECS. A WECS of less than 100kW in total nameplate generating
capacity. The energy must be used on-site with excess energy distributed into
the electrical grid.
c. Tower Height. The total height of the WECS, including tower, rotor, and blade to
its highest point to travel.
d. Wind Energy. Kinetic energy present in wind motion that can be converted into
electrical energy.
e. WECS. A Wind Energy Conversion System which is an electrical generating
facility comprised of one or more wind turbines and accessory facilities, including
but not limited to, power lines, transformers, substations and metrological towers
that operate by converting the kinetic energy of wind into electrical energy. The
energy must be used onsite with excess energy distributed into the electrical grid.
f. Wind Energy System. An electrical generating facility that consists of a wind
turbine associated controls and may include a tower.
g. Wind Turbine. A wind turbine is any piece of electrical generating equipment that
converts the kinetic energy of blowing wind into electrical energy through the use
of airfoils or similar devices to capture the wind.
2. Permits
a. Large WECS Districts. Large WECS are permitted with a conditional use permit
as outlined in Section 3.4 in all Commercial and Industrial Districts, Public/Semi-
Public – Facility, and all properties located in the residential districts for purposes
of shared WECS energy production among the residential dwelling units.
b. Small WECS Districts. Small WECS are permitted with approval of a Design
Review as outlined in Section 3.5 in all zoning districts.
c. A valid building permit shall be obtained before installation of a Wind Energy
Conversion System. Such systems must comply with the Uniform Building Code
standards, and accepted engineering standards.
3. Locations
a. One (1) large WECS shall be allowed on a single lot of one (1) to five (5) acre(s).
All other larger parcels will be limited to one (1) large WECS per five (5) acres of
land area.
d. One (1) small WECS shall be allowed on a single lot up to one (1) acre in size.
All other larger parcels will be allowed one (1) small WECS per five (5) acres of
land area.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 43
b. No part of any wind energy conversion system may, at any time, extend over any
property line. This includes the full arc area created by any rotor (blade/wind
collector) used in the system.
c. No part of any wind energy conversion system or any equipment used in
connection therewith or connected thereto shall be constructed or maintained in
or upon any drainage or utility easements.
e. Roof mounted Large WECS are not permitted.
f. Roof mounted small WECS are permitted at the rear
g. WECS shall not encroach on public drainage, utility, roadway or trail easements.
4. Setbacks
a. The setback of a WECS shall be the total height of the system plus 10 feet from
the property line or public right of way.
b. The setback requirement may be reduced upon documentation from a licensed
Engineer that the system is so designed that any debris in the event of a collapse
or failure will be confined to the area of property under the control of the Provider
or in any case will not seriously endanger adjacent property.
h. The structure and/or equipment used by the Provider shall be located as close as
possible to the base of the wind turbine or other structure on which the system is
located unless another location is approved by the permit issuer.
i. No such system shall be constructed within twenty (20) feet laterally of any
overhead power line (excluding secondary electrical service lines or service
drops). Setback from underground distribution lines shall be at least five (5) feet.
5. Height
a. WECS mounted on the ground in residential property shall not exceed sixty (60)
feet in tower height.
b. WECS mounted on the ground in non-residential zoned property shall not exceed
one-hundred twenty-five (125) feet in tower height.
c. WECS mounted on roof tops in all districts must not exceed the maximum height
allowed in the zoning district for which it is installed.
6. General Standards
The following provisions will apply to all WECS erected under the provisions of this
ordinance:
a. Color: All portions of the wind energy system shall be a non-reflective, nonobtrusive
color, subject to the approval of the City Administrator or designee.
Only monopole towers are permitted. The appearance of the turbine, tower and
any other related components shall be maintained throughout the life of the wind
energy system pursuant to industry standards.
b. Noise: All WECS shall comply with Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
standards outlined in Minnesota Rules Chapter 7030.
c. Over Speed Controls: Shall be equipped with manual and automatic over
speed controls to limit the blade rotation within design specifications.
d. Lighting: Have no installed or accessory lighting, unless required by federal
or state regulations.
e. Such systems shall be adequately grounded and designed to withstand
lightning strikes.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 44
f. Electrical equipment and connections on wind energy conversion systems
shall comply to all applicable state and local government regulations.
g. Intent to Install: Prior to the installation or erection of a WECS, the operator
must provide evidence showing their regular electrical service provider has
been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected,
customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be
exempt from this requirement.
h. Signs: A sign or signs shall be posted on the tower, transformer and
substation warning of high voltage. Signs with emergency contact
information shall also be posted on the turbine or at another suitable point.
The placement of all other signs, postings, or advertisements shall be
prohibited on the units. This restriction shall not apply to manufacturer
identification, unit model numbers, and similar production labels.
i. Commercial Installations: All WECS shall be limited to the purpose of onsite
energy production, except that any additional energy produced above
the total on-site demand may be sold to the operator's regular electrical
service provider in accordance with any agreement provided by the same or
applicable legislation.
j. Feeder Lines: Any lines accompanying a WECS, other than those
contained within the WECS' tower or those attached to on-site structures
by leads, shall be buried within the interior of the subject parcel, unless
there are existing lines in the area which the lines accompanying a WECS
can be attached.
k. Clearance: Rotor blades or airfoils must maintain at least 35 feet of
clearance between their lowest point and the ground.
l. Blade Design: The blade design and materials must be engineered to
insure safe operation in an urban area.
m. Energy Storage: Batteries or other energy storage devices shall be
designed consistent with the Minnesota Electric Code and Minnesota Fire
Code.
7. Operation and Maintenance
a. Wind energy conversion system shall be guarded against unauthorized climbing.
The first twelve (12) feet of the tower shall be unclimbable by design or be
enclosed by a six-foot high non-climbable fence with a secured access.
b. The system shall be designed and operated so as to not cause radio and
television interference.
c. Interface of a wind energy conversion system's operation with the consumer's
electrical service shall be pursuant to all applicable federal and state regulations.
The owner shall notify his local electric utility company in advance of said
application and shall submit an agreement for co-generation if connected to the
electrical utility service.
8. Abandoned. A WECS that is allowed to remain in a nonfunctional or inoperative state
for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, and which is not brought in operation
within the time specified by the city after notification to the owner or operator of the
WECS, shall be presumed abandoned and may be declared a public nuisance
subject to removal at the expense of the owner or operator.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 45
9. Decommissioning Plan. Large WECS shall submit a decommissioning plan by the
owner or operator (or both) to ensure that it properly removes the equipment and
facilities upon the end of project life or after their useful life. The owner or operator
shall decommission the WECS in the event they are not in use for twelve (12)
consecutive months. The plan shall include provisions for the removal of all
structures and foundations, all electrical transmission components, the restoration of
soil and vegetation, and a soundly based plan ensuring financial resources will be
available to fully decommission the site. The owner/operator shall provide a currentday
decommissioning cost estimate and shall post a letter of credit or establish an
escrow account, in an amount determined by the City Engineer and approved by the
City Administrator, to ensure proper decommissioning.
B. Solar Energy Sources and Systems
1. Definitions. In addition to capitalized terms otherwise defined in this Section and
Chapter, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall
have the meaning provided herein, except where the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
a. Building-Integrated Solar System. An active solar system that is an integral part
of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate mechanical device,
replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural component of the
building. Building-integrated systems include, but are not limited to, photovoltaic
or hot water solar systems that are contained within roofing materials, windows,
skylights, and awnings.
b. Ground Mounted Panels. Freestanding solar panels mounted to the ground by
use of stabilizers or similar apparatus.
c. Photovoltaic System. An active solar energy system that converts solar energy
directly into electricity.
d. Roof or Building Mounted SES. Solar energy system (panels) that are mounted to
the roof or building using brackets, stands or other apparatus shall follow all
current National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) regulations.
e. Roof Pitch. The final exterior slope of a building roof calculated by the rise over
the run, typically, but not exclusively, expressed in twelfths such as 3/12, 9/12,
12/12.
f. Solar Access. A view of the sun, from any point on the collector surface that is
not obscured by any vegetation, building, or object located on parcels of land
other than the parcel upon which the solar collector is located, between the hours
of 9:00 AM and 3:00 PM Standard time on any day of the year.
g. Solar Collector. A device, structure or a part of a device or structure for which
the primary purpose is to transform solar radiant energy into thermal, mechanical,
chemical, or electrical energy.
h. Solar Energy. Radiant energy received from the sun that can generate electricity
and be collected in the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
i. Solar Energy System (SES). A set of devices whose primary purpose is to collect
solar energy and convert and store it for useful purposes including heating and
cooling buildings or other energy-using processes, or to produce generated power
by means of any combination of collecting, transferring, or converting solargenerated
energy.
j. Solar Energy System, Accessory (ASES). Rooftop or ground mounted Solar
Energy Systems which supply energy and are accessory to a principal use or
structure.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 46
k. Solar Energy System, Community (CSES or Solar Garden). A facility that
generates electricity by means of ground-mounted or roof-mounted solar
photovoltaic systems that provide electricity and designed to supply energy for
public utilities, multiple community members, businesses, or to participating
subscribers and under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Section 216B.1641
as amended from time to time or its successor statute.
l. Solar Hot Water System. A system that includes a solar collector and a heat
exchanger that heats or preheats water for building heating systems or other hot
water needs, including residential domestic hot water and hot water for
commercial processes.
2. Regulation of types of Solar Energy Systems (SES). This Ordinance defines and
regulates two (2) types of Solar Energy Systems:
a. Accessory Solar Energy Systems (ASES). Accessory Solar Energy Systems
(ASES) is a set of devices as defined above that supply energy to a principal use
or structure. ASES shall be regulated as follows:
i. Rooftop mounted ASES are permitted accessory uses in all districts in which
buildings and structures are permitted.
ii. Ground mounted ASES are prohibited.
iii. A building permit is required before installing a roof mounted ASES and the
issuance of such building permit is at the discretion of the City.
iv. ASES shall be located on the same property or adjacent to the off-site user(s)
and the user(s) shall be located within the city limits.
v. Rooftop systems shall be placed on the roof to limit visibility from the public
right-of-way and to blend into the roof design, provided that the property
owner is able to reasonably capture solar energy.
b. Community Solar Energy Systems (Solar Gardens/CSES). Community Solar
Energy Systems may be allowed as a principal or accessory permitted use as
limited below and subject to the following additional restrictions and
requirements, except as otherwise regulated or prohibited in this section:
i. In addition to all other required permits, CSES as an accessory use is
permitted only with an Interim Use Permit (“IUP”) as defined in Section 9.1
and issued in accordance with Section 3.2 on Parcels with a minimum lot size
of forty (40) acres. No subdivision of such Parcel will be allowed until the IUP
is terminated and all decommissioning of the CSES has been completed.
ii. In addition to all other required permits, CSES as a principal use is permitted
only with an Interim Use Permit (“IUP”) as defined in Section 9.1 and issued
in accordance with Section 3.2 and is limited to Parcels in the Agriculture
District and any Residential District that are 40 acres or more in size. No
subdivision of such Parcel will be allowed until the IUP is terminated and all
decommissioning of the CSES has been completed. CSES as the principal
use is prohibited in all Commercial, Industrial, Planning Mixed Development
(PMD) and Planned Industrial District (PID) zoning districts.
iii. CSES shall not, either as a principal or an accessory use be located in the
Conservation Overlay, Shoreland, and Floodplain districts.
iv. CSES as an accessory use shall be located on or adjacent to the off-site
users and the primary user shall be located within the City limits.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 47
v. CSES shall be a maximum five (5) MW or a maximum of forty (40) acres of
contiguous or aggregate site area.
vi. The site area calculated for any CSES shall include all CSES components
such as solar array panels, transformers, metering pads, batteries for energy
storage, and similar equipment needed for the use. It shall also include any
fences, and screening. The applicant shall show the lot dimensions of the
CSES.
3. Permits and Applications.
a. A Screening and Landscape Permit is required for all ground mounted solar
energy systems. Screening and landscaping plans shall be submitted to the City
for review at the time the application is submitted, shall be subject to City
approval and shall be installed in accordance with such approved plans to the
City’s satisfaction to the approval and issuance of any building or other permit
and installation of the Solar Energy System.
b. A building permit is required prior to constructing all SES, including but not
limited to new installation of solar hot water systems and solar energy systems.
c. In addition to all other required permits, an Interim Use Permit as defined in
Section 9.1 and issued in accordance with Section 3.2 is required for any new
ground mounted Solar Energy Systems (SES) to the extent more restrictive in
this Section 6.12.
d. The application shall also include two vertical sketch elevations of all structures
on the subject parcel accurately drawn to a scale identified on the drawing,
depicting the proposed solar energy conversion system and its relationship to the
surrounding topography and public roadways. The sketches shall depict the
proposed system’s relationship to structures on adjacent properties and streets
as viewed from eight ( 8) feet above ground level at the residential structure wall
and at the center of all streets closest to the solar installation, one sketch
showing the view without screening and the other sketch showing the view with
proposed screening. The sketch elevations shall include a graphic scale not
less than 1:50, or as needed to clearly show the vertical relationship between the
proposed solar facilities and structures on adjacent properties.
4. Height and Placement
a. Roof or building mounted SES shall not exceed the maximum allowed height in
any zoning district. For purposes of height measurement, solar systems other
than building-integrated solar systems shall be considered to be mechanical
devices and are restricted consistent with other building-mounted mechanical
devices.
b. Ground mounted SES shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height when oriented
at maximum tilt.
c. Ground mounted SES shall be located in such a manner as to minimize site of the
SES from neighboring properties and shall not unreasonably interfere with the use
and enjoyment of neighboring properties.
d. Ground mounted CSES shall have a minimum setback of three-hundred and fifty
(350) feet from the property line, unless otherwise specified in this Section.
e. All CSES shall be a minimum of three-hundred and fifty (350) feet from the centerline
of any City street, seven-hundred and fifty (750) feet from a county road, and onethousand
two hundred (1,200) feet from the centerline of Trunk Highway 8.
f. Ground mounted SES and CSES shall not be placed within wetland buffers or setbacks as
regulated by Section 7.2.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 48
g. Ground mounted SES shall not be placed on berms.
h. Roof or Building Mounted SES. The collector surface and mounting devices for roof
or building mounted SES shall not extend beyond the required setbacks of the
building on which the system is mounted.
5. General Standards. In addition to all other requirements and standards in this Chapter, the
following standards are required to be met in connection with any SES:
a. Notification. Prior to the installation or erection of any SES, the applicant and the
operator must provide evidence showing their regular electrical service provider
has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected, customerowned
SES. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
b. Feeder lines. Any lines accompanying any SES, other than those attached to onsite
structures by leads, shall be buried within the interior of the subject parcel,
unless there are existing lines in the area to which the lines accompanying an
SES can be attached. The Zoning Administrator may grant exemptions to this
requirement in instances where the Zoning Administrator determines that shallow
bedrock, water courses or other elements of the natural landscape interfere with
the ability to bury lines.
c. Noise. Equipment such as, but not limited to, generators and transformers, that may create a
continuous humming or buzzing sound shall be placed in the center of the solar project to
maximize the distance from any adjoining property lines to reduce or eliminate the sound from
neighboring properties.
d. Reflector systems. Reflectors to enhance solar production is prohibited.
e. Ground Cover. Ground mounted systems shall have a permanent, deep rooted,
low-growing, native grass and pollinator mix suitable to soil type and moisture
conditions under and between the collectors and surrounding the system’s
foundation or mounting device. Plant growth shall be stable and self-supporting
within two (2) growing seasons from the date of project approval. This excludes
single residential ASES.
f. Screening. Ground mounted SES shall be fully screened at the time of planting
from neighboring residents and public right of way. All screening shall provide
year-round coverage from surrounding properties and public rights-of-way. In the
discretion of the City, screening may require, but not be limited to, additional
setbacks, berms, and vegetative planting.
g. Restrictions on SES Limited. No homeowners' agreement, covenant, common
interest community, or other contract between multiple property owners within a
subdivision of Chisago City shall restrict or limit solar systems to a greater extent
than Chisago City’s renewable energy ordinance.
h. Solar Easements. Chisago City encourages solar access to be protected in all
new subdivisions and allows for existing solar access to be protected consistent
with Minnesota Statutes. Any solar easements filed, must be consistent with
Minnesota Statutes, Section 500.30.
i. Regulations. All SES shall follow all local, state and federal regulations.
6. Additional Performance Standards for Community Solar Energy Systems. Without limiting any
other provisions in this Section 6.12 or this Chapter, CSES shall be subject to the following
additional performance standards:
a. Fencing. A security fence meeting the permit requirements of Section 6.8(k) surrounding
the CSES shall be approved and constructed prior to the commencement of construction of
the CSES and as a condition to the continuous operation of the CSES. Fences shall be
mounted on wood posts, shall not include any barbed or razor wire, shall not exceed eight
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 49
(8) feet in height from the ground, shall be placed inside any required berm, and shall
comply with the National Electric Code (NEC) and approved by the City. Where deemed
necessary by the City, a fence may be required surrounding a ground mounted ASES in
accordance with Section 6.8(K) and approved by City staff.
b. Screening. In addition to any required fencing, screening shall be placed in such a manner
as to fully screen the CSES facilities from surrounding properties and streets. The
screening shall be based from the adjacent properties and streets as viewed from eight (8)
feet above ground level at the residential structure wall and at the center of all streets
closest to the solar installation. The CSES facility shall be fully screened from these
locations at the time of planting. A detailed landscape plan as described in Section 6.10(C)
shall be submitted; approved and constructed prior to the commencement of construction
of any CSES. The screening shall include, but not be limited to, an eight (8) foot earthen
berm at a 4:1 slope and trees and other acceptable vegetative screening four (4) feet in
height at planting on all sides. The evergreen trees shall be planted eight (8) feet apart and
shall reach a minimum mature height of twelve (12) feet. The vegetative screening shall
include two (2) rows of evergreen trees and one (1) row of shrubs. The plantings shall be
staggered and provide year-round screening. The applicant shall post a letter of credit, or
the establishment of an escrow account with the City to ensure trees and other acceptable
vegetation is installed and establishes itself as identified in the approved permit, based on
an estimated cost for plantings and labor provided the by City engineer. ASES shall be
screened from neighboring residents and street view and screening type will be reviewed
and approved by the City in its discretion.
c. Dust Control. The subject property owner or operator must construct, maintain and operate
all SES equipment in such a manner as to minimize on-site and off-site dust conditions.
d. Lighting. SES shall not be lighted except for downcast security lights on major equipment
or storage buildings. Such light shall be shielded so as to not reflect or spill into adjacent
properties.
e. Signage. In addition to any other restrictions imposed by this Chapter, signs shall be
limited to equipment labeling, security warnings and messages, entrance identification and
directional signs, and a single site identification sign.
f. Erosion. CSES are subject to stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
best practices, including DNR guidance on Wildlife Friendly Erosion Control, and NPDES
permit requirements, and the property owner and/or applicant and/or operator shall obtain
and at all times comply with required permits from the MPCA, Watershed District, City and
state organizations that may apply.
g. Plans. All plans submitted for building permit approval must be prepared by a licensed,
professional engineer and shall be subject to review and approval by the City.
h. Annual Review and Report. The applicant, owner, and/or operator of any CSES facility
shall submit an annual report to the Zoning Administrator by December 31. The report shall
include the operation and energy production of the facility. The facility and report will be
reviewed by the City Council annually.
i. Developer’s Agreement. Developer of CSES facility shall enter into a development
agreement with the city.
7. Abandonment of SES and Decommissioning Plan
a. Abandonment. An SES is allowed to remain in a nonfunctional or inoperative
state for a period not more than twelve (12) consecutive months, and if it is not
brought in operation within such time period, the SES shall be presumed
abandoned and may be declared a public nuisance by the City subject to removal
at the expense of any or all of the owner, applicant or operator, in the City’s
discretion.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 50
b. Decommissioning Plan. As a condition to the approval of the IUP therefore,
applicants for a CSES or a ground mounted SES shall submit a decommissioning
plan to the City by which any or all of the owner, applicant or agree to operator
properly remove ass SES equipment and facilities and otherwise restore the
subject property upon the earlier of termination of the IUP, the end of project life of
the SES or after the useful life of the SES facility. The owner or operator shall
decommission the solar panels in the event they are abandoned as provided
above. The plan shall include provisions for the removal of all structures and
foundations, all electrical transmission components, the restoration of soil and
vegetation, and a soundly based plan ensuring financial resources will be
available to fully decommission the site. The City does not recognize any resale
value to the SES and will not give any credit in order to decrease the
decommissioning costs. The subject property owner, the applicant or the
operator shall deliver to the City and at all times shall maintain in place an
irrevocable letter of credit or with the consent of the City shall establish and at all
times maintain an escrow account prior to the issuance of an IUP or building
permit. The decommissioning cost to be secured by the letter of credit or escrow
account will be determined by the City engineer and shall include an inflationary
escalator to ensure proper decommissioning in accordance with the
decommissioning plan. The issuer of the letter of credit and the form of the letter
of credit or escrow account shall be subject to the City’s satisfaction thereof.
C. Geothermal Energy Sources and Systems
1. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall
have the meaning provided herein, except where the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
a. Closed Loop Ground Source Heat Pump System. A system that circulates a
heat transfer fluid, typically food-grade antifreeze, through pipes or coils buried
beneath the land surface or anchored to the bottom in a body of water.
b. Geothermal Energy. Renewable energy generated from the interior of the earth
and used to produce energy for heating buildings or serving building commercial
or industrial processes.
c. Ground Source Heat Pump System (GSHPS). A system that uses the relatively
constant temperature of the earth or a body of water to provide heating in the
winter and cooling in the summer. System components include closed loops of
pipe, coils or plates; a fluid that absorbs and transfers heat; and a heat pump unit
that processes heat for use or disperses heat for cooling; and an air distribution
system. The energy must be used on-site.
d. Heat Transfer Fluid. A non-toxic and food grade fluid such as potable water,
aqueous solutions of propylene glycol not to exceed twenty percent (20%) by
weight or aqueous solutions of potassium acetate not to exceed twenty percent
(20%) by weight.
e. Stormwater Pond. These are ponds created for stormwater treatment. A
stormwater pond shall not include wetlands created to mitigate the loss of other
wetlands.
2. Permits and Applications. A building permit is required with all new installation of a
Ground Source Heat Pump System.
3. Location. A GSHPS is allowed in all zoning districts.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 51
4. Design and Placement
a. Noise. GSHPS shall comply with Minnesota Pollution Control Agency standards
outlined in Minnesota Rules Chapter 7030.
b. Easements. All components of GSHPS shall not encroach on easements.
c. GSHPS are prohibited on surface waters, except for stormwater ponds where
they are permitted.
d. Only closed loop GSHPS utilizing Minnesota Department of Health approved
heat transfer fluids are permitted.
5. Abandonment
A GSHPS that is allowed to remain in a nonfunctional or inoperative state for a period of
twelve (12) consecutive months, and which is not brought in operation within the time
specified by the city after notification to the owner or operator of the GSHPS, shall be
presumed abandoned and may be declared a public nuisance subject to removal at the
expense of the operator.
(Amended: 5/24/2016, 11/21/19)
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: October 2000, 5/23/01, 2/22/05, 1/10/06, 2/14/06, 5/23/06, 6/12/07,
11/10/08, 03/09/10, 01/11/11, 07/24/12, 2/26/2013, 2/24/15, 5/24/16, 11/21/19)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 7
6.3 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
A. Accessory Buildings and Structures must meet the following requirements:
1. Definition: Accessory buildings and structures is a subordinate structure that is
located on the same lot on which the principal building is situated and is
reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary or principal
use of such building. A building is considered an accessory structure if the
footprint exceeds twenty-five (25) square feet and/or six (6) feet in height at the
peak of the roof. An attached or detached garage is considered an accessory
structure. This does not include playhouse(s), or structures that promote
tourism, does not exceed 80 square feet, and cannot be used for storage. The
dimensions to be measured will apply to the foundation size or footprint of the
accessory structures. Additional square footage of second story “bonus rooms”,
or lower level below grade “tuck under garages”, do not apply as additional
square footage area unless they exceed the foundation size.
2. Permits: A building permit is required for any accessory buildings that will be
permanently anchored or 120 square feet or larger. Any structures smaller than
120 square feet do not require a building permit, but do require a zoning permit.
3. Use: Accessory buildings may not be used as a space for the unregulated
operation of any business venture including, but not limited to, the storage of
materials or manufacturing of products. No detached garages or accessory
structures shall be used for human habitation. Sanitary facilities may include a
sink, one toilet or urinal, and one shower.
4. Time of Construction: No accessory buildings or structures shall be constructed
on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is
accessory.
5. Location: All permanently anchored accessory buildings must be placed on the
side or rear yard. Accessory buildings placed in the front yard must meet the
underlying zoning setbacks.
6. Setbacks: Accessory structures shall not be placed within any easements. No
accessory building, which is not attached to a principle structure, shall be located
within ten (10’) feet of a principal structure or six (6’) feet of another accessory
building. All accessory structures must meet all required setbacks.
Table: 1
Rear yard 10 feet
Side yard 10 feet
Corner yard 10 feet
7. Driveways: When new garages or garage additions are constructed, existing or
new residential driveways must be paved with impervious surface or pervious
asphalt, pavers, concrete or similar material before the garage is completed.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 8
Residential driveways that are one-hundred (100) feet or greater shall pave at
least forty (40) feet from street entrance.
8. Maximum Structures: No more than three (3) accessory structures may be placed
on a parcel on five (5) acres or less.
9. Temporary Structures: Use of temporary storage structures maybe allowed in
residential districts and shall require a temporary structure permit. Temporary
storage structures include but are not limited to the following: lean to structures
and tubular metal framed structures with canvass or similar coverings.
Temporary structures are allowed for up to eighteen (18) months. Said structure
shall be removed if they become torn, discolored, or in any way damaged that
modify their original appearance.
10. Design: Galvanized steel buildings are prohibited as accessory structures in all
districts except for Agricultural districts and uses on lots greater than 5 acres. If
the lot is sub-divided to less than 5 acres the accessory structures will need to
be removed or brought into compliance. All accessory buildings shall resemble,
in style, materials, color roofline, and siding type, the principal building on the lot,
except the following building types may vary from this standard:
a) Accessory structures located in the Agricultural District or on lots greater
than five (5) acres.
b) Accessory structures under 120 square feet in size.
c) Horse stables and riding arenas
d) Greenhouses
e) Gazebos and decorative shelters
f) Historic buildings
g) Buildings constructed in the PUD or RC District which are subject to an
overall site plan review.
11. Height: Accessory buildings shall not exceed twenty-six (26) feet in height or
exceed the height of the principal structure whichever is less.
B. Zoning District Regulations
1. Residential Districts
a) Lots less than One (1) acre
1) Accessory buildings must not exceed (1,000) square feet or one
hundred percent (100%) of the square footage of the foundation size
of the principal structure, excluding the foundation of the attached
garage, whichever is greater.
2) The sum of the accessory structures must not exceed one hundred
and twenty five percent (125%) of the square footage of the
foundation of the principal structure.
b) Lots One (1) acre or more
1) Accessory garages attached to the principal structure must not
exceed one-thousand (1,000) square feet or one-hundred percent
(100%) of the square footage of the foundation of the principal
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 9
structure, excluding the foundation of the attached garage, whichever
is greater.
2) The sum of the accessory structures must not exceed two (2%)
percent per buildable acre or one hundred and twenty five percent
(125%) of the square footage of the foundation of the principal
structure, whichever is greater.
(Table 2 is an example of the calculations.)
Table: 2
Lot A Lot B
1.5 acres
Buildable lot – 43,560 s.f.
Principal Structure – 1,000 s.f.
43,560 s.f. x 2% buildable = 871.20 s.f.
125% of principal structure = 1,250 s.f.
10 acres
Buildable lot – 5acres (217,800 s.f.)
Principal Structure – 1,000 s.f.
217,800 s.f. x 2% Buildable = 4,356 s.f.
125% of principal structure = 1,250 s.f.
Lot A may have a total sum of 1,250 s.f.
of accessory structures
Lot B may have a total sum of 4,356 s.f.
of accessory structures.
2. Commercial and Industrial Non-Residential Districts
a) All Non-Residential Districts, excluding Agriculture districts and uses,
must proceed through a design review process.
(Amendment: 02/24/2015)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 16
6.6 SIGNS
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to protect and promote the public health,
safety, order, and general welfare through the general establishment of standards,
regulations and procedures governing the erection and uses of signs and other
devices:
1. Establish standards that would permit businesses in the city a reasonable and
equitable opportunity to advertise.
2. Preserve and protect the value of land and buildings and also preserve and
protect landscapes.
3. Prevent hazards to life and property.
4. To assure the continued attractiveness of the City.
B. Definition: See Section 9.0 (Definitions)
C. General: The following are minimum requirements.
1. Off-Premise Signs. All off-premise signs along Highway 8 shall not be erected
unless regulated in this chapter.
2. It is unlawful to erect or maintain any sign on any property, public or private,
without the consent of the property owner thereof.
3. Signs may be erected or maintained by the leasee with the consent of the owner.
4. Illuminating signs. Illuminating signs in all districts shall meet the following
standards:
1. No sign may be brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate
visibility.
2. Sign shall be constructed and maintained that the source of light is not
visible from the public right-of-way or residential property, does not
interfere with or obstruct any official traffic sign or signal, nor is illuminated
by rotating light except for signs giving public service information.
3. All illuminated signs shall have a sun relay switch or similar device.
4. Illuminating signs must not exceed a maximum illumination of 5,000 nits
(candelas per square meter) during daylight hours and a maximum
illumination of 500 nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk to
dawn.
5. Signs shall not operate at a brightness level of more than one (1)
footcandle meter above ambient light in all districts or five-tenths (.5) a
footcandle meter above ambient light where it is adjacent to a residential
property. Measurement may be taken at the property line.
5. Electronic Signs. Changeable electronic signs are allowed subject to the
following conditions:
1. Changeable electronic signs are allowed only on freestanding signs.
2. The images and messages displayed must be static, and the transition
from one static display to another must be instantaneous without any
special effects.
3. Electronic signs shall not have distracting flashing or moving light so
designed or lighted as to be a traffic hazard, except public informational
signs such as signs stating time and temperature.
4. The message on an electric sign may change at a rate of no less than 6
seconds.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 17
5. The images and messages displayed must be complete in themselves,
without continuation in content to the next image or message or to any
other sign.
6. Electronic signs must be designed and equipped to freeze the device in 1
position if a malfunction occurs. The displays must also be equipped with
a means to immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions, and the
sign owner must immediately stop the dynamic display when notified by
the city that it is not complying with the standards of this chapter.
6. All signs shall conform to the building setback regulations for the district in which
they are located except as may be otherwise specified in this Section. Those free
standing signs located within Commercial districts may have a support structure
located no closer than ten (10) feet from the property line or public right-of-way.
7. All new, rebuilt, and reface monument or pylon signs must be constructed to
meet wind loads of at least 80 mph.
8. Plans must be submitted to show how the sign will be anchored to the building
for all wall and projecting signs.
9. Signs must be located at least five hundred (500) feet from a park, historical site,
or rest area, nor within one hundred (100) feet of a church or school.
10. Signs shall not be closer to any other sign on the same side of the highway
facing traffic proceeding in the same direction than one hundred (100) feet. This
spacing between signs does not apply to structures separated by buildings or
other obstructions in such a manner that only one sign facing located within the
above spacing distances is visible from the highway at any one (1) time.
11. At least one address sign identifying the correct address shall be required on
each principal building in all districts. The numbers shall be at least three and
one half inches in height and shall be distinctively in contrast to the color of the
principal building.
D. Prohibited Signs and sign structures: No sign shall be erected or maintained:
1. Which purports to be or resembles an official traffic control device, sign, or signal,
or railroad sign or signal; or which hides from view or interferes in any material
degree with the effectiveness of any traffic control device, sign, or signal, or
railroad sign or signal, or which obstructs or interferes with the driver’s view of
approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic for a distance not to exceed five
hundred (500) feet;
2. No sign shall be located within or over a public right of way unless otherwise
specifically permitted by this section or the City Council.
3. No signs shall be located on rooftops. Exceptions would be in cases where
applicant demonstrates difficulties in using a wall sign or freestanding signs. No
rooftop sign shall exceed forty (40) square feet.
4. No sign shall be erected or maintained which imitates or resembles any official
traffic sign, signal or device. Furthermore, no sign shall contain such wording
including, but not limited to STOP, WARNING, CAUTION or DANGER which
may be confused with traffic signing or controls unless such signs are approved
by the City.
5. Which contains statements, words, or pictures of an obscene, indecent or
immoral character, or such as would offend public morals or decency on any
right-of-way or the interstate system of highways, except as otherwise provided
by law or allowed by the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of
Transportation;
6. Which has distracting flashing or moving light so designed or lighted as to be a
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 18
traffic hazard, except public informational signs such as signs stating time and
temperature.
7. Which in the opinion of the City building inspector or City Administrator that are
structurally unsafe, are in disrepair, or abandoned.
8. No sign shall be painted, drawn or placed on a utility pole, tree, rocks or natural
features except those signs that provide public information concerning a school,
city, county, state, or federal event, unless approved by city staff.
9. No sign/structure shall be placed that will obstruct safe access to doors, windows
or fire escapes.
10. No signs shall be supported by guy wires.
E. Signs Permitted without or no-fee permit. Signs without a permit include signs on
owner’s private property, approved by the City Administrator or designee or political
and campaign signs permitted by Minnesota State Statutes. Signs requiring a no-fee
permit are signs located on City’s Public right-of-way.
1. Traffic signs as approved by the City Administrator or designee.
2. Public signs as approved by the City Administrator or designee.
3. Political and Campaign signs as permitted by Minnesota State Statutes. All
candidates and politically oriented groups may post their political and campaign
signs for sixty (60) days and shall be removed within seven (7) days after an
election. For the purpose of this Subdivision, the primary election and general
election held in the same year for the same offices(s) shall be considered one
election. Political and campaign signs may not be placed on the public right-ofway
or easement or on any other publicly owned property. Signs located on
public property in conflict with this Subdivision may be removed by the City and
the expense of said removal shall be paid by the candidate, group, or property
owner.
4. Real estate, lease, and rental signs not in excess sixteen (16) square feet of sign
may be placed within the front yard of such property to be sold or leased. Only
one (1) such sign is permitted per street frontage. Corner properties may contain
two (2) signs, one (1) per frontage. Such signage shall not be less than sixteen
(16) feet from the front lot line unless located against the structure. Failure to
remove said sign within ten (10) days of sale or lease of property or failure to
maintain said sign shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance.
5. One free-standing, per corner, off-site real estate sign announcing an “open
house” or similar activity for the purpose of showing or displaying real estate for
sale are permitted provided the off-site sign is located on private property with
the approval of the owner. The off-site sign shall be displayed only during the
“open house”. The maximum size of such sign shall be eight (8) square feet.
Said signs may be placed in the city boulevard area on the same day of the open
house and only during the open house.
6. One temporary, per corner, off-site directional signs for specific events, garage
sales, auctions or similar functions may not exceed three (3) square feet in area
and may be located on private property with the approval of the owner.
7. One temporary, on-site construction sign promoting a new residential
development, commercial, or industrial project may be located at a construction
site provided a final plat for residential development or concept plan in other
zoning districts has been filed for the period of construction only. Sign may not
exceed a hundred (100) square feet and six (6) feet above grade in height if
located in a residential district, and eight (8) feet above grade in height if located
in other districts. Said sign shall not be erected before issuance of a building
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 19
permit and shall be removed within seven (7) days following issuance of
certificate of occupancy for a single residence or when ninety-five percent (95%)
of a project is sold.
8. Signs stating the name and/or address of the owner, lessee or occupant of such
property or information not to exceed two (2) square feet.
9. Service club and religious notices.
10. No trespass/no hunting and similar signs not to exceed two (2) square feet in
size may be placed on private property.
11. Ribbons, banners, pennants, streamers, and similar devices are allowed in
commercial, industrial and public institution districts. Said signs shall be
removed if they become torn, discolored or in any way damaged to modify their
original appearance or within three (3) days after termination of the event or
function. A maximum of two (2) signs per lot is allowed for said signs.
F. Signs Requiring a Permit.
1. On-site portable signs for specific or special events, sales, and new item
promotions. Signs shall be authorized on a lot no more than four times in any
calendar year for a time period not exceeding a total of 40 days in any calendar
year. They shall be removed within 24 hours after expiration of the permit.
2. Agriculture, Residential, and Public/Semi-Semi Public Districts
1) One free-standing identification sign not to exceed thirty-five (35) square
feet in size or five (5) feet in height for residential developments with six
or more single family or multiple family dwelling units.
2) One free-standing identification sign not to exceed a hundred (100)
square feet in size or five feet in height for each church, school, hospital
or residential care facility. Public/Semi-Public Districts visible on Highway
8 may have a sign height of 25 feet. Such sign shall be solely for the
purpose of displaying the name of the institution and its activities or
services.
3) Wall, Canopy, or Marquee. For signs in the Public/Semi-Public Districts a
total sign area on any one side of a building may not exceed forty (40)
square feet. Total sign area on any one side of a building with multiple
tenants may not exceed forty (40) square feet per business.
3. Highway Commercial, Business Park
1) One free-standing sign for each principle structure or legal parcel,
whichever is more restrictive, not to a hundred (100) square feet, per side,
twenty - five (25) feet in height.
2) One, per driveway entry, on site directional sign for campus type
buildings, businesses with multiple entryways, tenants and/or uses not to
exceed fifteen (15) square feet and six (6) feet in height.
3) Wall, Canopy, or Marquee. Total sign area on any one side of a building
or per business front, may not exceed six (6%) percent of the building
façade on which the sign is erected, or forty (40) square feet, whichever is
greater. Total sign area on any one side of a building with multiple tenants
may not exceed forty (40) square feet per tenant. The top of any sign,
including its super structure if any, shall be no higher than the wall height
of a building to which such sign may be attached or twenty - five (25) feet
above ground level, whichever height is less.
4. Downtown Commercial Business District: Area as designated in the Downtown
Design Guideline.
1) For lots with at least twenty (20) feet of front yard, one monument sign for
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 20
each principle structure or legal parcel, whichever is more restrictive, not
to exceed a hundred (100) square feet or twenty - five (25) feet in height.
2) Wall, Canopy, or Marquee. Total sign area on any one side of a building
may not exceed six (6%) percent of the building façade on which the sign
is erected, or exceed forty (40) square feet, whichever is greater. Total
sign area on any one side of a building with multiple tenants may not
exceed forty (40) square feet per tenant.
3) Projecting signs. Total sign area may not exceed ten (10) square feet
and may not project more than five (5) feet. The sign shall be situated no
lower than ten (10) feet and no higher than eleven (11) feet above grade.
4) Projecting signs shall not be erected directly above wall signs. They may
be located along side of a wall sign.
5) Wall or projecting signs shall not be bare or painted plywood.
5. Industrial District
1) One monument sign for each principle structure or legal parcel, whichever
is more restrictive, not to exceed a fifty (50) square feet or six (6) feet in
height.
2) One, per driveway entry, on site directional sign for campus type
buildings, businesses with multiple entryways, tenants and/or uses not to
exceed fifteen (15) square feet.
3) Wall, Canopy, or Marquee. Total sign area on any one side of a building
may not exceed six (6) percent of the building façade on which the sign is
erected, or Forty (40) square feet, whichever is greater. The top of any
sign, including its super structure if any, shall be no higher than the wall
height of a building to which such sign may be attached or twenty - five
(25) feet above ground level, whichever height is less.
G. Permit Requirements.
1. A Building Permit shall be obtained for any structure governed by the Uniform
Building code supporting a sign.
2. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no sign or structure shall be
erected, constructed, altered, rebuilt or relocated until a permit has been issued
by the City.
3. Sign applications are available at Chisago City Hall. The applicant shall include
sign dimensions, height, colors, construction materials, method of anchoring,
content, and location. A sketch or photograph of the proposed sign is required
and a site plan that adequately illustrates the location of the sign. In addition, the
application shall include the location and size of all other signs at the subject
property/development.
4. No signs shall be erected along U.S. Highway 8 without first obtaining the
necessary permit(s) from the State of Minnesota. Said permit shall be for each
individual sign eligible under this Title.
5. Once a completed sign application is filed with the City, the City Administrator or
designee shall review the plans and specifications for the proposed sign(s). If
the proposed sign(s) meets ordinance requirements, the building code and all
other laws and ordinances of the City, a sign permit will be approved by the City
Administrator or designee.
6. The required fee as established by resolution of the City Council shall be paid to
the City before issuance of a sign permit.
H. Abandoned Signs. Any sign on any building or freestanding sign on a business site
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 21
where the business has not been in operation for six (6) consecutive months shall be
considered abandoned. Abandoned signs must be promptly removed by the owner
or occupant of the premises on which the sign is placed. Seasonal signs may remain
if approved by city staff.
I. Unsafe and Unlawful Signs.
1. Any sign erected or maintained in violation of any provision of this part or any
other sign regulation or of any other ordinance or law is a public nuisance. Upon
receiving notice of noncompliance from the Zoning Administrator or Building
Official, the sign shall be removed or brought into lawful compliance. Signs found
by the Building Official to present a threat to public safety must be removed or
made safe immediately. Other non-complying signs must be brought into
conformity within thirty (30) days.
2. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked for failure to comply
with any provision herein.
3. The City has the right to remove illegal signs after 30 day notice and to charge
the costs of removal to the property owner where the sign is located.
J. Nonconforming and Illegal Signs. Signs which do not conform to the provisions of
this Section applicable thereto shall be a non-conforming use.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 28
6.8 FENCES
A. General. Fences greater than thirty six (36) inches in height require a building
permit. Fences shall be maintained so as not to become unsightly, hazardous, or
less opaque than when originally constructed. The fence shall be constructed in
such a manner as to be capable of resisting the design wind loads for structures
as defined by the state building code.
B. Location. Fences may be located up to the property lines. No damage of any
kind should occur to abutting properties. Pedestrian trails adjacent to any
hazardous fences allowed by ordinance shall maintain a minimum five (5) foot
setback from the edge of the trail surface. Any hazardous fences allowed by
ordinance and placed adjacent to a pedestrian trail shall maintain a minimum five
(5) foot setback from the edge of the trail surface.
C. Materials. All fences built or maintained shall be constructed of materials
capable of providing a finished appearance on the outward side visible to the
public. All materials used to construct the fence shall be sound materials,
resistant to rot, and capable of accepting and maintaining a visually attractive
appearance. Exceptions to the fence materials are indicated in this section.
Fences shall be constructed of the following materials:
1. Wood
2. Simulated wood
3. Chain link
4. Decorative brick or stone
5. Wrought iron or aluminum designed to simulate wrought iron
6. Split rail
7. Other materials or fence types as approved by the city
D. Temporary Fences. Temporary fences such as snow fence or silt fence are
allowed without a permit and shall meet the following:
1. For the purpose of reducing or eliminating run-off, or as otherwise
required by city ordinance, a temporary silt fence shall be installed and
constructed as described by the Chisago City Standard Plate.
2. For the general purpose of reducing or eliminating snow drifts a snow
fence maybe installed and maintained during October 1 through May 1.
E. Prohibited Fences. Fences such as barbed wire, electric, chain link with barbs
exposed, and walls with protruding sharp edges thereof, and other fences and
walls designed for or likely to cause harm to persons are declared hazardous and
are prohibited in the city with the following exceptions:
1. Barbed wire, single strand wires, electric, chain link with barbs exposed
may be used to confine livestock, protect crops or as otherwise allowed
by ordinance.
2. Electrified fences shall use a UL approved for agricultural uses and
shall be installed so as to not have current going through said fence
except on an intermittent basis. Current shall not remain on longer
than three (3) seconds. Electrified fences adjacent to a pedestrian trail
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 29
or residential subdivision shall be clearly designated as an electrified
fence by the installation of one by one (1x1) square foot sign stating
“this fence is electrified”.
F. Agricultural Uses. Fences may be located on any lot line up to a height of six (6)
feet for the purpose of confining livestock or protecting crops.
G. Residential Districts. Fences may be located on any lot line up to a height of four
(4) feet in the front or the front one-half of the side yard. A fence up to six (6) feet
may be constructed in the rear yard or the rear one-half of the side yard.
H. Commercial and Industrial Districts. Fences may only be located on the rear and
rear one-half (1/2) of the side yard; the fence may be up to eight (8) feet in
height.
I. Public/Semi-Public Districts. Height restrictions are exempt for the following:
1. In public parks, schools, or other educational facilities, public and
private, fences for playgrounds, athletic fields, outdoor swimming
facilities, and other similar uses
2. Cemeteries, public utilities, and holding ponds.
J. Swimming Pool. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing
that contains water over twenty-four (24) inches deep shall install a fully enclosed
fence as required in the municipal code Section 70.00.
K. Special Purpose Fences. A conditional use permit may be granted by the City
for special purpose fences and fences differing in construction, heights or
location for the following:
1. Any variations in height in all zoning districts to add architectural
design, confine livestock, protect crops or provide additional security.
2. In commercial, industrial and Public/Semi-Public – Facility districts the
use of barbed wire on the top one (1) foot of any fence along side or
rear lot lines may be constructed of barbed wire. Barbed wire may also
be placed on the top one (1) foot of fences in the Industrial or
Public/Semi-Public – Facilities districts when fronting a public street
and placed five (5) feet off the public right-of-way. Barbed wire shall
not be permitted adjacent to any residential districts.
(Amended: January 11, 2011)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 35
6.11 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
The provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to such exceptions, additions or
modifications as set forth in the following supplementary regulations:
A. Essential Services. Essential services, as defined in this ordinance, shall be
permitted in all districts.
B. Soil Stripping. No person, firm or corporation shall strip, excavate or otherwise
remove top soil for sale, or for use other than on the premises from which it is
taken, except in connection with the construction or alteration of a building on the
premises and excavation or grading incidental thereto.
C. Vacant Lots of Record. Notwithstanding the limitations imposed by any other
provisions of this ordinance, the Council may permit erection of a dwelling on any
lot (except a lot in an industrial district), separately owned or under contract of
sale and containing, at the effective day of this ordinance, an area or width
smaller than that required for a one family dwelling, provided that municipal
sewer and water service is available to the site.
D. Substandard Lots. No lot, yard, court or other open space, already containing
less area than the minimum required under this ordinance, shall be further
divided or reduced.
E. Satellite Dishes. Satellite dishes shall be regulated as described below unless
exempt by federal law. Satellite dishes shall be permitted in the rear or side yards
of all districts. A building permit is required for dishes over 2 ft diameter. All
district setbacks must be met in placement of dishes. Dishes shall not exceed
thirty (30) feet in height.
F. Bulk Storage (Liquid). Storage permitted only in the light industrial zone district.
All uses associated with the bulk storage of oil, gasoline, liquid fertilizer,
chemicals, and similar liquids shall require a Conditional Use Permit in order that
the City Council may have assurance that fire, explosion, water, or soil
contamination hazards are not present that would be detrimental to the public
health, safety and general welfare. All existing above-ground liquid storage tanks
having a capacity in excess over one-thousand (1,000) gallons requires a
conditional use permit within twelve (12) months following enactment of this
Ordinance.
The City Council shall require the development of diking around said tanks and
appropriate monitoring systems. Diking shall be suitably sealed and shall hold a
leakage capacity equal to one hundred and fifteen percent (115%) of the tank
capacity. Any existing storage tank that, in the opinion of the City Council,
constitutes a hazard to the public safety must discontinue operations within one
(1) year following enactment of this Ordinance. The City Council may require
pressure testing of storage tanks on a periodic basis. Any liquid bulk storage
providers shall submit to the City copies of any hazardous material reports
submitted to Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) or by the Federal
Government.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 36
G. Structure Relocation. A building permit is required for all permanent relocation of
structures. Construction sheds and other temporary accessory structures to be
located on a lot for less than six (6) months do not require a building permit.
H. Fish houses and movable accessory buildings. One (1) moveable storage
accessory building (fish house) is allowed to be stored in either the side or rear
yard of a parcel, or on parcels with lake access in the back yard behind the
required setback.
I. Lighting. In all districts, any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area,
or other structure or area, shall be arranged not to be disruptive to neighboring
residents or the general public. This includes, but not limited to, direct or skyreflected
glare, whether from floodlights or from high temperature processes
such as combustion or welding. The source of light shall be hooded or controlled.
Bare light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public
rights-of-way. No light or combination of lights which cast light on a public street
shall exceed one (1) foot candle meter reading as measured from the centerline
of said street nor shall any light or combination of lights which cast light on
residential property exceed four/tenths (0.4) foot candles. Lighting standards
shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.
J. Keeping of Farm Animals. Every person who raises Farm Animals for sale,
profit, or pleasure on parcels must keep them confined on the premises at all
times, except for the purpose of when honey bees are pollinating, farm animals
are being transported, racing and used in ceremonies. This section of the
ordinance does not apply to the keeping of dogs, cats and other domestic
animals customarily kept as pets, or Kennel License as regulated in the
Municipal Code Chapter 151. Any persons keeping Farm Animals within the city
limits shall follow the guidelines within this section or as written in the Municipal
Code Chapter 151, whichever is more restrictive.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal which
habitually yaps, wails or cries. The habitual yap, wail, or cries shall exist
when repeated intervals of at least ten (10) minutes with less than one minute
of interruption over a period of one hour or more. Such yap, wail or cry must
also be audible off of the owner’s or caretakers premises.
2. The following animals are allowed on parcels of five (5) acres or larger. One
(1) animal unit is permitted per two acres. Pigeons and fowl maybe
combined to equal one (1) animal unit. Any other animals not listed below
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the City
Council.
The animal units are as follows:
1 Bovine = 1 animal unit
1 Horse = 1 animal unit
2 Swine = 1 animal unit
2 Bee Hives = 1 animal unit
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 37
5 Alpaca or llama = 1 animal unit
5 Sheep/Goat = 1 animal unit
20 Fowl = 1 animal unit
3. The following animals are allowed on parcels of five (5) acres or less.
a. Horses. Horses are permitted in the City on properties three (3) acres or
more. One (1) horse is equivalent to one (1) animal unit. One (1)
animal unit is permitted per two acres.
b. Pigeons and other Fowl. Pigeons and other fowl are permitted in the City
on properties that are less than one (1) acre. They shall be protected
from the weather and predators in a shelter or coop and have access to
the outdoors. Properties one (1) acre or less shall provide a run area that
is enclosed or fenced. Shelters, chicken coops and run area shall be
placed in the rear yard and be at least twenty-five (25) feet from any
residential dwelling on any other premises. The following are limitations
on Pigeons and other fowl within the City.
i. No person shall keep roosters on any property less than two (2)
acres.
ii. All premises on which the pigeons and fowl are kept or maintained
shall be kept clean from filth, garbage, and any substances which
attract rodents. The shelter, coop, and its surrounding must be
cleaned frequently enough to control odor. Manure shall not be
allowed to accumulate in a way that causes an unsanitary condition or
causes odors detectible on another property. Failure to comply with
these conditions may result in a violation of this section and municipal
code Chapter 151.
iii. Pigeons and other fowl are not allowed on properties with three (3) or
more dwelling units.
iv. Other fowl are allowed on properties less than one (1) acres. The
following animals are allowed:
Pigeons or Other Fowl
5 Pigeons or Other Fowl Less than one (1) acre
10 Pigeons or Other Fowl Greater than one (1) acre, but less than
two (2) acres
20 Pigeons or Other Fowl Greater than two (2) acres
c. Honey Bees. Keeping, maintaining, and raising of honey bees may be
allowed on properties one (1) acre or greater. Any person keeping,
maintaining, and raising honey bees shall comply with the following
restrictions:
i. Any Africanize strain species of honeybees is prohibited.
ii. The bee hives shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from
any property line, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to
the property line.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 38
iii. The beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least
six (6) feet in height. The flyway barrier may consist of a wall, fence,
dense vegetation or a combination thereof, such that honeybees will
fly over rather than through the material to reach the colony. The
flyway barrier must be in proximity to the hive to ensure the
honeybees fly up and above head height. A flyway barrier is not
required if the property adjoining is undeveloped, or is used for
agriculture or industrial; this does not include properties with horses
or pedestrian trails. A flyway barrier is not required if the hives are
located on the roof of a structure containing at least one (1) full story
if all hives are located at least five (5) feet from the side of the
structure and at least fifteen (15) feet from any adjacent and
occupied structure.
iv. No person is permitted to keep more than the following numbers of
colonies on any lot within the city:
Bee Hives
2 Bee Hives Larger than 1 acre, but less than 3 acres
4 Bee Hives Larger than 3 acres, but less than 5 acres
v. Any person keeping, maintaining, or raising of honeybees shall
comply with the following standards of practice:
1. Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames,
which shall be kept in sound and usable condition.
2. Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is
available to the colony prior to and so long as colonies remain
active outside of the hive.
3. Each beekeeper shall ensure that no wax comb or other material
that might encourage robbing by other bees is left upon the
grounds of the apiary lot. Such materials once removed from the
site shall be handled and stored in sealed containers, or placed
within a building or other insect-proof container.
4. Each beekeeper shall maintain his beekeeping equipment in good
condition, including keeping the hives painted, and securing
unused equipment from weather, potential theft or vandalism and
occupancy by swarms. It shall be a violation of this section for
any beekeeper’s unused equipment to attract a warm, even if the
beekeeper is not intentionally keeping honeybees.
vi. If a beekeeper serves the community by removing a swarm or
swarms of honeybees from locations where they are not desired, a
beekeeper shall not be considered in violation of the portion of this
section limiting the number of colonies while temporarily housing the
swarm on the apiary lot in compliance with the standards of practice
established pursuant to this section if the swarm is so housed for no
more than thirty (30) days.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 39
4. Interim Use Permit Required. Any person who desires to exceed these
limitations shall first apply for an Interim Use Permit as outlined in Chapter
3.2 of this ordinance.
(Amended Chapter 6.11.J July 24, 2012)
K. Docks, Lifts and other Mooring Structures or Facilities.
Purpose: The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate docks, lifts and other
mooring structures or facilities, other than those owned or operated by the state
or a political subdivision, on all residential lots (Rural Residential RR-1 and RR-2,
Residential R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts)
1. General Requirements:
a. No person shall store fuel upon any dock.
b. Overnight use of water craft as living quarters, beaching, docking, or
continuous mooring of watercraft may be allowed with a conditional use
permit.
c. Docks, moorings and other structures may be constructed of such materials
and in such a manner as the owner determines, provided that they shall be
so built and maintained that they do not constitute a hazard to the public
using the waters of the lake, and they shall be maintained in a workmanlike
manner.
d. Docks or mooring facilities are only allowed on approved single family lots. A
minimum of a ten (10) foot easement is allowed for docks or other mooring
structures on lakeshore properties that are at least a hundred (100) feet wide
at the highest point of the OHW and with a Conditional Use Permit (CUP).
The owner of the lakeshore property is allowed one (1) easement for one (1)
individual owner.
e. Consideration of a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) must include consideration
of lot width, lot depth, land slope, water depth, vegetation, soils, depth to
groundwater and bedrock, compatibility with adjacent land uses and/or other
relevant factors.
f. It is at the discretion of the Planning Commission and City Council as to
whether to approve any Conditional Use Permits (CUP) and they may place
additional appropriate conditions on such facilities as they deem appropriate.
g. Except as modified by the requirements in this chapter, all other provisions of
Minnesota Rules 6115.0210 shall apply.
h. Docks that are non-compliant and are removed before freeze-up shall be
allowed to place their dock back into the water (grandfather clause).
However, the landowners shall make every effort to comply with the
requirements of this ordinance.
2. Location: No dock, mooring or other structure shall be so located as to:
a. Obstruct the navigation of any lake
b. Obstruct reasonable use or access to any other dock, mooring or other
structure authorized under this chapter
c. Present a potential safety hazard.
d. Be detrimental to significant fish and wildlife habitat or protected vegetation.
3. Dimensions: Docks and other mooring structures must meet the following
requirements located on Single-Family lots.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 6.0 – Community Design Page 40
a. No dock shall exceed six (6) feet in width.
b. No dock shall exceed fifty feet (50’) in length or the minimum straight line
distance necessary to reach a water depth of five (5) feet, whichever is
greater. The width, but not the length, of the crossbar of any T- or L-shaped
dock shall be included in the computation of length. The crossbar of any
such dock shall not measure in excess of twenty-five (25) feet in length.
c. No dock shall encroach upon any dock setback zone, however; the owners of
any two abutting lakeshore sites may erect one common dock within the dock
setback to the abutting lakeshore sites, if the common dock is the only dock
on the two lakeshore sites and if the dock otherwise conforms with the
provisions of this chapter.
4. Detached Single Family: Docks or other mooring structures located on singlefamily
lots in all Rural Residential and Residential Districts do not need a permit
from the City but must meet the following requirements
a. Docks shall be located so that moored watercraft and equipment are at least
five (5) feet from the extended property line. Docks located on an easement
maybe less than five (5) feet on the extended property line in which the
easement was granted. Existing non-conforming docks shall be centered and
every attempt must be made to stay incompliance.
b. Mooring is limited to five (5) registered watercraft.
c. All registered watercrafts must be registered to a family member. No more
than one (1) watercraft that is not registered to a family member can be
moored for no more than four (4) consecutive days.
d. Rental of slips is not allowed.
e. Docks must be removed before freeze-up. For extenuating circumstances or
difficult terrain, a dock may be moved as close to the lakeshore as possible.
f. All docks must be marked with reflective material on the front (facing the
water) and each side of the structure. The reflective material must measure a
total area of no less than nine (9) square inches every ten (10) feet on each
side of the dock.
g. No docks shall use flashing lights or bright lights that are disruptive to
neighboring residents.
5. Twin-home, Townhomes, Multi-family, Commercial, and Planned Development
Districts (PDD): Docks or other mooring structures in twin-homes, townhomes,
multi-family, commercial, and Planned Development Districts (PDD) shall apply
for a permit at the time of initial platting or subsequent to plat approval. If owners
apply for additional docks, lifts, or other mooring structures after initial platting, a
Conditional Use Permit (CUP) process outlined in this ordinance shall apply.
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: October 2000, 5/23/01, 2/22/05, 1/10/06, 2/14/06, 5/23/06, 6/12/07,
11/10/08, 03/09/10, 01/11/11, 07/24/12, 2/26/2013)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 1
7.0 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
7.1 FOREST PROTECTION REGULATIONS
A. Findings and Purpose.
1. Chisago City finds that preservation of trees and woodlands within the City is critical
to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens; that existing and potential
development within the City has the effect of reducing and in some cases
eliminating wooded area, which, if preserved and maintained, serve important
ecological, recreational and aesthetic benefit to existing and future residents.
Therefore, the purposes of these regulations are the following:
2. To preserve woodlands and trees on individual sites; protect the safety of said
residents by preventing wind and water erosion, slope instability and rapid runoff
promote the health of said residents by absorption of air pollutants, contaminants
and noise; and protect the welfare of residents by increasing rainfall infiltration to
the water table, provide a diversified environment for many kinds of animals and
plants necessary for wildlife maintenance and important to the aesthetic values and
recreational requirements of the area and promote energy conservation by shading
buildings in the summer and breaking winds in the winter.
3. District Boundaries. The Forest Protection regulations apply to all zoning districts
within the city.
4. Restrictions.
a. No development permit may be issued for any development unless the
development is in compliance with the following standards:
(1) Development must be conducted so that the maximum number of trees is
preserved by the clustering of structures in existing cleared areas and
natural clearings.
(2) Grading, contouring and paving may not detrimentally affect the root zone
aeration and stability of existing trees and existing trees must be provided
with a water area.
(3) When trees are lawfully removed, the permittee must restore the density of
trees that existed before the development. Comparable nursery stock must
be utilized, but not more than ten trees per acre are required.
(4) Development may not reduce the existing crown cover greater than 50
percent and may preserve the under-story.
(5) Trees used in reforestation or landscaping must be compatible with the
local landscape and conditions and not presently under disease epidemic.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 2
(a) Lawful development is under a continuing obligation to observe
these restrictions.
(b) The removal of trees seriously damaged by storms or other acts of
God or diseased trees is not prohibited.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 3
7.2 WETLAND PROTECTION REGULATIONS
A. Definition.
1. Wetland: See Chapter 9 (Definitions).
2. Buffer: an upland area adjacent to a lake, stream or wetland that is natural or
restored to primarily native vegetation.
3. Setbacks: The minimum horizontal distance between a structure or sewage
treatment system and the edge of a delineated wetland.
B. General. The following are minimum requirements.
1. All wetland delineations must be completed by a certified wetland delineator.
2. Wetland Delineations for Planned Development Districts (PDD) and Subdivisions
must follow the Minnesota Routine Assessment Methodology (MNRAM) and
identify the quality of the wetland based on the assessment.
3. Minor subdivisions, Administrative lot splits, building permits, septic system
installation and updates, and soil disturbances 100 cubic feet or less would be
exempt from this requirement and will utilize the moderate quality buffer and
setbacks set forth in this section, unless a MNRAM has been completed and
approved or the wetland has already been identified as a high quality wetland by
MNRAM standards. An applicant that is exempt from the MNRAM requirements
may still complete the MNRAM process and comply with the resulting setbacks.
C. Wetland Limitations. The following activities are prohibited within a wetland or wetland
buffer:
1. Runoff must not be discharged directly into wetlands without presettlement of the
runoff.
2. Creating impervious cover, except those that are approved through plan review or
by the City.
3. Excavating fill or placing fill or debris, except as approved, in writing, by the City or
County Wetland Specialist.
4. Altering vegetation, except for vegetative enhancements, and the removal of
invasive exotic species or trees for disease control or revegetation. These
exceptions must include a detailed plan submitted and approved by the City.
5. Applying phosphorus-containing fertilizers that is harmful or will injure the
waterbody. The exception must be authorized by the City Administrator.
D. Setbacks and Buffers. Based on the wetland function and value assessment the
following will be buffer and setback requirements measured from the delineated
wetland edge.
Low Quality Buffer 15 feet
Setback 15 feet
Moderate Quality Buffer 20 feet
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 4
Setback 30 feet
High Quality Buffer 25 feet
Setback 50 feet
E. Protection. Protection of buffer areas described in this rule is to be maintained
indefinitely. Buffer strips (natural or created) shall be protected by erosion and
sediment control measures during construction. Where buffer strips are not vegetated
or have been cultivated or other land disturbance has occurred within 5 years of the
application, such areas shall be replanted and maintained. The buffer strip plantings
must be identified on the site plan and approved by the city. Buffer strips shall not be
mowed without permission from the city.
F. Sign. A buffer shall be indicated by permanent, free-standing monuments at the
buffer’s upland edge, with a design and text approved by the City. A marker shall be
placed at each lot line, with additional markers at an interval of no more than 150 feet.
For subdivisions, it is the City’s standard that the monument requirement applies to
each lot of record. On public land or right-of-way, the monument requirement may be
satisfied by the use of markers flush to the ground, breakaway markers of durable
material, or a vegetation maintenance plan approved by City staff.
G. Mitigation. Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or partially, unless replaced
by wetland areas of at least equal public value. Replacement be guided by the following
principles in descending order of priority:
a. Avoiding the direct or indirect impact of the activity that may destroy or
diminish the wetland.
b. Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the
wetland activity and its implementation.
c. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the
affected wetland environment.
d. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and
maintenance operations during the life of the activity.
e. Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing substitute
wetland resources or environments. Compensation including the
replacement ratio and quality or replacement must be consistent with
the requirements outlined in the rules adopted by the Board of Water
and Soil Resources described in the Wetland Conservation Act of 1991.
Any wetland replacement plan must be approved by the city. The amount of
replacement wetlands required will be determined by the quality of the wetlands being
mitigated.
Wetland Quality Replacement rate
Low/Moderate Quality 2:1
High Quality 3:1
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 5
7.3 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
A. Statutory Authorization. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
Section 462.351.
B. Findings. Chisago City hereby finds that uncontrolled and inadequate planned use of
wetlands, woodlands, natural habitat areas, areas subject to soil erosion and areas
containing restrictive soils adversely affects the public health, safety and general welfare
by impacting water quality and contributing to other environmental problems, creating
nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses of environmental resources and hindering the
ability of the city to provide adequate water, sewage, flood control and other
community services. In addition, extraordinary public expenditures may be required for
the protection of persons and property in areas which may be affected by unplanned
land use.
C. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to promote, preserve and enhance the natural
resources within Chisago City and protect them from adverse effects caused by poorly
sited development or incompatible activities by regulating land disturbing or
development activities that would have an adverse and potentially irreversible impact
on water quality and unique and fragile environmentally sensitive land; by minimizing
conflicts and encouraging compatibility between land disturbing and development
activities and water quality and environmentally sensitive lands; and by requiring
detailed review standards and procedures for land disturbing or development activities
proposed for such areas, thereby achieving a balance between urban growth and
development.
D. Applicability. Every applicant applying for subdivision or a development permit to allow
land disturbing activities must submit a storm water management plan to the Public
Works Director. No building permit, subdivision approval or development permit to
allow land disturbing activities may be issued until approval of the storm water
management plan or a waiver of the approval requirement has been obtained in strict
conformance with the provisions of this ordinance.
E. Exemptions. The provision of this ordinance do not apply to:
1. Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved by the city
on or before the effective date of this ordinance.
2. A lot for which a building permit has been approved on or before the effective date
of this ordinance.
3. Installation of fence, sign, telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or
poles.
4. Emergency work to protect life, limb or property.
F. Storm Water Management Plan Approval Procedures. At a minimum, the storm water
management plan must contain the following information:
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 6
1. Existing Site Map. A map of existing site conditions showing the site and
immediately adjacent areas including:
a. The name and address of the applicant, the section, township and range, north
point, date and scale of drawing and number of sheet.
b. Location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to clearly identify the
location of the property and giving such information as the streets and number
of adjoining roads, railroads, utilities, subdivisions, towns and districts or other
landmarks.
c. Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the topography of
the land but in no case having a contour interval greater than 2 feet. (Use urban
sea level as a base).
d. A delineation of all streams, rivers, public waters and wetlands located on and
immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of water, a description of all
vegetation which may be found in the water, a statement of general water
quality and any classification given to the water body or wetlands by the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency and/or United States Corp of Engineers.
e. Delineation of ordinary high water mark of lakes.
f. Location and dimensions of existing storm water drainage systems and natural
drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site delineating in which
direction and at what rate storm water is conveyed from the site, identifying
and receiving stream, river, public water or wetland and setting forth those
areas of the unaltered site where storm water collects.
g. A description of the soils of the site, including a map indicating soil types of
areas to be disturbed as well as a soil report containing information on the
suitability of the soils for the type of development proposed and for the type of
sewage disposal proposed and describing any remedial steps to be taken by the
developer to render the soils suitable.
h. Vegetative cover and clearly delineating any vegetation proposed for removal.
i. 100-year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways.
2. Site Construction Plan. A site construction plan must contain the following
information:
a. Location and dimension of all proposed land disturbing activities and any
phasing of those activities.
b. Locations and dimensions of all temporary soils or dirt stockpiles.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 7
c. Location and dimension of all construction site erosion control measures
necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance.
d. Schedule of the starting and completion date of each land disturbing activity
including the installation of construction site erosion control measures for each
phase.
e. Provisions for maintenance of the construction site erosion control measures
during construction.
3. Plan of Final Site Conditions. A plan of final site conditions on the same scale as the
existing site map showing the site changes including:
a. Finished grading shown at contours at the same interval as provided on the
existing site map indicating the relationship of proposed changes to existing
topography and remaining features.
b. A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including dimensions and
distances and the location, type, size and description of all proposed landscape
materials that will be added to the site as part of the development.
c. A drainage plan of the developed site delineating the direction and rate of storm
water from the site and the areas of where storm water will be allowed to
collect.
d. The size, alignment and intended use of any structures to be erected on the site.
e. A delineation and tabulation of all areas which shall be paved or surfaced,
including a description of the surfacing material to be used.
f. Any other information necessary for the review of the project plan.
G. Plan Review Procedure.
H. Process. Storm water management plans meeting the requirements of Section 6 must
be submitted by the Public Works director to the Planning Commission for review in
accordance with the standards in this section.
I. Duration. Plan approval will expire one year after date of approval unless construction
has commenced in accordance with the plan. However, if prior to the expiration of the
approval, the applicant makes a written request to the Public Works Director for an
extension of time to commence construction setting forth the reasons for the requested
extension, the planning department may grant one extension of not greater than on
year. Receipt of any request for extension shall be acknowledged by the Department of
Public Works within 15 days. The Department of Public Works shall make a decision on
the extension within 30 days of receipt. Any plan may be revised in the same manner as
originally approved.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 8
J. Conditions. A storm water management plan may be approved subject to compliance
with conditions reasonable and necessary to insure that the requirements of this
ordinance are met. Conditions may limit the size, kind or character of the proposed
development, require the construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage basins
and other facilities, require replacement of vegetation, establish required monitoring
procedures, stage the work over time, require alteration of the site design to insure
buffering and require the conveyance to the city or other public entity of necessary
lands or easements.
K. Performance Bond. A letter of credit or other form of security shall be requested to
cover the amount of the established cost of complying with the conditions as calculated
by the City Engineer. The bond must guarantee completion and compliance with
conditions within a specific time and may be extended in accordance with this section.
L. Fees. All applications for a storm water management plan approval must be
accompanied by a processing and approval fee as determined by resolution of the City
Council an escrow account may be required by the Zoning Administration to pay for
actual engineering costs incurred by the City Engineer.
M. Approval Standards.
1. No storm water management plan that fails to meet the standards in this section
may be approved.
2. Site Dewatering. Water pumped from the site including temporary sedimentation
basins, grit chambers,-sand filters, up-flow chambers, hydrocyclones, swirl
concentrators or other appropriate controls as appropriate. Water may not be
discharged in a manner that causes erosion or flooding of the site or receiving
channels of a wetland.
3. Waste and Material Disposal. All waste and unused building materials (including
garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic materials or hazardous
materials) shall be properly disposed of, as regulated by city, state and federal
regulations, off-site and not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving channel
or storm sewer system.
4. Tracking. Graveled roads, access drives and parking areas must be of sufficient
width and length to prevent sediment from being traced onto public or private
roadways. Any sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by
Street cleaning (not flushing) before the end of each workday, unless approved by
the city. Street cleaning must be completed by the applicant or approved designee.
5. Drain Inlet Protection. All storm drain inlets must be protected during construction
until control measures are in place with a straw bale, silt fence or equivalent barrier
meeting accepted design criteria, standards and specifications contained in the
MPCA publication “Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas”.
6. Site Erosion Control. The following criteria (“a” through “d”) apply only to
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 9
construction activities that result in runoff leaving the site.
a. Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through the site must be
diverted around disturbed areas, if practical. Otherwise, the channel must be
protected as follows:
Sheetflow runoff from adjacent areas greater than 10,000 square feet in area
shall be diverted around disturbed areas, unless shown to have resultant runoff
of less than 0.5 ft.3/sec. across the disturbed area for a one-year storm event.
Diverted runoff must be conveyed in a manner that will not erode the
conveyance and receiving channels.
b. All activities on the site must be conducted in a logical sequence to minimize the
area of bare soil at any one time.
c. Runoff from the entire disturbed area on the site must be controlled by meeting
either 1 and 2 or 1 and 3 of this section.
(1) All disturbed ground left inactive for fourteen or more days must be
stabilized by seeding or sodding or by mulching or covering or other
equivalent control measures.
(2) For sites with more than ten acres disturbed at one time, or if a channel
originates in the disturbed area, one or more temporary or permanent
sedimentation basins must be constructed. Each sedimentation basin must
have a surface area of at least one percent of the area draining to the basin
and at least three feet of depth and constructed in accordance with
accepted design specifications. Sediment must be removed to maintain a
depth of three feet. The basin discharge rate must also be sufficiently low as
to not cause erosion along the discharge channel or the receiving water.
(3) For sites with less than ten acres disturbed at one time, silt fences, straw
bales or equivalent control measures must be placed along all side-slope
and down-slope sides of the site. If a channel or area of concentrated runoff
passes through the site, silt fences must be placed along the channel edges
to reduce sediment reaching the channel. The use of silt fences, straw bales
or equivalent control measures must include a maintenance and inspection
schedule.
d. Any soil or dirt storage piles containing more than ten cubic yards of material
should not be located with a down-slope drainage length of less than 25 feet
from the toe of the storage pile to a roadway or drainage channel. If remaining
for more than seven days, it must be stabilized by mulching, vegetative cover,
tarps or other means. Erosion form piles that will be in existence for less than
seven days must be controlled by placing straw bales or silt barriers around the
storage pile. In-street utility repair or construction soil or dirt storage piles
located closer than 25 feet of a roadway or drainage channel must be covered
with tarps or suitable alternative control, if exposed for more than seven days
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 10
the storm drain inlets must be protected with straw bales or other appropriate
filtering barriers.
N. Storm Water Management Criteria for Permanent Facilities.
1. An applicant must install or construct, on or for the proposed land disturbing or
development activity, all storm water management facilities necessary to manage
increased runoff so that the two-year, ten-year and 100-year storm peak discharge
rates existing before the proposed development are not increased and accelerated
channel erosion will not occur as a result of the proposed land disturbing or
development activity. An applicant may also make an in kind or monetary
contribution to the development and maintenance of the community storm water
management facilities designed to serve multiple land disturbing and development
activities undertaken by one or more persons, including the applicant.
2. The applicant must give consideration to reducing the need for storm water
management facilities by incorporating the use of natural topography and land
cover such as wetlands, ponds, natural swamps and depressions as they exist before
development to the degree that they can accommodate the additional flow of water
without compromising the integrity or quality of the wetland or pond.
3. The following storm water management practices must be investigated in
developing a storm water management plan in the following descending order of
preference:
a. Infiltrations of run-off on-site, if suitable soil conditions are available for use.
b. Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swamps and natural depressions.
c. Storm water retention facilities.
4. A combination of successive practices may be used to achieve the applicable
minimum control requirements specified in Section 7.02.N.1. Justification shall be
provided by the applicant for the method selected.
O. Design Standards. Storm water detention facilities constructed in the city must be
designed according to the National urban Runoff Program (NURP), wet basin design
criteria and the urban best management practices as reflected in the MPC publication,
“Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas”, and must contain, at a minimum, the
following design factors.
1. A permanent pond surface area equal to two percent of the impervious area
draining to the pond or one percent of the entire area draining to the pond,
whichever amount is greater.
2. An average permanent pool depth of four to ten feet. (COMMENTARY: An
alternative to subsections 1 and 2 that the volume of permanent pool be equal to or
greater than the runoff from a 1.0 inch rainfall, per event (first flush) for the fully
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 11
developed site.)
3. A permanent pool length-to-width ratio of 3:1 or greater.
4. A minimum protective shelf extending ten feet into the permanent pool with a slope
of 10:1 beyond which slopes should not exceed 3:1.
5. A protective buffer strip of vegetation surrounding the permanent pool at a
minimum width of one rod (16.5 feet).
6. All storm water detention facilities must have a device to keep oil, grease and other
floatable material from moving downstream as a result of normal operations.
7. Storm water detention facilities for the new development must be sufficient to limit
peak flows in each subwatershed to those that existed before the development for
the 10-year storm event. Also, calculations and hydrologic models used in
determining peak flows must be submitted along with the storm water
management plan.
8. All storm water detention facilities must have a forebay to remove coarse-grained
particles prior to discharge into a watercourse or storage basin.
P. Wetlands. As indicated in section 7.2
Q. Steep Slopes. No land disturbing or development activities are allowed on slopes of 18
percent or more.
R. Catch Basins. All newly installed and rehabilitated catch basins must be provided with a
sump area for the collection of coarse-grained material. The basins must be cleaned
when they are half filled with material.
S. Drain Leaders. All newly constructed and reconstructed buildings must route drain
leaders to storm sewer facilities or pervious areas wherein the runoff can be allowed to
infiltrate. The flow ration of water from the leaders must be controlled so no erosion
occurs in the pervious areas.
T. Inspections and Maintenance. All storm water management facilities must be designed
to minimize the need of maintenance, to provide access for maintenance purposes and
to be structurally sound. All storm water management facilities must have a plan of
operation and maintenance that assures continued effective removal of pollutants
carried in storm water runoff. The director of public works, or designated
representative, must inspect all storm water management facilities during construction,
during the first year of operation and at least once every five years thereafter. The
inspection records will be kept on file at the public works department for a period of six
years. It is the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any easements or property
interests to allow needed access to the storm water management facilities for
inspection and maintenance purposes.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 12
U. Models/Methodologies/Computations. Hydrologic models and design methodologies
used for the determination of runoff and analysis of storm water management
structures must be approved by the director of public works. Plans, specifications and
computations for storm water management facilities submitted for review must be
sealed and signed by a registered professional engineer. All computations must appear
on the plans submitted for review, unless otherwise approved the director of Public
Works.
V. Watershed Management Plans/Groundwater Management Plans. Storm water
management plans must be consistent with adopted watershed management plans and
groundwater management plans prepared in accordance with Minnesota Statutes
Section 103B.23 1 and 103B.255 respectively and as approved by the Minnesota Board
of Water and Soil Resources.
W. Easements. It is the responsibility of the applicant to obtain from adjacent property
owners any necessary easements or other property interests concerning flowage of
water.
X. Other Controls. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this ordinance
and other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, the more restrictive standard prevails.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 13
7.4 LAND ALTERATION AND GRADING
A. Permit Required. No person, firm or corporation may undertake, authorize or permit
any of the following actions without first having obtained a grading permit from the city.
1. Any excavating, grading, filling or other change in the earth’s topography resulting in
the movement of more than 50 cubic yards per acre of material, except in any
designated Wetlands, Floodplain or Shoreland District.
2. Any excavating, grading or filling or change in the earth’s topography in any
designated Wetlands, Floodplain or Shoreland District.
3. Any changing of a natural drainage way or drainage pattern that results in any
change in the flow of surface water upon adjacent property.
B. Exception. Notwithstanding the above, no grading permit is required for the following
activities, except as required by Minnesota State Building Code.
1. Earthwork undertaken in accordance with grading plans approved in conjunction
with a site and building plan review or plat approval, or
2. Earthwork that will result in moving less than 50 cubic yards of material provided
the work does not take place in any designated Wetlands, Floodplain or Shoreland
District and does not affect local drainage patterns.
3. Agriculture Uses as defined in Section 9.1 of this Title, unless the work is to change
or heighten the topography of the land being used for agriculture.
C. Administrative Review of Grading Permits. A permit is required from the City
Administrator or City Engineer or designee for any of the following:
1. Placement of or grading of more than ten cubic yards of material on steep slopes
adjacent to lakes and wetlands or with the shore or bluff impact zones.
2. Placement of or grading of more than 50 cubic yards, of material per acre.
3. Where filling or grading occurs within ten feet of a property line or when such
activity alters the drainage patterns of adjacent properties.
D. City Council Review. All grading permits that would result in changing the use of the
property must be reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the City
Council. If possible, grading permit review will be combined with other planning permit
reviews.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 14
E. Application for a Grading Permit.
1. Applications for a grading permit for Administrative review shall include a permit as
provided by the city and accompanied with the following:
a. Existing land elevations
b. Proposed site elevations and drainage patterns.
c. Erosion control
d. Security bond to insure compliance with the approved permit and adequate
site restoration.
e. As deemed necessary by the City Administrator or City Engineer
Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Engineer must review the
application within ten (10) working days and must notify the applicant of the
decision in writing. The City Engineer may impose such modifications and conditions
as may be necessary to protect the public interest. Bonding may be required in an
amount sufficient to complete site restoration should the applicant default.
2. Applications for a grading permit that requires review by the Planning Commission
and approved by the City Council must be made to the City Engineer on forms
provided by the city and must be accompanied by the following information:
a. Evidence of ownership or written permission by land owner.
b. Existing and proposed final grades with two foot contour intervals.
c. A survey showing the location and elevation of all roads, utilities and structures
that may be impacted by the proposal.
d. If trees are impacted, a tree survey showing all significant trees having a caliper
of six (6) inches or greater at breast height and a tree preservation plan.
e. A landscaping and/or site restoration plan.
f. A drainage plan with an engineering design for necessary storm water retention
work.
g. An erosion control plan indicating the type and location of erosion measures.
h. A traffic analysis showing how the materials will be removed from or delivered
to the site.
i. Two copies of all available soil borings and with boring location maps and any
other available soil information.
j. Any other information that may be required by the City Administrator or City
Engineer or designee.
k. A completion schedule of building construction phasing.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 15
F. Grading Permit Standards.
1. No grading permit may be issued for site grading without approved plans for site
development and adequate provision for site protection from wind or water
erosion.
2. Grading permits may be issued when in compliance with the following standards:
a. The plans must maximize the preservation of trees on the property and utilize
the trees to the maximum extent possible to screen the grading from adjacent
property.
b. The plan must utilize landscaping to restore site aesthetics, minimize the visual
impact of the work, screen the grading from adjacent property and enhance the
property’s development potential. All areas altered because of grading activity
must at a minimum, be restored with seed and diced mulch or sod within two
weeks after the completion of the activity. The city may approve an extension of
this deadline of appropriate, but in no case may site restoration be delayed
beyond October 1.
c. The plan must not result in sites that are unsatisfactory for development of
permitted uses. The development potential of a site may be adversely impacted
by unsuitable finish grades, poor soil stability, unsatisfactory drainage or
exposure to deleterious influences.
d. The plan must provide for the removal of any significant amounts of organic
material or construction debris.
e. In instances where an existing buffer will be impacted by grading or filling
operations, site restoration must be completed in a manner that resembles the
original vegetative and topography state of the property.
f. The plan must protect designated wetlands, floodplains, shoreland, public
waters and other natural features:
g. The plan must provide for adequate drainage, storm water retention and
erosion control measures.
h. The plan must provide for traffic movements to and from the site without
having significant adverse effects on roads, intersections or development in the
area. Streets surrounding the site must be swept to remove any debris that may
accumulate due to these activities.
i. The plan must include a schedule of activities, which limits the duration of
disruptions and impacts.
j. The plan must also be approved, where required, by appropriate watershed
districts, the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Minnesota Department
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 16
of Natural Resources and any other government agency that has jurisdiction.
k. The plan shall be accompanied by a letter of credit or other satisfactory security
to insure compliance with the approved permit and adequate site restoration.
The amount of the bond will be based upon the size of the site, sensitivity of its
surroundings, extent of grading, amount of material moved, necessary site
restoration and potential impacts upon public facilities, including damage to
public roadways and property.
l. The plan must comply with the Minnesota State Building Code and all other
applicable statutes or ordinances.
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: March 2001, April 2008, January 2012)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 17
7.5 MINERAL EXTRACTION AND MANUFACTURING
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare through the following:
1. Existing Activities. Identify areas in the community where existing mineral
extraction has been conducted.
2. Appropriateness. Identify areas in the community where mineral extraction is most
appropriate and minimizes conflicts with other land uses.
3. Standards. Establish standards for existing and new mineral extraction which
prevent or minimize environmental and aesthetic impacts on extracted properties,
adjacent properties and the community as a whole.
4. Restoration. Establish standards and financial guarantees that restore land used for
existing and new mineral extraction to a condition compatible with adjacent
properties and suitable for future uses which are compatible with the Chisago City
Comprehensive Plan.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
meaning associated with them:
1. Asphalt Plant: Machinery used for blending and making aggregate materials with oil
based materials to create hot or cold asphalt products.
2. Berm: A mound of earth designed to provide screening of areas and to reduce
noise.
3. Bond: Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, or
instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the City of Chisago City.
All bonds shall be approved by the City of Chisago City wherever a bond is required
by these regulations.
4. Concrete Ready-Mix Plant: Machinery used to mix materials (usually cement, sand,
or aggregate) and water to create concrete for resale.
5. Conditional use Permit: See Section 3.1.
6. Dust: Airborne mineral particulate matter.
7. Engine Retard Breaking: Dynamic Brake, Jake Brake, Jacobs Brake, C Brake, Paccar
Brake, transmission brake or other similar engine retarding brake system which
alters the normal compression of the engine and subsequently releases that
compression.
8. Excavation: The movement or removal of soil and minerals.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 18
9. Holiday: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.
10. Interim Use Permit: A permit for temporary use of a property until a particular date,
until the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer
permit it.
11. Manufacturing: Any activity that includes Portable or Permanent or Temporary
Asphalt Plants, Concrete Ready Mix Plants, Processing and Recycling Plants.
12. Mineral: Sand, gravel, rock, clay and similar higher density non-metallic natural
minerals.
13. Mineral Extraction: The removal of sand, gravel, rock clay and other minerals from
the ground.
14. Mineral Extraction Facility: Any area that is being used for removal, stockpiling and
storage, of sand, gravel, topsoil, clay, and other minerals.
15. Operator: Any person or persons, partnership, corporations or other entities or
combination or assignees thereof, including public or governmental agencies,
engaging in mineral extraction and any processing, recycling, and manufacturing
activities derivatives.
16. Owner: Any person or persons, partnership, corporation or other entities owning
fee title to the Subject Property.
17. Permanent Asphalt Plant or Permanent Ready Mix Concrete Plant: Permanent
Plants that are constructed on footings or concrete foundations and are not
portable from one site to another.
18. Plant Operating Days: Days in which a Portable Asphalt Plant or Concrete Ready Mix
Plant is on and operating.
19. Portable Asphalt Plant or Portable Concrete Ready Mix Plant: Portable Plants which
can be assembled and disassembled on-site which are not constructed on footings
or concrete foundations.
20. Processing Plant: , Machinery used to crush, wash, compounding, mixing, or treat
dirt, sand, gravel, rocks, or similar mineral products into consumable products such
as construction grade sand, gravel, and other similar products. This does not
include Asphalt Plants and Concrete Ready Mix Plants.
21. Recycling Plant: Machinery used to crush, wash compounding, mixing, or treat used
aggregate, concrete, asphalt and other similar products into other consumable
products. This does not include Asphalt Plants or Concrete Ready Mix Plants.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 19
22. Rehabilitation: To renew land to self-sustaining long-term use which is compatible
with contiguous land uses, present and future, in accordance with the standards set
forth in this Ordinance.
23. Soil: A natural three dimensional body of the earth’s surface.
24. Stockpiling: Move or handle a reserve supply of goods or raw material accumulated
for future use.
25. Subject Property: The real property on which Mineral Extraction Facilities,
Processing Plant, Asphalt Plant and/or Ready Mix Plant is sought to be permitted.
26. Topsoil: the upper portion of the Soils present that is the most favorable material
for plant growth.
C. Permit Required.
1. Mineral Extraction.
a. Permit Required. Irrespective of the zoning classification of a Subject property a
permit, as provided in this Subsection C is required for Mineral Extraction
and/or Manufacturing, unless specifically accepted from such permit.
b. An Interim Use Permit (I.U.P.) is required for any new Mineral Extraction Facility,
starting after the date of the adoption of this Ordinance, on forty (40)
continuous acres or more and shall follow the procedure set forth in Chapter
3.2. and, to the extent more restrictive, this Section 7.5.
c. Permanent Mineral Extraction Facilities are not allowed on less than forty (40)
contiguous acres.
d. Any existing Mineral Extraction Facility that has been in operation before the
adoption of this Ordinance and has not been abandoned is required to obtain a
Conditional Use Permit (C.U.P) as regulated in Chapter 3.1. and, to the extent
more restrictive, this Section 7.5.
2. Manufacturing.
a. An Interim Use Permit is required for any Processing Plant, Recycling Plant, or
Temporary Processing Plant, Recycling Plant, Asphalt Plant or Concrete Plant,
unless specified in this section.
b. A Conditional Use Permit may be granted for any existing Processing or
Recycling Plant as described in section 7.5. that is part of an existing Mineral
Extraction Facility.
3. Processing or Recycling Plant. Processing and Recycling Plant shall only be allowed
within and as part of a Mineral Extraction Facility.
a. A separate Interim Use Permit shall be required for any new Mineral Extraction
Facility that wishes to have a Processing or Recycling Plant.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 20
b. A Conditional Use Permit (C.U.P) may be considered for any existing Processing
or Recycling Plant that is part of an existing Mineral Extraction Facility.
c. Without limiting Subsection 7.5(E) below, any Processing or Recycling Plant
must meet the following performance standards:
(1) The application must include the nature of the processing and equipment,
location of the plant, source of water, disposal of water, and reuse of
water.
(2) Crushing equipment must be placed in the bottom of the pit area if
practical or in such a manner as to have the least environmental and
aesthetic impact.
(3) If products are being recycled the stockpiles of unprocessed recycled
materials shall be screened from public view from the nearest public right
of way.
4. Portable Asphalt Plants and Ready Mix Plants. Portable Asphalt and Concrete Ready
Mix Plants shall only be allowed within a Mineral Extraction Facility pursuant to the
permit requirements set forth in Section C above. Permanent Asphalt and Concrete
Ready Mix Plants are prohibited.
a. Without limiting Subsection 7.5(E) below, an Interim Use Permit for Portable
Asphalt Plants and Concrete Ready Mix Plants may be allowed if the following
conditions are met:
(1) Portable Asphalt Plants and Concrete Ready Mix Plants must not operate
on the property for more than one-hundred and fifty (150) plant operating
days per calendar year. The operator must provide written documentation
generated from the equipment, as requested by the City.
(2) Portable Asphalt Plants and Concrete Ready Mix Plants must not be on the
property for more than 24 consecutive months unless allowed by permit.
(3) An Interim Use Permit may be applied to extend an existing Portable
Asphalt Plant or Concrete Read Mix Plant, up to an additional 24 months,
and must be completed prior to the expiration of the previous permit.
(4) Operations will be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday. Operations are prohibited entirely on legal holidays,
including weekday holidays, on weekends and during the period from 7:01
p.m. to 6:59 a.m. on weekdays.
(5) All setbacks as set forth in 7.5(E.2) of the Chapter must be met.
(6) All Federal, State and City air, water, noise and odor quality standards
must be met. An air quality permit must be obtained from the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.
(7) Equipment must be screened and located in such a manner as to have the
least environmental and aesthetic impact.
(8) If the Portable Asphalt Plant was established on the site on the effective
date of this ordinance, it may not expand except through a new Interim
Use Permit.
(9) Any emission stack shall be at least thirty (30) feet higher than the highest
land elevation within one-thousand (1,000) feet of facility.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 21
D. Exceptions. An Interim Use Permit shall not be required for any of the following:
1. Private Excavation for Building. Excavation for a foundation, cellar or basement of a
building if a building permit has been issued.
2. Public Road Excavation. Excavation by state, county, city, or township authorities in
connection with construction or maintenance of roads, highways, or utilities,
conducted solely within permanent easement areas or rights-of-way.
3. Hook-Ups. Curb cuts, utility hook-ups or street openings for which another permit
has been issued by the City.
4. De Minimas Excavation. Excavation less than five hundred (500) cubic yards in area
or one foot in depth.
5. Agricultural. Excavation or grading for agricultural purposes.
6. Other. Other activities in which a permit has been issued, site grading is allowed
and mineral extraction is clearly an incidental activity.
E. Performance Standards. The following performance standards apply to all Mineral
Extraction and Manufacturing Facilities in the City:
1. Zoning District. Mineral Extraction Facilities are permitted only in the Agricultural
(AG), Planned Industrial (PI), Light Industrial (LI) and Office Park Industrial (OPI)
Districts as identified on the official Chisago City Zoning Map.
Portable Asphalt Plants and Ready Mix Plants are permitted only in the Planned
Industrial (PI), Light Industrial (LI) and Office Park Industrial (OPI) Districts.
.
2. Minimum Lot Size. Any new Mineral Extraction or Manufacturing Facility must be
conducted on Subject Property of forty (40) continuous acres or more owned by the
same Owner.
3. Setbacks. No mining, stockpiling or land disturbance with the exception of
screening (e.g. berms, planting of trees and other vegetation) and access roads, shall
take place within:
a. Fifty (50) feet of any property lines road right-of-way or easement which
prohibit activity.
b. Two-hundred (200) feet of any occupied structures existing at the time of
original permitting not owned by the Operator or Owner.
c. One hundred (100) feet of any property subdivided into residential lots of five
(5) acres or less whether or not owned by the Owner or Operator.
d. Screeners, crushers, other processing equipment and manufacturing equipment
may not be located closer than seven hundred fifty (750) feet without berming
or five hundred (500) feet with berming from any residential dwelling. Grading
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 22
plans affecting pipelines or power line corridors will be evaluated on a case by
case basis.
4. Setback Exception. An exception of the property line setback requirement may be
granted on a case-by-case basis where the Subject Properties continuing two
Mineral Extraction Facilities share a common lot line or when there is adequate
screening. The setbacks for all other equipment and activities shall be based upon
performance standards for noise, dust control, visual screening and the like.
5. Hours of Operation.
a. Those portions of the Mineral Extraction Facility and Manufacturing consisting
of excavating shall be conducted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless specifically authorized by the City. All
Mineral Extraction and Manufacturing shall not take place on holidays. In cases
of public emergencies, hours of operation may be extended by the City
Administrator or designee.
b. In cases of time constraints on completion of road construction before the end
of the construction season caused by adverse weather conditions and in cases
of major road or highway construction projects which cause substantial
inconvenience to the traveling public, hours of operation can be extended by
the City Council. Authorization will be limited to those functions or government
contracts that cannot occur during normal hours of operation. Supporting
documentation will be required. Notification and review for extended hours
shall be made at a regular City Council meeting prior to the day(s) on which
extended hours are requested.
c. Hour of operation for manufacturing facilities are set forth in subsection
7.5(C)(4)(a)(4).
6. Fencing. Where deemed necessary by the City, a fence maybe required prior to the
commencement or as a condition to the continuous operation of any Mineral
Extraction, Manufacturing, operation enclosing the area authorized by the
applicable Interim Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit. . If required, fencing must
have a minimum of two (2) single strand wires with posts a maximum of twelve (12)
feet apart and at least four (4) feet in height.
7. Screening. Where deemed necessary by the City, Mineral Extraction Facilities and
Manufacturing operations shall be screened or located in such a manner as to
minimize noise, dust, odors, erosion and visual impacts on surrounding properties.
If required, the screening shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height and shall
provide a contiguous screening of the area within which such operations are
conducted. If required, screening shall be installed prior to commencement of
operations or pursuant to other deadlines established by the City.
8. Access. All access roads will be of a sufficient length from a public road so that any
turns onto the public road can be completed with a margin of safety. All access
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 23
roads shall be maintained so as to minimize noise and dust from vehicles using such
access road.
9. Trucking Operations. All trucks traveling to or from the Mineral Extraction Facility or
Manufacturing operation shall utilize a 9-ton or greater blacktop, concrete, or gravel
road. Operators may be granted a special permit to utilize roadways temporarily
posted under 9-tons, provided adequate surety is guaranteed to cover the costs of
repairing any damage to roadways. All truck loads leaving any pit regulated by this
Chapter are loaded so as to comply with state law and shall be clean of any loose
material from the truck including the tires before leaving the operation. It shall be
unlawful for the operator of any truck to intentionally use an engine retard braking
on any highway, street, parking lot or alley within the City.
10. Dust Control. The Subject Property Owner or Operator must construct, maintain
and operate all equipment in such a manner as to minimize on-site and off-site dust
conditions. All operations shall meet the standards of the Federal and State
regulations.
11. Lighting. Lights used for safety and security purposes maybe installed where
necessary provided the light source is directed down away from abutting property
and public right-of-way.
12. Noise. No person may operate or cause or permit to be operated any source of
noise in such a manner as to create a noise level exceeding the limit set in Table I for
the receiving land use category specified when measured at or within the property
line of receiving land use
Table I. Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use Districts.
Day
(8:00 a.m.--10:00 p.m.)
Night
(10:00 p.m.--8:00 a.m.)
Land Use
Districts
L10
Standard
L50
Standard
L10
Standard
L50 Standard
Residential
65 dBA 60 dBA 55 dBA 50 dBA
Commercial
70 dBA 65 dBA 70 dBA 65 dBA
Industrial 80 dBA 75 dBA 80 dBA 75 dBA
For noise relative to period less than L-10 Standard, the following conditions apply:
No indoor sound level shall be raised more than six dbc over existing background,
and no outdoor sound level shall be raised more than ten dbc over existing
background noise level. The limits of the most restrictive district shall apply at the
boundaries between the different land use categories. The determination of land
use shall be by its zoned designation.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 24
13. Vibration. Operators shall use all practical means to eliminate adverse impacts on
adjacent properties from vibration of equipment.
14. Air Quality. All activities on the Subject Property will be conducted in a manner
consistent with the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s operating permits.
15. Water Quality Monitoring. Water quality monitoring will be required when Mineral
Extraction or Manufacturing Operations disturbs or utilizes the water table or
operates a wash plant. Water levels shall be recorded and samples collected from
monitoring wells or water collected or discharged from the Mineral Extraction or
Manufacturing area. Water samples shall be analyzed until one year after
reclamation is completed. Samples shall be taken and testing results submitted prior
to commencement of operation. More frequent monitoring and sampling may be
required by the City and done by an independent testing laboratory or an agency
chosen by the City. Wells shall be sealed one year after reclamation efforts are
complete if the Subject Property is determined to be uncontaminated. Water
samples shall be analyzed for diesel range organics, the level of petroleum products
and hydrocarbons or as requested by the City. All required monitoring shall be
completed at the cost of the applicant for the required permit.
16. Storage. No vehicles and equipment of materials not associated with the Mineral
Extraction Facility or Manufacturing Operation not in operable condition may be
kept or stored in public view on the Subject Property.
17. Explosives. The use of explosives is strictly prohibited.
18. General Compliance. Without limiting the requirements of this Section 7.5, all the
Mineral Extraction and Manufacturing Operations shall conform to all federal, state
and local laws.
19. Bond. Prior to the commencement of a new Mineral Extraction or Manufacturing
Operations, and as a condition to any Interim Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit
required hereunder, a Bond or other financial guarantee, in an amount determined
by the City, must be posted by the Operator or the Owner (or both) to assure
compliance with this Section 7.5 and the restoration of the site Subject Property.
20. Rehabilitation Plan. A Rehabilitation Plan for the Subject Property as outlined in
Section 7.5(J) of this chapter shall be required as a condition to the issuance of any
Conditional Use Permit or Interim Use Permit.
21. Additional Regulations and Provisions. The City may review Interim Use Permits
annually. When deemed necessary, the City Council may impose additional
regulations and requirements to the Interim Use Permit to protect the public health
and safety. The city may revoke any Conditional Section 3.6 of the City’s zoning
ordinance.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 25
F. Temporary Processing or Recycling Plant in Conjunction with a Specific Project. A
Temporary Processing Plant located within the Property, right-of-way or adjacent to the
specific project, will be allowed without an Interim Use Permit subject to the following
conditions:
1. Compliance With Regulations. All Federal, State, and City air, water and noise
quality standards must be met.
2. City Authorization. The City Council shall review and authorize a Temporary
Processing or Recycling Plant in Conjunction with a Specific Project.
3. Minimal Effect. The processing equipment must be located so as to minimize its
effect on surrounding property owners.
4. Limited Duration. The Processing Plant may only be on the property for the
duration of the project.
5. Entrance. If an entrance is not available from the Processing Plant to a road, a rock
entrance must be constructed and maintained with appropriate dust control as
required in this chapter.
6. Removal of Material. No materials, outside of the designated right-of-way, may be
excavated or removed from the site without an Interim Use Permit.
7. Restoration. The site shall be restored one (1) year after the road project has been
complete.
8. Performance Standard. The performance standards of 7.5(E) above are met to the
satisfaction of the City Administrator or designee.
G. A Portable Asphalt Plant in Conjunction with a Specific Road Project. Portable Asphalt
Plants located within the project boundary of a specific road project will be allowed
without an Interim Use Permit subject to the following conditions:
1. Compliance with Regulations. All applicable Federal, State and City regulations
regarding air, water and noise quality standards must be met. An air quality permit
must be obtained from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
2. City Authorization. The City Council shall review and authorize a Temporary
Processing or Recycling Plant in Conjunction with a Specific Project.
3. Minimal Impact. The Portable Asphalt Plant must be located in such a manner so as
to have the least environmental and aesthetic impact.
4. Minimal Effect. Site selection shall be made as to minimize the effect on the public
health, safety, and welfare.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 26
5. Limited Duration. The Portable Asphalt Plant shall be on the property for no longer
than the duration of the project.
6. Performance Standards. A bond or other financial guarantee, in an amount
determined by the City, must be posted to assure restoration of the site.
H. Application. Any application for an Interim Use Permit to operate a Mineral Extraction
Facility and Manufacturing shall be submitted to the City on a form supplied by the City.
Information may include the following or as required by the City:
1. Narrative. A narrative outlining the type of material to be excavated, mode of
operation, estimated quantity of materials to be extracted, and other pertinent
information to explain the request in detail.
2. Supporting Documentation. Every application shall include submission of
supporting documentation which shall include, but not limited to the following:
a. A description of the soil, vegetation, mineral content and topography of the
subject property. A minimum of three (3) soil boring logs representative of the
site and a description of the subsurface materials on the subject property must
be submitted.
b. A general description of surface waters, existing drainage patterns and
groundwater conditions within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the subject property.
c. A general description of the depth, quantity, quality and intended uses of the
mineral deposits on the subject property.
d. An EAW and/or EIS if required by the Environmental Quality Board (EQB).
e. Copies of county, state and federal application documents and operating
permits.
f. A description of the site hydrology and drainage characteristics during
extraction. Identify any locations where drainage of any disturbed areas will not
be controlled on the subject property and plans to control erosion,
sedimentation and water quality of the runoff.
g. A description of the plan to mitigate potential impacts resulting from mineral
extraction.
h. A description of site screening, landscaping and security fencing.
i. If applicable, a plan for groundwater quality protection. A minimum of three (3)
cross-sections showing the extent of overburden, extent of sand and gravel
deposits, the water table, and any evidence of the water table in the past. The
Planning Commission reserves the right to require additional borings if
necessary.
3. Rehabilitation Plan. A Subject Property Rehabilitation Plan for permits on Mineral
Extraction Facilities and Manufacturing operations which shall include the grading
plans, topsoil replacement, seeding, mulching, erosion control and sedimentation
control specifications for each phase and the final site restoration. The following
minimum standards and conditions apply:
a. Final grades may not exceed their original grade.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 27
b. A minimum of four (4) inches of topsoil shall be placed.
c. Seeding and mulching shall be consistent with Minnesota Department of
Transportation specifications for rights-of-way. Exceptions include areas
returned to agricultural production.
d. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be consistent with
MPCA’s “Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas.”
e. Rehabilitation of the Subject Property shall be done within twelve (12) months
after expiration or termination of the permit or such other period time agreed
to by the City.
4. Maps. The following maps which shall include the entire Subject Property and all
property within five hundred (500) feet of the Subject Property. Maps shall include
title, name, phone and address of operator and land owner. All maps shall be
drawn at a scale of one (1) inch to one-hundred (100) feet unless otherwise stated
below or as accepted by the City:
a. Map A: Aerial Photo. Map A and B maybe combined if contents are legible.
b. Map B: Existing Conditions to include:
(1) Survey indicating property boundaries.
(2) Legal description of the property.
(3) Names and current land use of the adjacent landowners
including all those within a one-quarter (1/4) mile radius of the
boundary line of the subject property.
(4) Contour lines at ten (10) foot intervals.
(5) Existing vegetation.
(6) Existing drainage and permanent water areas.
(7) Existing structures.
(8) Existing wells and private sewer systems of record.
(9) Existing pipelines, power lines and other utilities.
(10) Easements and Right-of-ways.
c. Map C: Proposed operations to include:
(1) Property boundaries.
(2) Structures to be erected.
(3) Location of sites to be mined showing depth of excavation.
(4) Location of tailings deposits showing maximum height
deposits.
(5) Topographic data at contours at two (2) foot intervals.
(6) Location of processing areas and machinery to be used in the
mining operation.
(7) Location of storage of mined materials, showing height of
storage deposits.
(8) Location of vehicle parking.
(9) Erosion and sediment control structures.
(10) Haul routes.
(11) Water courses, wetlands, wooded areas, and rock outcrops.
(12) Power transmission poles and lines
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 7.0 – Environmental Protection Page 28
(13) Other significant features as deemed necessary by the City.
d. Map D: Rehabilitation Plan to include:
(1) Property boundaries.
(2) Final grade of proposed site showing elevations and contour
lines at two (2) foot intervals.
(3) Location and species of vegetation to be replanted.
(4) Location and nature of any structure to be erected in relation to
the end use plan.
(5) Turf Rehabilitation Plan.
I. Existing Uses. All existing Mineral Extraction Facilities and Manufacturing Operations
for which permits must be obtained under Section 7.5 in order for them to be in
compliance with Section 7.5 may continue to operate as long as the operator thereof
has filed any application as needed with the City by August 31, 2010.
J. Effective Date. This Section 7.5 shall be effective on and after its publication as required
by law.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 8.0 – Non-conforming Structures & Uses Page 1
8.0 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES
8.1 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to provide for the regulation of nonconforming
buildings, structures and uses and to specify those requirements,
circumstances and conditions under which non-conforming buildings, structures,
and uses will be operated and maintained. The Zoning Ordinance establishes
separate districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the location of uses,
which are permitted in that district. It is necessary and consistent with the
establishment of these districts that nonconforming buildings, structures and
uses not be permitted to continue without restriction. Furthermore, it is the intent
of this section that all non-conforming uses shall be eventually brought into
conformity.
B. Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this ordinance
shall not be enlarged, expanded or intensified, except in conformity with the
provisions of this zoning ordinance. Legal nonconforming uses and structures
shall be allowed to continue at the size and in the manner of operation existing
upon such date except as hereinafter specified.
C. Expansion or Alteration of Nonconforming Uses or Structures. The City Council
may permit by variance request the expansion of a legal nonconforming structure
or use if in no case would a structure or use prohibited in the zoning district be
extended beyond the present lot and upon making the following findings:
1. The expansion will be compatible with the adjacent property and the other
properties in the vicinity.
2. The expansion will not result in significant increases in adverse off site
impacts such as noise, dust, odors and parking congestion.
3. The expansion, because of improvements to the property, will improve
the appearance or stability of the vicinity.
D. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the repair of a structure to a safe condition
when said structure is declared unsafe by the building official providing the
necessary repairs shall not constitute more than fifty percent (50%) of
replacement value of such structure.
E. No non-conforming building, structure or use shall be moved to another lot or to
any other part of the parcel of land upon which the same was constructed or was
conducted at the time of this ordinance adoption unless such movement shall
bring the non-conformance into compliance with the requirements of this
Ordinance.
F. When any lawful non-conforming use of any structure or land in any district has
been changed to a conforming use it shall not there-after be changed to any nonconforming
use.
G. A lawful non-conforming use of a structure or parcel of land may be changed to
lessen the non-conformity of use. Once a non-conforming structure or parcel of
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 8.0 – Non-conforming Structures & Uses Page 2
land has been changed, it shall not there-after be so altered to increase the nonconformity.
H. Any building which is damaged to an extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of its
value may be restored to its former extent within twelve (12) months. Estimate of
the extent of damage or destruction shall be made by the Zoning Administrator,
Building Official and County Assessor.
I. If at any time a non-conforming building, structure or use is destroyed by fire or
other peril to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its estimated fair
market value, as indicated in the records of the County assessor at the time of
the damage, the building and the land on which such building was located or
maintained shall, from and after the date of said destruction, be subject to all the
regulations specified by these zoning regulations for the district in which such
land and buildings are located, unless a building permit is applied for within 180
days of when the damage occurred. The City may impose reasonable conditions
upon a zoning or building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on
adjacent properties or water body.
J. When a nonconforming structure in the shoreland district, with less than 50
percent of the required setback from the water, is destroyed by fire or other peril
to greater than 50 percent of its estimated market value, as indicated in the
records of the county assessor at the time of damage, the structure setback may
be increased if practicable and reasonable conditions are placed upon a zoning
or building permit to mitigate created impacts on the adjacent property or water
body.
K. Whenever a lawful non-conforming use of a structure or land is discontinued for a
period of twelve (12) months, following written notice from the Zoning
Administrator of the City, any future use of said structure or land shall be made to
conform with the provisions of this Ordnance.
L. Normal maintenance of a building or other lawful non-conforming use is
permitted, including necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations,
which do not physically extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
M. Alterations may be made to a building or other lawful non-conforming residential
units without a variance when they will improve the livability thereof, provided any
addition or alteration made meets the current setback requirements. The
building must be completely on subject property and may not extend over a
property line.
N. Any proposed structure which will, under this Title, become nonconforming but
for which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date of
this Title may be completed in accordance with the approved plans; provided
construction is started within sixty (60) days of this Title. Such structure and use
shall thereafter be a legally nonconforming structure and use.
O. All non-conforming water supply, sewage disposal, and waste treatment facilities
and systems located within the City shall be brought into conformance with the
provisions of this Title, or as otherwise provided by State Law, within one year
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 8.0 – Non-conforming Structures & Uses Page 3
after the adoption of this Title.
P. Any lot that was recorded as a buildable lot as of January 1, 2000, is at least 50
feet in width, and 100 feet in length, may improve or otherwise modify the
structure/s without a variance on that lot provided the following conditions are
met:
1. All setbacks for new construction or modifications must meet side, front, rear,
lake, wetland, septic system and other setbacks from adjacent properties
and/or right of ways are met.
2. All other conditions of the zoning district are met.
3. Owner does not own adjacent property with which they could meet current lot
size standards.
4. Owner complies with any grading and/or drainage requirements set forth by
staff as necessary due to the close proximity of adjacent lots.
5. Impervious surface requirements are met based on the zoning district or 25%
in the Shoreland district.
6. All lake property’s building structures, additions, decks, etc. must not impair
the adjacent property’s line of sight as determined at the time of application.
Q. A non-conforming single lot of record may be allowed as a building site without a
variance from lot size requirements provided:
1. All structure and septic system setback distance requirements can be met.
2. A sewage treatment system consistent with the Minnesota Rules, chapter
7080 can be installed or the lot is connected to a public sewer.
3. Impervious surface requirements are met based on zoning district or 25% in
the Shoreland district.
R. Any lot that was recorded as a buildable lot and in a group of two or more
contiguous lots of record under a common ownership, an individual lot must be
considered as a separate parcel of land for the purpose of sale or development, if
it meets the following requirements:
1. The lot must be at least 66 percent of the dimensional standard for lot width
and lot size.
2. The lot must be connected to city sewer, if available, or must be suitable for
the installation of a sewage treatment system consistent with Minnesota
Rules, chapter 7080, and local controls.
3. Impervious surface must be met within the requirements of the zoning district.
4. Development of the lot must be consistent with an adopted comprehensive
plan.
S. A lot subject to letter Q not meeting the requirements must be combined with the
one or more contiguous lots so they equal one or more conforming lots as much
as possible.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 8.0 – Non-conforming Structures & Uses Page 4
T. In evaluating all variances, zoning and building permit applications, or conditional
use requests, the zoning authority shall require the property owner to address,
when appropriate, storm water runoff management, reducing impervious
surfaces, increasing setback, restoration of wetlands, vegetative buffers, sewage
treatment and water supply capabilities, and other conservation-designed
actions.
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: October 2004, September 2009, August 2010, June
2013)
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 1
9.0 DEFINITIONS
9.1 DEFINITIONS
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this Ordinance, shall be interpreted
as herein defined. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give the same meaning as they have in common
usage to give this ordinance the most reasonable application. For purposes of this
ordinance must and shall are mandatory and not permissive.
1. Accessory Building or Structure. A subordinate structure that is located on the same
lot on which the principal building is situated and is reasonably necessary and
incidental to the conduct of the primary or principal use of such building. A building is
considered an accessory structure if the footprint exceeds 25 square feet and/or 6 feet
in height. An attached or detached garage is considered an accessory structure.
2. Accessory Use. A subordinate use which is located on the small lot on which the
principal use is situated and is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of
the primary or principal use.
3. Agriculture Uses. Those uses commonly associated with the growing of produce on
farms. These include field crop farming, pasture for hay, fruit growing, tree, plant,
shrub, or flower nursery without buildings, truck gardening, roadside stand for sale in
season, and livestock raising and feeding; but not including fur farms, commercial
animal feed lots, and kennels.
4. Alteration. To change or make different; remodel or modify.
5. Animals, Domestic Farm. As defined in Municipal Code Chapter 151.
6. Animals, Domestic Pets. As defined in Municipal Code Chapter 151.
7. Animals, Non-Domestic: As defined in Municipal Code Chapter 151
8. Antenna. That portion of any equipment used to radiate or receive radio frequency
energy for transmitting or receiving radio or television waves. Antennas may consist of
metal, carbon, fiber, or other electromagnetically conductive rods or elements, to the
extent not pre-empted by the Federal Communications Code.
9. Artificial Obstruction. Any obstruction which is not a natural obstruction.
10. Automobile Repair, Major. General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines in
motor vehicles or trailers; collision service including body, frame or fender
straightening or repair; overall painting or paint job; vehicle steam cleaning; and
upholstering.
11. Auto Repair, Minor. Maintenance, repair or replacement of the alternator, generator,
starter, water pump, battery, brakes, or part thereof. Minor tune-up which consists of
distributor cap, rotor, and spark plug replacement. Change of oil and filter, fan belt, or
hoses. Others include lamp replacement, repair of flat tires, and lubrication.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 2
12. Automobile Service Station. A place where gasoline, stored only in underground
tanks, kerosene, motor oil, and lubricants for operation of automobiles are related
directly to the public on premises, and including minor accessories and services for
automobiles, but not including automobile major repairs and rebuilding.
13. Automobile Reduction Salvage Yard. Any place where any vehicles not in running
condition and/or not licensed, or parts thereof are stored in the open and are not being
restored to operation for a period of more than thirty (30) days; or land, building or
structure used for dismantling or storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof, and
including any commercial salvaging, and scavenging of any other goods, articles or
merchandise.
14. Basement. Any floor level below the first story in a building, except that a floor level in
a building having only one floor level shall be classified as a basement unless such
floor level qualifies as a first story as defined herein.
15. Bed and Breakfast. An owner or manager occupied dwelling in which a room or
rooms are rented on a nightly basis for 1 or more nights for periods of less than a
week. Meals may or may not be provided.
16. Bed and Breakfast Unit. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating
purposes.
17. Bluff.
a. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff or embankment having the following
characteristic:
(1) Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;
(2) The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level of
the water body;
(3) The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point twenty-five
(25) feet or more above the Ordinary High Water level averaging thirty
(30% percent or greater; and
(4) The slope drains towards a water body.
b. An area with an average slope of less than eighteen (18%) percent over a
distance of fifty (50) feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff
18. Bluff Impact Zone. A bluff and land located within thirty (30) feet from the top of a
bluff.
19. Bluff, Toe Of. The lower point of a fifty (50) foot segment with an average slope
exceeding 18% percent.
20. Bluff Line. A line along the top of a bluff connecting the points at which the bluff,
proceeding away from the river, lake or adjoining watershed channel becomes less
than a fifteen (15%) percent incline from the horizontal. The location of the bluff line
for any particular property shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator. More than
one bluff line may be encountered proceeding away from the river or adjoining
watershed channel; all setbacks required herein shall be applicable to each bluff line.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 3
21. Boarding House. Home in which lodgers rent one or more rooms for one or more
nights.
22. Boathouse. A structure designed and used solely for the storage of boats and boating
equipment.
23. Buffer. The use of land, topography, difference in elevation, space, fences or
landscape plantings to screen or partially screen a use or property from another use
or property or to shield or mitigate noise, lights or other impacts.
24. Buildable Area. The contiguous portion of a lot remaining after each of the following
features are subtracted:
a. Wetlands and peat or muck type soils.
b. Areas below the Ordinary High-water Level of water bodies.
c. Areas prone to flooding as indicated in the City Floodplain Management
Regulations.
d. Steep slopes 25%+.
e. Areas subject to easements or other encumbrances prohibiting building.
25. Buildable Lot. A lot of record prior to January 1, 1973 which meets the development
requirement of this Title.
22. Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or
occupancy.
23. Building Code. The MN State Building Code adopted by the City Council.
24. Building Height. A distance to be measured from the mean ground level to the top of
a flat roof, to the mean distance of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof, to the
deckline of a mansard roof, to the uppermost point on other roof types.
25. Building Line. A line running parallel with the bluffline, ordinary high water mark or lot
line, whichever is applicable, at the required setback beyond which a structure may
not extend.
26. Building Official. The designated authority charged with the administration and
enforcement of the State Building Code.
27. Building Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the building and the
specified lot line or other feature such as an easement as determined by the City as
prescribed in this Ordinance.
28. Business. Any establishment, occupation, employment or enterprise where
merchandise is manufactured, exhibited or sold, or where services are offered for
compensation.
29. Campground. An area accessible by vehicle and containing campsites, cabins, or
camping spurs for tent and/or trailer camping.
30. Channel. A natural or artificial depression of perceptible extent, with definite bed and
banks to confine and conduct water either continuously or periodically.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 4
31. Church. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons
regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together with its
accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body
organized to sustain public worship.
32. Clear-cutting. The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip,
row or block.
33. Club or Lodge. A non-profit association of persons who are bonafide members paying
annual dues, use of premises being restricted to members and their guests. It shall be
permissible to serve food and meals on such premises providing adequate dining
room space and kitchen facilities are available. Serving of alcoholic beverages to
members and their guests shall be allowed, providing such serving is secondary and
incidental to the operation of the dining room for the purpose of serving food and
meals and providing further that such serving of alcoholic beverages is in compliance
with the applicable federal, state and municipal laws.
34. Cluster Development. A pattern of subdivision development which places housing
units into compact groupings while providing commonly owned open space.
35. Commercial Agriculture. The use of land for the growing and/or production of field
crops, livestock and livestock products for sale.
36. Commercial Planned Unit Development. Uses that provide transient short term
lodging spaces, rooms or parcels and whose operations are essentially serviceoriented.
For example hotel/motel accommodations, resorts, recreational vehicle and
camping parks, and other primarily service oriented activities are commercial planned
unit developments.
37. Commercial Uses. The use of land or buildings for the sale or trade of products,
goods and/or services.
38. Community Sewage Treatment Facility. Any public or private system for the treatment
of greywater and effluent from more than one dwelling unit, business, or other
contributing unit. Both community sewage treatment facilities and municipal sanitary
sewer are considered central sewers.
39. Comprehensive Plan. The comprehensive development plan prepared and adopted
by Chisago City, indicating the goals, objectives, and land use map for guiding the
present and future development of the Town.
40. Concept Plan. The first plan submitted to the city portraying the general concept,
layout and design of proposed project.
41. Conditional Use. A land use that may be allowed, with or without appropriate
conditions or restrictions that is generally compatible and desirable within a particular
zoning district, has an unusually significant and major impact on public facilities or the
use and enjoyment of nearby properties, and requires the exercise of discretion in
determining satisfactory locations and characteristics.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 5
42. Conditional Use Permit. A permit issued by the City in accordance with procedures
specified in this Ordinance, as well as its compatibility with the Chisago City
Comprehensive Plan, as a flexible device to enable the City to assign dimensions to a
proposed use or conditions surrounding it after consideration of adjacent uses and
their functions and the special problems or potential conflicts which the proposed use
presents.
43. Conservancy. The implementation of polices for the protection and preservation of
the natural character of lands for their value to scenic enjoyment native vegetation,
wildlife, water and soil conservation, flood plain management, forestry and other-such
purposes.
44. Convenience Store. Retail food sales outlet of fifteen hundred (7500) sq. ft. or less,
which may include fuel and other common use items, and may or may not include a
car wash.
45. Crown Cover. The ratio between the amount of land shaded by the vertical protection
of the branches and foliage area of standing trees to the total area of land, usually
expressed as a percentage.
46. Day Care Facilities. A facility for operating less than 24 hours per day that provides
training, supervision, recreation, and/or medical services for children from infant to
pre-school age, for the disabled, or for the elderly, on a regular basis.
47. Deck. A horizontal unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats,
trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a building and extending
more than one foot above ground.
48. Density. The number of dwelling units permitted per acre of land.
49. Deposition. Any rock, soil, gravel, sand or other material deposited naturally or by
man into a water body, watercourse, flood plain or wetland.
50. Development. The construction, addition, installation or alteration of any structure, the
extraction, clearing or other alteration of terrestrial or aquatic vegetation, land or the
course, current or cross section of any water body or water course of the division of
land into two or more parcels.
51. Development Permit. Any subdivision, planned unit development, zoning permit,
grading permit, plat approval, rezoning, special use permit or variance.
52. Dimensional Requirement. Minimum and maximum setbacks, yard requirements and
structure height or size restriction established in the zoning ordinance.
53. District. A section or sections of the City for which the regulations and provisions
governing the use of buildings and lands are uniform for each class of use permitted
therein.
54. Diversion. A channel that intercepts surface water runoff and that changes the
accustomed course of all or part of a stream.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 6
55. Double-front lots. A lot which has a front line abutting on one street and a back or
rear line abutting on another street.
56. Draining. The removal of surface water or groundwater from land.
57. Dredging. To enlarge or clean-out a water body, watercourse or wetland.
58. Drive-in / Drive-through Establishment. An establishment which accommodates the
patron’s motor vehicle, from which products may be purchased and consumed either
on-site in the motor vehicle, or off-site; or from which business may be transacted.
59. Dwelling. A building or portion thereof occupied or intended to be occupied
exclusively for residential purposes, but not including hotels, motels, boarding houses,
nursing homes, trailers, tents, trailer coaches or lodging rooms.
60. Dwelling – Attached. A residential dwelling which is joined to another dwelling.
61. Dwelling – Detached. A residential dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open
space.
62. Dwelling – Multifamily. A residential dwelling designed for 2 or more families, with the
number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.
63. Dwelling-Single Family. A detached residential dwelling unit designed for occupancy
of one (1) family only.
64. Dwelling-Two-Family. A detached residential dwelling containing 2 dwelling units
designed exclusively for occupancy of two (2) families living independently of each
other.
65. Dwelling Unit. A residential building or portion thereof intended for occupancy by one
family or not more than five persons unrelated by blood, but not including hotels,
motels, nursing homes, seasonal cabins, boarding or rooming houses, tourist homes
or trailers.
66. Earth Sheltered Buildings. Buildings constructed so that more than fifty percent (50%)
of the exterior surface area of the buildings, excluding garages and other accessory
buildings, is covered with earth and the Minnesota Building Code standards
promulgated pursuant to Section 16.85 are satisfied. Partially completed buildings
shall not be considered earth sheltered.
67. Eating and Drinking Establishments. Establishment within a building or group of
buildings designated for the eating of food and drinking of (including liquor).
68. Engineer, City. The professional engineer engaged by the governing body for
services.
69. Entertainment and Amusement Services. The use of the land for a bowling alley, golf,
pool hall, dance ball, skating, trampoline, tavern, theater, firearms range, boat rental,
amusement rides, riding stables, resorts, campgrounds, deer park, and similar uses
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 7
for which fees are charged for admission or use of the facility, or use of the land to
gain access to a recreational activity or resource, public or private.
70. Equal Degree of Encroachment. A method of determining the location of
encroachment lines so that the hydraulic capacity of flood plain lands on both sides of
a stream are reduced by an equal amount when calculating the increases.
71. Essential Services. Gas, underground electrical, steam or water distribution systems,
collection, communication, supply or disposal system including poles, wires, mains,
drains, sewer, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants or
other similar equipment and accessories in conjunction therewith.
72. Family. An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption,
or foster care arrangement living together as a single housekeeping unit maintaining
a common household and using common cooking and kitchen facilities; as
distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, hotel, club
lodge, sorority or fraternity house, and assisted living facility
73. Feedlots. A lot or building or a group of lots and buildings intended for the confined
feeding, breeding, raising or holding of animals, and specifically designed as a
confinement area in which manure may accumulate, or where the concentration of
animals is such that a vegetative cover cannot be maintained within the enclosure.
Open lots used for the feeding and rearing of poultry shall be considered feedlots.
74. Farm. A tract of land ten (10) or more acres which is principally used for agriculture
activities such as the production of cash crops, livestock, or poultry farming. Such
farms may include agricultural dwellings and accessory buildings and structures
necessary to the operations of the farm.
75. Farm, Hobby. Small farm that is maintained without expectation of being a primary
source of income.
76. Fence. A barrier forming a boundary to, or enclosing some area.
77. Finished Living Area. An area within a residential dwelling which has finished walls,
floors, and ceilings (e.g. sheetrock, taped, and sanded).
78. First Story. The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a story, as defined
herein, except that a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be
classified as a first story, provided such floor level is not more than four (4) feet below
grade, as defined herein, for more than fifty (50) percent of the total perimeter, or not
more than eight (8) feet below grade, as defined herein, at any point.
79. Flood. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of a
wetland or lake that results in inundation of normally dry areas.
80. Flood Frequency. The frequency, statistically determined, for which it is expected that
a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 8
81. Flood Fringe. That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is
synonymous with the term “floodway fringe” used in the Flood Insurance Study,
Chisago County, Minnesota and incorporated Areas.
82. Flood Plain. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse
which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
83. Flood-Proofing. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to
properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination
of flood damages.
84. Floodway. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of the watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to carry or
store the regional flood discharge.
85. Floor Area. The area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building or
portion thereof, including the sum of the gross horizontal area of several floors of a
building, exclusive of hallways, utility space, restrooms, window showcases,
ornamental space not used for assembly, or the like.
86. Floriculture uses. The cultivation of flowers, especially of decorative flowering plants.
87. Forestry. The management, including logging, of a forest, woodland, or plantation,
and related research and educational activities, including the construction, alteration
or maintenance of woodroads, skidroads, landing area and fences.
88. Garage-Private. An accessory building or accessory portion of the principal building
which is intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles of the
residents.
89. Garage – Public. A building or portion of a building, except as herein defined as a
private garage or as a repair garage, used for the storage of motor vehicles, or where
any such vehicles are kept for remuneration or hire and which any sale of gasoline, oil
and accessories is only incidental to the principal traffic.
90. Ghost Plat. A concept of how the land within a subdivision or lot split will be
subdivided into urban lots in the future. The layout shall include lots, streets,
easements and preservation areas, if applicable.
91. Grade (Adjacent Ground Elevation). The lowest point of elevation of the finished
surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between a building and the
property line, or when the property line is more than five (5) feet from the building,
between the building and a line five (5) feet from the building.
92. Grading. Changing the natural or existing topography of land.
93. Harbor. A portion of a body of water along or landward of the natural shoreline deep
enough for recreational watercraft navigation, and so situated with respect to
shoreline features as to provide protection from winds, waves, ice and currents.
Natural harbors consist of bays and estuaries, while artificial harbors are constructed
by dredging.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 9
94. Historic Building and Structure. A structure which has been identified by the State
Historic Preservation Office as having public value due to their notable architectural
features relating to the cultural heritage of the City.
95. Home Occupation. Any occupation or profession carried on by a member of the
family residing on the premises, provided that the use is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, does not change the
residential character of the dwelling or the neighborhood.
96. Horticulture — Non Retail. The growing of fruits, vegetables, flowers and ornamental
plants.
97. Hotel. Any building or portion thereof providing provisions for six (6) or more guest, in
which lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation and which is open
to transient or permanent guests or both, and in which ingress and egress to and from
all rooms is through an inside lobby or office, supervised by a person in charge..
98. Impervious Surface. An artificial or natural surface through which water, air, or roots
cannot penetrate.
99. Industrial Use. The use of land or buildings for production, manufacture,
warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products, commodities, or other wholesale
items; all permitted, conditional and accessory uses allowed in the “I” district.
100. Interim Use Permit. A permit for temporary use of property until a particular date, until
the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit it.
101. Kennel. Any place where three (3) or more dogs or four (4) animals, including cats,
over the age of six (6) months are kept, boarded, trained or offered for sale except
when located in a pet shop or veterinary clinic/hospital. A kennel may include secured
outdoor runs and/or play areas.
102. Landscaping. Planting and maintaining trees, shrubs and ground cover, such as
grass.
103. Light Construction Equipment. Any equipment that can be operated and transported
by hand. Such equipment would include tampers, jack hammers, and smaller hand
tools, for example.
104. Loading space, Off-Street. Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups
and deliveries.
105. Lot. A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land survey,
auditors plot, or other accepted means and separated from other parcels or portions
by said description for the purpose of sale, lease, or separation thereof. For the
purposes of this Ordinance, a lot shall be considered to be an individual parcel, which
shall be occupied by no more than one principal building or use and its accessory
buildings.
106. Lot Area. The area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 10
107. Lot of Record. A parcel of land, whether subdivided or otherwise legally described of
record prior to the adoption of zoning ordinances approved by the City as a lot
subsequent to such date and which is occupied by or intended for occupancy by one
(1) principal building or principal use together with any accessory buildings and such
open spaces as required by this Ordinance and having its principal frontage on a
street, or a proposed street approved by the City.
108. Lot, Corner. A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets; or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a single street, the
interior angle of which is one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees or less.
109. Lot, Frontage. The front of a lot shall be that boundary abutting a public right-of-way.
110. Lot, Interior. Including through lots, excluding corner lots.
111. Lot, Line. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separated ownership,
except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot
line shall be deemed to be the street or alley right-of-way.
112. Lot, Through. A lot fronting on two parallel streets.
113. Lot, Width. The width of a lot shall be considered the distance between straight lines
connecting the front lot width at setback. For shoreland width, measurements shall be
the distance between straight lines connecting the back lot width at the ordinary high
water level.
114. Lot Measurement. The depth of a lot shall be considered the distance between the
midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front
of the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
115. Manufactured Home (Mobile Home). A structure, not affixed to or part of real estate,
transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet
or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or
more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning; and electrical systems
contained in it. A manufactured home is commonly referred to as a mobile home or
trailer home.
116. Manufactured Home Park. Any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon which two or more
occupied manufactured homes are located, either free of charge or for compensation,
and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for
use as part of the equipment of the manufactured home park. A manufactured home
park is commonly referred to as a trailer park or mobile home court.
117. Manufacturing – Light. All uses which include the compounding, processing,
packaging, treatment, or assembly of products and materials provided such use will
not generate offensive odors, glare, smoke, dust, noise, vibration or other
objectionable influences that extend beyond the lot on which use is located, and does
not normally require an urban level of public services such as centralized sewer and
water.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 11
118. Medical Uses. Those uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment and care of
human beings. These include hospitals, dental services, medical services or clinics,
nursing or convalescent home, orphan’s home, rest home and sanitarium.
119. Mineral. Sand, gravel, rock, clay, and similar higher density non-metallic natural
minerals.
120. Mineral Extraction. The removal of sand, gravel, rock clay and other minerals from
the ground.
121. Mineral Extraction Facility. Any area that is being used for removal, stockpiling and
storage, of sand, gravel, topsoil, clay, and other minerals.
122. Modular Homes. A single-family dwelling constructed in modules or sections in a
factory and then delivered to their intended site of use. The modules are assembled
on a foundation into a single residential building using either a crane or trucks.
123. Motor Fuel Station. A place where gasoline and diesel fuel (stored only in
underground tanks), kerosene; motor oil and lubricants for operation of automobiles,
are related directly to the public on premises, and including minor accessories and
services for automobiles, but not including automobile major repairs and rebuilding.
124. Name Plate. A sign indicating the name and address of a building or the name of an
occupant thereof and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
125. Natural Drainage System. All land surface areas which by nature of their contour
configuration, collect, store, and channel surface water run-off
126. Natural Obstruction. Any rock, tree, gravel or analogous natural matter that is an
obstruction and has been located within a water body, watercourse, or wetland by a
non-human cause.
127. Nonconforming Structure, Use, or Parcel. Any legal use, structure, or parcel of land
already of existence, recorded, or authorized before the adoption of official controls or
amendments that would not have been permitted to become established under the
terms of the official controls as now written, if the official controls had been in effect
prior to the date it was established, recorded or authorized.
128. Nursing Home (Rest Home). A state licensed facility or that part of a facility which
provided care for aged or infirm persons who require nursing and personal care and
related services in accordance with state regulations. A nursing home may be a
residential healthcare facility, an intermediate care facility, or a long term care facility.
129. Obstruction. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, abutment, projection,
excavation, channel rectification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill,
structure, or matter, in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or
regulatory flood hazard area which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the
flow of water, either by itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water,
or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the
damage of life or property.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 12
130. Off-Street Loading Space. A space accessible from the street, alley, or way, in a
building or on the lot, for the use of trucks while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials. Such space shall be of such size as to accommodate one (1) truck of the
type typically used in the particular business.
131. Open Sales Lot. Any open land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling
and/or renting merchandise and for the storing of same prior to sales.
132. Ordinary High Water Level. Ordinary high water level means the boundary of public
waters and wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level
which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary
high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs
and flowage the ordinary high water level shall be the operating elevation of the
normal summer pool.
133. Overlay District. A zoning district shown as an overlay on the zoning map. Both
underlying and overlay district regulations apply to land use activity.
134. Parking Space. An area of not less than nine (9) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in
length, enclosed in the main building, in an accessory building, or unenclosed,
sufficient in size to store one (1) automobile which has adequate access to a public
street or alley and permitting satisfactory ingress and egress of an automobile.
135. Preliminary Plan. A descriptive proposed plan of a proposed development project.
136. Permitted Use. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or
districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance
standards (if any) of such districts.
137. Person. An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or organization of
any kind.
138. Planned Industrial-use Development. A district identified geographically on the zoning
map where a mix of residential and light industrial services can be accommodated in
an integrated and compatible pattern.
139. Planned Mixed-use Development. A district identified geographically on the zoning
map where a mix of residential and commercial and/or retail services can be
accommodated in an integrated pattern.
140. Planned Unit Development. A development consisting generally of mixed land uses
and housing types in which densities are calculated on a project-wide basis;
permitting the clustering of houses or buildings and the provision of common open
space intended to create a more flexible, creative and efficient approach to the use of
land and subject to the procedures, standards and regulations contained in this title.
141. Planning Commission. The planning agency of the City, designated by the City
Council.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 13
142. Pole Building. A building which is primarily supported by poles rather than by a
framework of dimension lumber. The sides generally consist of a steel product.
143. Prefabricated Home. A single family dwelling unit which is prefabricated in parts or
components at a central factory and transported to a building site where file
installations are made permanently.
144. Principal Use. The primary or main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
subordinate, incidental or accessory uses.
145. Public Roads. Any town, municipal, county, state or federal road or highway.
146. Public Facilities. Facilities owned or operated by Chisago City, school districts,
county, state or other governmental units.
147. Public Open Space. Open space owned or operated by Chisago City, School
districts, county, state or other governmental units.
148. Semi-Public Facilities. Facilities partially but not entirely open to the use of the public.
Maintained partially or entirely by a private, nonprofit organization.
149. Semi-Public Open Space. Open space partially but not entirely open to the use of the
general public. May be maintained partially or entirely by a private nonprofit
organization.
150. Public Waters. Any waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes 1980, Section 105.37,
Subdivision 14 and 15. However, no lake, pond, or flowage of less than 25 acres in
size need by regulated for the purposes of these regulations. A body of water created
by a private user where there was no previous shoreland shall be exempt from the
provisions of these regulations. The official determination of the size of public water
basins and physical limits of drainage areas of rivers and streams shall be made by
the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
151. Reach. A hydraulic engineering term used to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban area, the
segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings would most
typically constitute a reach.
152. Recreation Entertainment. The use of the land for a bowling alley, golf, pool hall,
dance ball, skating, trampoline, tavern, theater, firearms range, boat rental,
amusement rides, riding stables, resorts, campgrounds, deer park, and similar uses
for which fees are charged for admission or use of the facility, or use of the land to
gain access to a recreational activity or resource, public or private.
153. Recreational Vehicle. A vehicular portable structure used for amusement, vacation, or
recreational activities including but not limited to travel trailers, motor homes, camping
trailers, snowmobiles, boats, bicycles, and motorcycles.
154. Recycling Facility. A site permitted by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and
Chisago City, used to collect, process, and repair recyclable materials and reuse them
in their original form or use them in manufacturing processes.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 14
155. Recycling Collection Site. A site permitted by Chisago City, used to drop-off glass,
cardboard, plastic, paper, and aluminum for recycling. No hazardous wastes are
allowed on the site. The only processing allowed must be done within a completely
enclosed and insulated structure. Such processing shall generally be limited to lass
separation, and can sorting and crushing.
156. Regional Flood. A flood which is representative of large floods known to have
occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be
expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100 year
recurrence interval.
157. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. A point not less than one (1) foot above the
water surface profile associated with the regional flood plus any increases in flood
heights attributable to encroachments on the flood plain. It is the elevation to which
uses regulated by this ordinance are required to be elevated or flood proofed.
158. Research. Medical, chemical, electrical, metallurgical or other scientific research and
quality control, conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
159. Residential Day Care. A home that provides training, supervision, recreation, and/or
medical services for children from infant to pre-school age, for the disabled, or for the
elderly, on a regular basis operating less than 24 hours per day.
160. Residential District. The RR-1, RR-2, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts, are
Residential Districts in this Title. The (A) Agricultural District is primarily intended to
provide areas for agricultural uses, but for zoning purposes shall also be considered a
residential district.
143. Resort. A commercial establishment that includes buildings, lodges, dwelling units,
parking areas, recreation areas, recreational equipment, camping or recreational
vehicle sites, or enclosures or any part thereof kept, used, maintained or advertised
as or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are
furnished to the public, primarily to persons seeking recreation, for periods of one day
or longer, and having for rent three or more cabins, rooms, campsites, or enclosures.
The establishment must be primarily service oriented for transient lodging of guests.
All cabins, rooms, dwelling units, camping or recreational vehicle sites, or enclosures
must be included in the resort rental business. Resorts must not allow residential use
of a dwelling unit or site, except dwelling uses as residences for the service provider.
To qualify as a resort, a resort must be fully licensed and permitted under appropriate
state regulations. The entire parcel of land must be controlled and managed by the
licensee.
144. Restaurant. An establishment which serves food in or on non-disposable dishes, to
be consumed primarily while seated at tables or booths within the building.
145. Retail Sales. The transfer of goods for an agreed to amount of money or other
consideration directly to customers from an ordinary store or at the regular customer
price and in small amounts rather than in bulk and/or wholesale.
146. Retirement Homes. Residential dwelling units occupied by retired and/or elderly
individuals.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 15
147. Rural Cluster. A method of subdivision to maintain the rural character of Chisago city
by preserving agricultural land, woodlands, natural corridors and other significant
natural features while allowing residential development.
146. Screening. The presence of vegetation or topography which renders a structure on
any property visually inconspicuous.
147. Selective Cutting. The removal of a single scattered tree or single scattered trees
where the original density and crown cover of the stand is essentially unchanged from
pre-cutting conditions.
148. Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure or sewage treatment
system and the ordinary high water level, or between a structure or sewage treatment
system and a bluff, road, highway or property line.
149. Setback, Front Yard. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure and a
platted roadway or the right-of-way of a road. If there is a utility easement along the
front property line of a lot, and that easement is specifically intended as a multiple use
easement for utility and pedestrian trail or walkway purposes, then the front yard
setback is the minimum horizontal distance between a structure and the utility
easement.
150. Sewage Disposal System. Any system for the collection, treatment and dispersion of
sewage including but not limited to septic tanks, soil absorption systems, and drain
fields.
151. Shore Impact Zone. The land located between the ordinary high water level of public
water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50 percent of the structure setback.
152. Shoreland. Land located within the following distances from the public water:
a. 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or flowage; and
b. 300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a flood plain designated
by ordinance on such a river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of
shoreland may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by
topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances
and when approved by the commissioner of the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources.
153. Sign. Any letter work, symbol, model, printed, projected or affixed device, poster,
picture, reading matter, or other representation in the nature of an advertisement,
announcement, direction or informative device including structural and compound
parts that is located outdoors and is larger than 1 square foot in area.
154. Sign Area. The area within the marginal lines or extreme outside edge of the surface
that bears the advertisement, or in the case of messages, figures, or symbols
attached directly to any part of a building, that area included in the smallest rectangle
that can be made to circumscribe any message, figure, or symbol displayed thereon.
For a sign with not more than 2 back-to-back faces, only the area of 1 side is
computed in determining the sign area. Such perimeter shall not include any
structural elements lying outside of such sign and not forming an integral part or
border of the sign.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 16
155. Sign, Banner. Attention getting devices that resemble flags and are of a paper, cloth
or plastic like consistency.
156. Sign, Construction. Any sign that displays information regarding the construction or
development of the site in which it is displayed.
157. Sign, Development Identification. A sign that identifies the name of a residential,
commercial or industrial development at a street entrance to the development.
158. Sign, Directional. Signs which provide directions to businesses, churches, parks and
similar facilities for the benefit of the traveling public. The sign may include the name
of the facility and direction, but shall not contain advertising.
159. Sign, Electronic. A sign or portion thereof displaying electronic images, graphics, or
pictures, with or without text information, defined by a small number of matrix
elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics,
light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area.
160. Sign, Flashing. An illuminated sign which has a light source not constant in intensity
or color at all times while such sign is in use or a sign containing an electric reading
board.
161. Sign, Government. A sign which is erected by a governmental unit for the purpose of
identification and directing or guiding traffic.
162. Sign, Identification. A sign containing principally the name of the individual or
establishment occupying the premises, and which also may include the street
address, telephone number, or other information identifying the use.
163. Sign, Illuminated. Any sign which is lighted by an artificial light source, either directed
upon it or illuminated from an interior source.
164. Sign, Motion. A sign that has revolving parts or signs which produce moving effects
through the use of illumination.
165. Signs, Off Premise. Any sign that advertises anything other than the business located
on the same lot.
166. Sign, On Premise. Any sign that advertises anything other than the business,
product, etc. located on the same site as the sign is located.
167. Sign, Pedestal. A ground sign usually erected on one (1) central shaft or post, which
is solidly affixed to the ground.
168. Sign, Permanent. Any sign other than a temporary sign.
169. Sign, Portable. A sign so designed as to be movable from 1 location to another that is
not permanently attached to the ground, sales display device, or structure.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 17
170. Sign, Political Campaign. Signs or posters announcing the candidate(s) seeking
political office and/or political issues, and data pertinent thereto.
171. Sign, Public. Signs of a public, non-commercial nature to include safety signs, danger
signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, signs indicating scenic or historical points of
interest, memorial plaques, and the like, and when said signs are erected by or on
order of a public officer or employee in the performance of official duty.
172. Sign, Real Estate. A sign offering property (land and/or buildings) for sale, lease or
rent.
173. Sign, Temporary. Any sign which is erected or displayed for a specified period of
time.
174. Sign, Roof. A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet of a structure.
175. Slope. The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in
percent or degrees, lands between the ordinary high water mark and the riverway
boundary having an angle of ascent or descent of more than 12% from the horizontal,
but less than 18%.
176. Slope, Steep. The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, expressed in
percent or degrees, lands having an angle of ascent or descent of 18% or more from
the horizontal in residential zoning districts.
177. Stable. A building for the shelter and feeding of domestic animals, particularly for
horses.
178. Street. A public right-of-way which affords a primary means of access to abutting
property.
179. Street, Collector. A street which serves or is designed to serve as a trafficway for a
neighborhood or a feeder to a major road.
180. Street, Intermediate or Minor Arterial. A street which serves or is designed to serve
heavy flows of traffic and which is used primarily as a route for traffic between
communities and/or other heavy traffic generating areas.
181. Street, Local. A Street intended to serve primarily as an access to abutting properties.
182. Street Pavement. The wearing or exposed surface of the roadway used by vehicular
traffic.
183. Street Width. The width of the right-of-way measured at right angles to the centerline
of the street.
184. Story. That portion of a building included beneath the upper surface of a floor and
upper surface of floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of
a building, included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or
roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement or cellar, or unused
underfloor space is more than six (6) feet above grade as defined herein for more
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 18
than fifty (50) percent of the total perimeter or is more than twelve (12) feet above
grade as defined herein at any point, such basement, cellar, or unused underfloor
space shall be considered as a story.
185. Structure. Any building or appurtenance that is manufactured, constructed or erected
that is normally attached to or positioned on land, including attached decks, except
aerial or underground utility lines, such as a sewer, electric, telephone, telegraph, or
gas lines, including towers, poles, and other supporting facilities. The building or
appurtenance can include portable or temporary structures.
186. Structural Alteration. Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would affect
the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders
or foundations.
187. Subdivision. The separation of one or more portions of a lot from another portion of
that lot by deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map, plat or
other document, whether recorded or unrecorded, which vests or otherwise contracts
for the conveyance of title, or any interest therein, of any such portion or portions to a
person, persons or an entity other than the owner of record; provided that the term
subdivision shall not be construed to apply to a mortgage against a parcel complying
with the minimum dimensional requirements herein: scenic easements; easements for
the installation, construction and maintenance of public utilities; and easements of
road access.
188. Substandard Structure. Any structure established before the effective date of this
ordinance, which is permitted within a particular zoning district but does not meet the
structure setbacks or other dimensional standards of this ordinance.
189. Substandard Use. Any use existing prior to the date of this ordinance which is
permitted within the applicable zoning district but does not meet the minimum lot area,
frontage, setbacks, water frontage length, or other dimensional standards of this
ordinance.
190. Tree. Any woody plant that has at least one trunk with a diameter of six inches or
greater measured at breast height.
191. Tower. Any pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof; including supporting lines,
cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an
antenna, or to serve as an antenna.
192. Transfer Facility. A site specifically licensed by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency under this Ordinance to collect garbage, rubbish, other mixed municipal solid
waste and recyclable and transport to markets or further processing centers.
193. Transmission Services. Electric power, telephone and telegraph lines, cables and
conduits that are used to transport large blocks of power, convey intelligence or
transport material between two points. A distribution line, cable or conduit used to
provide power, water, gas or other essential services locally to utility customers is not
a transmission service.
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 19
194. Use. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designated,
arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized or maintained, and shall
include the performance of such activity as defined by the performance standards of
this Ordinance.
195. Usable Open Space. A required ground area or terrace area on a lot which is
developed, landscaped and equipped and intended and maintained for either active or
passive recreation or both, available and accessible to and useable by all persons
occupying a dwelling unit or rooming unit on the lot and their guests. Such areas shall
be grassed and landscaped or covered only for a recreation purpose. Roofs,
driveways and parking areas shall not constitute usable open space.
196. Variance. A modification, variation, or exception from the literal requirements of this
ordinance.
197. Vegetation. The sum total of plant life in some area or a plant community with
distinguishable characteristics.
198. Waterbody. A body of water (lake, pond) in a depression of land or expanded part of
a river, or an enclosed basin that holds water and is surrounded by land.
199. Watercourse. A channel or depression through which water flows, such as rivers,
streams, or creeks, and may flow year around or intermittently.
200. Watershed. The area drained by the natural and artificial drainage system, bounded
peripherally by a bridge or stretch of high land dividing drainage areas.
201. Watershed Management or Flood Control Structure. A dam, floodwall, wing dam,
dike, diversion channel, or an artificially deepened or widened stream channel
following the same or approximately the same course as the natural channel, or any
other structure for altering or regulating the natural flow condition of a river or stream.
The term “Watershed management or flood control structure” does not include pilings,
retaining walls, gabion baskets, rock riprap, or other facilities intended primarily to
prevent erosion and which must be authorized by period from the Commissioner of
the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
202. Wetlands. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water
table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. For
purposes of this definition, wetlands must have the following three attributes: (1) have
a predominance of hydric soils; (2) are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and (3) under normal
circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation. An area where water stands
near, at, or above the soil surface during a significant portion of most years, saturating
the soil and supporting a predominantly aquatic form of vegetation and which may
have the following characteristics.
c. Vegetation belonging to the marsh (emergent aquatic) bon, fen, sedge meadow,
shrubland, southern lowland forest (lowland hardwood), and northern lowland
forest (conifer swamp) communities. (These communities correspond roughly to
Chisago City Zoning Code
Chapter 9.0 – Definitions Page 20
wetland types 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8, described by the United States Fish and
Wildlife Service, Circular 39, “Wetlands of the U.S” , 1956).
d. Mineral soils with gray horizons or organic solids belonging to the Histosol order
(peat and muck).
e. Soil which is water logged or covered with water at least three months of the
year. Swamps, bogs, marches, potholes, wet meadows, and sloughs are
wetlands, and properly may be shallow water bodies, the waters of which are
stagnant or actuated by very feeble currents, and may at time be sufficiently dry
to permit tillage but would require drainage to be made arable. The edge of a
wetland is commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial.
203. Wildlife. All free living animals.
204. Woodland. A group of trees at least one-half acre in area and with a crown cover of
50 percent or greater.
205. Yard. An open space on the lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest
level to the sky. A yard extends along a lot line at right angles to such lot line to a
depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the zoning district in which such lot
is located.
206. Yard – Front. A yard extending across the front of the lot fronting on a dedicated
street between the side lot lines and lying between the front line of the lot and the
nearest line of the building.
207. Yard – Rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the
rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the building.
208. Yard – Side. A yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of the
building and extending from the front line of the lot to the rear yard.
209. Zoning Administrator. A person appointed by the City Council to administer and
enforce the Zoning Ordinance.
210. Zoning Map. The maps or map incorporated into this Ordinance as part thereof, and
as amended, designating the zoning districts.
211. Zoning District. An area or areas within the county in which the regulations and
requirements of this ordinance are applied.
(Adopted: January 2000. Amended: February 10, 2009)
Subdivision Ordinance
Chisago City, Minnesota
Adopted: June 1997
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Table of Contents Page 1
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
CHISAGO CITY, MINNESOTA
Table of Contents
Chapters Title Pages
1 General Provisions .................................................................................1-5
2 Definitions...............................................................................................1-6
3 Application for Subdivision .....................................................................1-7
4 Preliminary & Final Plat Data Requirements ..........................................1-4
5 Minimum Design Standards .................................................................1-12
6 Required Improvements & Financing Arrangements..............................1-4
7 General Provisions ....................................................................................1
8 Enforcement..............................................................................................1
9 Fees........................................................................................................1-2
1.00 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.01 TITLE
This ordinance shall be known as the “SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
CHISAGO CITY” and will be referred to as “this ordinance.”
1.02 PURPOSE OF THE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
Pursuant to the authority contained in Minnesota Statutes 462.358, this ordinance is
adopted for the following purposes:
A. To provide for the orderly, economic, and safe development of land and public
services and facilities.
B. To promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the residents
of the City.
C. To preserve and protect wetlands, drainage areas, woodlands, and significant
tree stands, ravines, shorelands, and sloped areas.
D. To locate neighborhood parks and trail systems to provide convenient access
between residential lots and parks, open space, and other destinations in the
community.
E. To assure equitable handling of all subdivision plats by providing uniform
procedures.
F. To provide for the coordinated planning of public facilities with land already
developed and areas yet to be developed.
1.03 SCOPE
The provisions of this ordinance relate to any division of a tract of land into two (2) or
more parcels by platting, replatting, conveyance, registered land survey lot line
adjustment or other means.
1.04 JURISDICTION
These regulations governing plats and the subdivisions of land shall apply to the area
within the corporation limits of the City of Chisago City. By right of Minnesota Statutes
462.358, the City can extend its subdivision rights two miles beyond its boundaries.
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 1 – General Provisions Page 1
1.05 COMPLIANCE
After the adoption of this ordinance, no lot in a subdivision shall be sold, no permit shall
be issued to alter or erect any building upon land in a subdivision unless a subdivision
plat has been approved and recorded and until the public improvements are installed
and dedications made as provided by these regulations.
1.06 REQUIRED APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLATS
Before any plat is legally binding, it shall be approved by the City Council and recorded
in the Chisago County Recorder’s Office.
1.07 CONFLICT
It is not intended by this ordinance to annul or interfere with any official regulation or
ordinance of the City provided, however, that when there is a difference between
minimum standards or dimensions herein and those contained in other official
regulations or ordinances of the City, the highest standards shall apply.
1.08 EXCEPTIONS
Where written justification is submitted by an applicant which clearly indicates that the
intent of this ordinance can be satisfied without going through the procedural
requirements of this ordinance and upon receiving the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, the City Council by resolution may exempt the conveyance and the
conveyance may then be filed or recorded.
1.09 CONVEYANCE OF METES AND BOUNDS
No conveyance of one or more parcels in which the land is described by metes and
bounds or by reference to an unapproved registered land survey made after the effective
date of this ordinance shall be filed or recorded except in certain cases of minor
subdivisions as described in 1.12 of this Section and those conveyances except under
1.13 of this Section.
1.10 SUBDIVISION WITHOUT CENTRAL WATER & SEWER
All proposed subdivisions must have City sewer and water in order to subdivide.
Subdivision without City water and sewer can be allowed only if all the following
conditions are met:
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 1 – General Provisions Page 2
A. The area proposed for subdivision is appropriate for development with the
exception that it is too low in relation to the nearest City sewer line for a gravity
sewer, and the amount of land available for development is too small to make it
economically feasible to construct a sewage lift station. In this situation, the City
may require the subdivision hook into City water.
B. The area proposed for subdivision is appropriate for development with the
exception that it is too far from existing City water and sewer lines to make it
economically feasible to extend the lines to serve the proposed development. In
allowing a subdivision under this provision, the City may require the subdivision
to hook into City water and sewer in the future when it has been extended to the
subdivision. The City may assess the cost of the extension to the benefiting
property owners.
C. Where the proposed lot size is two (2) acres in the Rural Residential –
Existing (RR-1) or two and a half (2 ½) acres in all other residential districts
or greater and the soil tests show the site can support a septic system according
to PCA standards and the subdivider shows how the lot can be resubdivided
(Ghost Plat) when City water and sewer service is available.
The City Council must make findings of fact before approving a subdivision under these
provisions. The City Council shall have the authority to deny a subdivision request if it
appears that the intent of these regulations, the Comprehensive Plan, or the Zoning
Code may be violated.
1.11 SUBDIVISIONS LOCATED IN FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT EXCEPT FOR THOSE LOTS
OR AREAS PRESERVED AS OPEN SPACE
All lots located within the Flood Plain District shall contain a building site at or above the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation, have road access both to the subdivision and to
the individual building site no lower than two (2) feet below the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation and shall meet other applicable provisions of the Flood Plain District
within the Chisago Zoning Ordinance. In no case shall lots preserved as open space be
used to meet open space regulations for buildable lots. In the General Flood Plain
District, applicants shall provide the information required in the Zoning Ordinance for
evaluating conditional uses within the district, and the subdivision shall be evaluated in
accordance with this information and the established factors used for conditional use
decisions contained in the Zoning Ordinance.
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 1 – General Provisions Page 3
1.12 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
In the case of a subdivision resulting in three (3) or less lots situated in a neighborhood
with public road access and City water and sewer services or there is adequate soil for
a septic well system, conditions are well defined and no further resubdivision is
expected, the Zoning Administrator may exempt the subdivider from complying with
some of the requirements of these regulations, after submission of a survey by a
registered land surveyor of the proposed subdivision and the newly created property
lines will not cause any resulting lot to be in violation of these regulations or the Zoning
Code. Request for a minor subdivision maybe required to dedicate land for park
and/or trail purposes in order to comply with City Park and Trail Comprehensive
Plan.
In the case of a request to subdivide a lot which is a part of a recorded plat or to create
not more than three (3) new lots, and the newly created property lines will not cause any
resulting lot to be in violation of these regulations or the Zoning Code, the division may
be approved by the zoning administrator, after submission of a survey by a registered
land surveyor showing the original lot and the proposed subdivision. There shall be only
one minor subdivision with regard to the original tract in any twenty-four (24) month
period. The zoning administrator shall have the authority to deny minor subdivisions if
it appears that the intent of these regulations or the Zoning Code may be violated. Each
new lot must have the required frontage or access on to an improved public road and
be connected to City water and sanitary sewer service.
1.13 RESUBDIVISION
In the case of a request to divide a lot other than an outlot, which is a part of a recorded
plat where the subdivision is to permit the adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot or
to create two (2) lots where the newly created property line will not cause the remaining
portion of any lot to be in violation with this ordinance or the Zoning Ordinance, the
subdivision may be approved by the Zoning Administrator with submission of a
Certified Survey or a Registered Land Survey, as applicable by a registered land
surveyor showing the original lot and the proposed subdivision.
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 1 – General Provisions Page 4
1.14 EXEMPTIONS
The following conveyances shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance and
shall not constitute a subdivision:
A. The parcel was a separate lot of record prior to the effective date of this
ordinance.
B. The parcel was the subject of a recorded written agreement to convey entered
into prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
C. The parcel is a single parcel of land of not less than two (2) acres in area or 150
feet in width and all parcels have frontage or required access on to a public rightof-
way.
D. The parcel relates to a division of a lot which is part of a recorded plat where the
division is to permit the adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot or to create
two (2) lots and the newly created lot will not cause the other remaining portion of
the lot to be in violation of this ordinance or the Zoning Ordinance.
E. Cemetery lots.
F. Parcels resulting from court orders or the adjustment of a lot line by the
relocation of a common boundary as the result of a correctional survey of a
previously recorded parcel instrument of conveyance.
(Adopted: June 1997. Amended: July 2008.)
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 1 – General Provisions Page 5
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 2 – Definitions Page 1
2.00 DEFINITIONS
2.01 RULES
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words used herein are defined. The word
“shall” is mandatory. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular
number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The masculine shall
include the feminine and neuter.
2.02 DEFINITIONS
A. Abuts. Is next to.
B. Alley. A public way primarily designed to serve a secondary access to the side
or rear of property with principle frontage on another street.
C. Block. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets or
a combination of streets, exterior boundary lines of the subdivision, bodies of
water, or other topographic features.
D. Boulevard. The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and the
property line.
E. Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or
occupancy.
F. Building Setback Line. A line parallel to a street between which line and the
nearest street right-of-way line no building may be erected or placed.
G. City Administrator. The appointed executive of the City, or his or her designee.
H. City Council. The governing body of the City of Chisago City.
I. Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan prepared and adopted by the
City indicating the general locations recommended for major land uses, streets,
parks, public buildings, and other public improvements.
J. County Board. The governing body of Chisago County.
K. Crosswalk or Pedestrian Way. The publicly owned right-of-way which crosses a
block and furnishes pedestrian access to adjacent streets or properties.
L. Design Standards. Specification to land owners or subdivider for the preparation
of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating among other things, the optimum,
minimum or maximum dimensions of such items as right-of-ways, blocks,
easements, and lots.
M. Developable Land. That area of the property exclusive of those areas that are
prohibited from development due to steep slopes (greater than 25%), wetlands,
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 2 – Definitions Page 2
floodplain, and drainage ponding or easement areas.
N. Easement. A grant by an owner to use a strip of land by the public, corporation,
or person for specific purposes as the construction of utilities, drainage ways,
and roadways.
O. Easement - Drainage. An easement for the purpose of ponding or draining
water.
P. Easement – Pedstrian. An easement for the purpose of providing pedestrian
access to a place.
Q. Easement – Utility. An easement for the placement of utilities.
R. Engineer. The City or county engineer or duly authorized consulting engineer.
S. Final Plat. The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider plan of
subdivision which will be submitted to the County Recorder’s office. Said plat
must conform to these subdivision regulations and all appropriate state laws.
T. Flood. A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation of the
areas adjacent to the channel.
U. Flood Fringe. That portion of the flood plain outside the floodway. Flood fringe is
synonymous with the term “floodway fringe” used in the Flood Insurance Rate
Maps.
V. Flood Plain. The area adjoining the watercourse which has been or hereafter
may be covered by the regional (100 year) flood.
W. Floodway. The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining
flood plains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regional
flood.
X. Grade – Percentage of. The rise and fall of a street in feet and tenths of a foot
for each 100 feet of horizontal distance measured at the center line of the street.
Y. Lot. The smallest unit of a subdivision individually numbered or designated on
the plat for purposes of description, recording, conveyance, development, or
taxation.
Z. Lot (of Record). A parcel of land, whether subdivided or otherwise legally
described, as of the effective date of this ordinance legally described and
recorded as such in the County Recorder’s office or approved by the City as a lot
subsequent to such date, and which is occupied by or intended for occupancy by
one (1) principle building or principle use together with any accessory buildings
or such open spaces as required by this ordinance and having its principle
frontage on a street or a proposed street approved by the City.
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 2 – Definitions Page 3
AA. Lot – Corner Lot. A lot with a street in front and along one of the sides.
BB. Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the street right-of-way line
and the opposite rear line of the lot measured in the general direction of the side
lot lines.
CC. Lot – Double Frontage. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets.
DD. Lot – Landlocked. A lot without access to a street.
EE. Lot – Lakeshore. A lot having frontage on a lakeshore or other body of water.
FF. Lot – Width. The mean horizontal distance between the side property lines of a
lot as measured at the building lines.
GG. Metes and Bounds Description. A description of real property which is not
described by reference to a platted lot or block, but is described by starting at a
known point and describing the bearings and distances of the lines forming the
boundaries of the property.
HH. Monuments. A meal marker set to mark specific points on a piece of property.
II. Ordinary High Water Level. The line delineating the highest water level which
has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominately aquatic to predominately terrestrial.
JJ. Owner. A person(s), partnership(s), association(s), firm(s), corporation(s) or
combination thereof having proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided.
KK. Parks and Playgrounds. Public land and open spaces dedicated or reserved as
part of the subdivision process for recreational purposes.
LL. Pedestrian Way. A public land and open spaces dedicated or reserved as part of
the subdivision process.
MM. Planning Commission. The Planning Commission of the City of Chisago City.
NN. Planned Unit Development. A development consisting generally of mixed land
uses and housing types in which densities are calculated on a project-wide basis
permitting the clustering of houses or buildings and the provision of common
open space.
OO. Plat. The map or drawing indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of land,
intended to be filed for record.
PP. Plat – Preliminary. The preliminary map, drawing, or chart indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 2 – Definitions Page 4
of the City for their consideration as to its compliance with the City’s ordinances,
policies, and these regulations along with required supporting data.
QQ. Protective Covenants. Contracts made between private parties as to protecting
and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area.
RR. Reserve Strip. Any strip or parcel of land not included as a part of a building lot
and held for development in the future.
SS. Right-of-Way. Land dedicated and publicly owned for use as a street or for other
public purposes.
TT. School District. Independent School District No. 2144.
UU. Screen Plantings. Vegetation planted to screen one use from another one.
VV. Service Lane. A frontage road or marginal access street parallel with and
adjacent to high volume arterial streets and highways, which provides access to
abutting properties and protects through traffic.
WW. Shoreland District. Lands located within the following distances from public
water; (1) 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or
flowage; and (2) 300 feet from a river or street or the landward extent of a flood
plain designated by ordinances on such river or stream, whichever is greater.
XX. Sidewalk. A paved pedestrian pathway separated from the roadway by distance
or grade.
YY. Sketch Plan. A drawing preceding the preliminary plat which shows the
proposed subdivision of property. This plan is not necessarily drawn to scale and
exact accuracy is not a requirement. Its purpose is to enable the subdivider to
save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the local community
and planning officials as to the form of the plat and the objectives of these
regulations.
ZZ. Street. A public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and
vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street highway
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, or boulevard.
AAA. Street, Arterial or Major. A street of considerable continuity, which is used
primarily for heavy through traffic between major traffic generation areas.
BBB. Street – Collector. A feeder street which provides connection primarily between
arterial streets or arterial streets and minor streets. Collector streets include the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and the principal streets
for circulation within such development.
CCC. Street – Commercial or Industrial. A street designed to accommodate
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 2 – Definitions Page 5
commercial or industrial traffic needs.
DDD. Street – Cul-de-sac. A comparatively short, minor street having one end open to
traffic and the other end permanently terminated by a vehicular turn around.
EEE. Street Extension. A platted or planned extension of an existing street.
FFF. Street – Marginal Access. A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to a
highway or an arterial street and which provides access to abutting properties
and protection from through traffic. Parking shall be prohibited on these streets.
GGG. Street – Minor or Local. A street which serves primarily as access to abutting
properties and is not intended to carry through traffic.
HHH. Street – Partial. A street or right-of-way that only partially meets width
requirements. Also referred to as a half street.
III. Street – Private. A street owned by a private individual or individuals and not
maintained by the City.
JJJ. Street – Right-of-way. A tract of land platted or dedicated for use as a street.
Normally includes both the paved portion of the right-of-way and an additional
portion on either side.
KKK. Street Tree. A tree planted close to or within the street right-of-way.
LLL. Street Width. The street right-of-way width, measured at right angle to the center
line of the street.
MMM. Subdivider. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation,
trust, or legal entity having sufficient interest in the land sought to be subdivided
to commerce and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this
ordinance.
NNN. Subdivision. The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots,
tracts or parcels for the purpose of transferring ownership or building
development or if a new street is involved, any division or development of a
parcel of land. The term includes resubdivision of land.
OOO. Tangent. A straight line that is perpendicular to the radius of a curve where it
intersects a curve.
PPP. Thoroughfare. A highway or expressway designed for and carrying mainly
through traffic with limited access.
QQQ. Vertical Curve. The surface curvature on a street center line located between
lines of different percentages of grade.
RRR. Wetland. Land transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the
water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 2 – Definitions Page 6
water. For the purpose of this definition, wetland must have the following three
characteristics; (1) predominance of hydric soil; (2) are inundated or saturated by
surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a
prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adopted to life in saturated soil
conditions; and (3) under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such
vegetation.
2.03 USE OF SKETCH PLAN
A. For purposes of preliminary discussion only, before a submission of a preliminary
plat application, a subdivider may request that the Planning Commission
consider a subdivision sketch plan. The Planning Commission has sole
discretion to grant or refuse such a request. Subject to the granting of a request,
subdivider may prepare or have his surveyor and/or planner draw a sketch plan
of the site to be subdivided.
B. No formal action shall be taken by the Planning Commission on a sketch plan.
Consideration shall be limited to planning review and comment.
C. The subdivider shall furnish the City Administrator with fifteen (15) copies of the
sketch plan.
D. The City, at its discretion, may choose to not expend any City funds for staff to
formally review a sketch plan unless the subdivider agrees to pay all such costs
and makes adequate provisions, such as cash deposit, to do so.
(Adopted: June 1997. Amended: Ord. #____.)
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
3.00 APPLICATIONS FOR SUBDIVISION
3.01 APPLICATION FORM
To initiate a subdivision, the subdivider shall complete an application form provided by
the City Administrator and shall include all required information specified in the
application instructions. An incomplete or inaccurate form shall not be accepted by the
City.
3.02 SIGNATURE(S) REQUIRED
The application form must be signed by the subdivider and land owner prior to
submission to the City. Any application form not properly signed may be rejected as
incomplete.
3.03 PROOF OF OWNERSHIP
At the time of filing the application form, the subdivider shall file Proof of Ownership on a
form acceptable to the City. The City may require Proof of Ownership including current
Abstract of Title or a Registered Property Certificate along with all applicable unrecorded
documents affecting title and an Opinion of Title by the subdivider’s attorney. Failure to
file the required Proof of Ownership shall be a basis for the City to deny the application
or to discontinue processing the application until such Proof of Ownership is submitted.
3.04 APPLICATION FEE
The subdivider shall pay to the City at the time of filing the application, the appropriate
application fee and establish an escrow account for each subdivision as established
from time-to-time by resolution of the City Council. An application form need not be
accepted if the application fee and escrow account are not paid.
3.05 COST RECOVERY
It is the intent of the City to recover all expenses incurred in the review and approval
process. The subdivider shall establish an escrow account with the City for any
expenses incurred over the amount of the application fee. This amount may be
increased dependent on the cost of application review. In the event the actual cost of
the review is less than the estimate, the City shall refund to the subdivider the difference
Chapter 3 – Applications for Subdivision Page 1
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
between the actual cost and the amount of money actually deposited by the subdivider.
In no case shall the application fee or any part of it be refunded.
3.06 PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURE
For those subdivisions requiring a plat as specified herein, the procedure specified in
this section shall be followed.
A. Review of Preliminary Plat. The City Administrator, after receipt of the
application (18 copies), application fee and proof of ownership, shall on a timely
basis, distribute copies of the application and preliminary plat for review,
comment and recommendation as follows:
1 copy to each City Council Member (5 total)
1 copy to each Planning Commission Member (7 total)
1 copy to the City Attorney (including Proof of Ownership)
1 copy to City Engineer
1 copy to School District #2144
1 copy to Minnesota Department of Transportation for projects abutting state
trunk highways.
1 copy to Watershed District
1 copy to Minnesota Department of Natural Resources for areas located in the
Shoreland District or delineated wetland.
Copies shall be provided to the Public Works Department, utility companies,
governmental agencies as needed.
B. Reports and Recommendations. The Administrator shall advise the Planning
Commission of any reports or comments that have been received from review
agencies about the preliminary plat. If no report or comments are received within
fifteen (15) days from date of receipt by review agencies, it may be assumed by
the Planning Commission that there are no objections to the preliminary plat as
submitted.
C. Public Hearing. The City Administrator on behalf of the Planning Commission,
shall set a date for a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be published in
Chapter 3 – Applications for Subdivision Page 2
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
the official newspaper of the municipality at least ten (10) days prior to the date of
the hearing. Such notice shall also be mailed not less than ten (10) days prior to
the date of the public hearing to:
1. All property owners of record according to the county assessment records
within 350 feet of the property.
2. The Commission of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources if the
proposed subdivision is located in part or in total within the “S” Shoreland or
“FP” Flood Plain District.
3. The Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Transportation and the
Chisago County Engineer if the proposed plat abuts or indicates access to a
State Trunk Highway or County State Aid Road.
4. Watershed District or other water regulating agencies.
5. All utility companies which may be affected.
D. The Planning Commission shall consider the preliminary plat and hold a public
hearing at its next regular meeting unless the filing date falls within 20 days of
said meeting, in which case the preliminary plat would be placed on the agenda
and considered at the regular meeting following the next regular meeting. The
City Administrator shall refer said application along with all related information to
the Planning Commission in order to present the subdivision and answer
questions concerning the preliminary plat.
E. Approval Factors. In considering the preliminary plat, the Planning Commission
shall consider the following factors:
1. Consistency with the design standards and other requirements of this
ordinance.
2. Consistency with the City’s Comprehensive Plan or other development plans.
3. Conformance with the Zoning Ordinance.
4. The physical characteristics of the site, including but not limited to,
topography erosion and flooding potential, wetlands and soil limitations and
suitability road access for the type of development or use contemplated.
5. The fiscal or environmental impact upon the City.
6. The dedication of land or payment of fee for parks and trails.
7. The need for environmental review pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Chapter
116D.
Chapter 3 – Applications for Subdivision Page 3
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
F. City Authority. The Planning Commission and City staff may request additional
information from the applicant concerning the preliminary plat or retain consultant
services for review of the preliminary plat information.
G. Recommendation. Within 45 days from the date of the public hearing, the
Planning Commission shall make the findings of fact and recommendation on the
preliminary plat to the City Council.
H. Council Action. After the public hearing and upon receiving the report and
recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall either:
1. Approve or disapprove the request as recommended by the Planning
Commission; or
2. Approve or disapprove the recommendation of the Planning Commission with
modifications, alterations, or differing conditions. Such modifications,
alteration or differing condition shall be in writing and made part of the
Council’s record; or
3. The City Council may refer the preliminary plat request back to the Planning
Commission for reconsideration;
4. In all cases, the preliminary plat shall be approved or denied by the City
Council within 120 days of the date of the completed preliminary plat
application, unless an extension of the review period has been agreed to be
the applicant.
5. Action on the preliminary plat shall be by majority vote of a quorum of the City
Council. The City Administrator shall notify the applicant of the Council’s
action and reasons thereof.
I. After Preliminary Plat Approval. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the City
Council, the subdivider shall submit the final plat to the Planning Commission
within one year after said approval or approval of the preliminary plat shall be
considered null and void. Prior to the expiration of the preliminary plat approval,
the Planning Commission may extend the approval for an additional year upon
request of the subdivider. The extension request shall be in writing specifically
designating the expiration and extension period. The extension shall not be
subject to an additional fee and only one extension may be granted per
preliminary plat.
J. Phased Development. In the case of a phased subdivision to be developed in
stages, the subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat for the entire property and
a final plat for only that portion of the property which he proposes to develop at
that time, provided such portion conforms with all the requirements of these
regulations. Each phase of the subdivision shall be self-sustaining and park
lands dedicated or fees paid. The subdivider shall submit an estimated time
schedule for further staging of the development and final platting.
K. Compliance with Law. All plats shall comply with the provisions of Minnesota
State Statutes and the requirements of the ordinance.
L. Improvements. Prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall have
Chapter 3 – Applications for Subdivision Page 4
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
installed all required improvements or have a signed development agreement
with the City Council for their installation. Required improvements shall conform
to minimum design standards and approved engineering standards established
by the City Engineer or any applicable state or county regulatory agency.
3.07 FINAL PLAT
A. Filing the Final Plat. The subdivider shall file:
1. Eighteen (18) copies of the application and final plat with the City
Administrator.
B. Review of Final Plat. The City Administrator, after receipt of the application, shall
distribute copies of the application and final plat for review, comment, and
recommendation as follows:
1 copy to the City Administrator
1 copy to each City Council Member (5 total)
1 copy to each Planning Commission Member (7 total)
1 copy to the City Attorney (including Proof of Ownership)
1 copy to the City Engineer
1 copy to School District #2144
1 copy to Minnesota Department of Transportation for projects abutting state
trunk highways.
1 copy to Watershed District
1 copy to Minnesota Department of Natural Resources for areas located in the
Shoreland District or delineated wetland.
C. Reports and Recommendations. The administrator shall advise the Planning
Commission of any comments received from the review agencies about the final
plat.
D. Public Hearing. The City Administrator, at the direction of the Planning
Commission, shall set a date for a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing
shall be published in the official newspaper of the municipality at least 10 days
prior to the date of the hearing. Such notice shall also be mailed not less than 10
days prior to the date of the public hearing to:
Chapter 3 – Applications for Subdivision Page 5
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
1. All property owners of record according to the county assessment records
within 350 feet of the property.
2. The Commission of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources if the
proposed subdivision is located in part or in total within the “S” Shoreland or
“FP” Flood Plain District.
3. The Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Transportation and the
Chisago County Engineer if the proposed plat abuts or indicates a State
Trunk Highway or County State Aid Road.
4. Watershed District or other water regulating agencies.
5. All utility companies which may be affected.
E. The City Administrator shall refer said application and final plat to the Planning
Commission for consideration at least seven (7) days before the next regular
meeting.
F. The Planning Commission shall consider the final plat and hold a public hearing
at its next regular meeting. The City Administrator shall refer said application
along with all related information to the Planning Commission for consideration.
The applicant or a representative shall appear before the Planning Commission
in order to answer questions concerning the final plat.
G. Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall review the final plat to assure
consistency with the approved preliminary plat. The Planning Commission shall
make a recommendation for approval or disapproval with conditions and reasons
thereof to the City Council. In the event the plat is disapproved, the subdivider
shall be notified in writing of the reason of such disapproval and what
recommendations are necessary to meet the approval of the Commission.
H. Council Action. The final plat, together with the recommendation of the Planning
Commission shall be submitted to the City Council at its next regularly scheduled
meeting. If approved, the action shall be by resolution, including acceptance of
all agreements for basic improvements, park and trail dedications and other
requirements as indicated by the City Council. If denied, the reasons for such
refusal shall be set forth in the proceedings of the Council and reported to the
subdivider.
Chapter 3 – Applications for Subdivision Page 6
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
I. Subdivider Responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to file the
plat with the appropriate county offices after the final approval pursuant to the
Subdivision Ordinance and Minnesota Statutes 508.08 as amended. Failure to
do so within two (2) years of final plat approval shall render the plat null and void
and require a new application. The City Council, at their discretion, may
grant an extension of the final plat for up to three (3) years from the date
the plat is to expire.
J. DNR Requirements. A copy of all final plats located in total or in part within “FP”
Flood Plain District and “S” Shoreland District shall be submitted to the
Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources within ten (10)
days of final plat approval by the City.
(Adopted: June 1997. Amended: July 2008.)
Chapter 3 – Applications for Subdivision Page 7
4.00 PRELIMINARY & FINAL PLAT DATA REQUIREMENTS
4.01 PRELIMINARY PLAT
The owner or applicant shall prepare and submit a preliminary plat, containing the
following information:
A. Identification and Description:
1. Proposed name of subdivision, not similar to any existing subdivision.
2. Date and North Point.
3. Scale of plat not less than one inch to 200 feet. The plat shall utilize a bar
scale (Standard Engineer Scale).
4. Indication of any proposed covenants.
5. Location of map indicating location of proposed subdivision in relationship to
general known areas and streets.
6. Names and addresses of the subdivider and surveyor making plat and
property owners of record within 350 feet of the proposed subdivision.
7. Legal description of proposed subdivision.
8. Title and opinion or title insurance policy indicating the fee ownership of land
to be subdivided.
B. Existing Conditions and Proposed Design Features.
1. Boundary line of proposed subdivision to such a degree of accuracy that no
major changes are necessary in preparing the plat.
2. Zoning of land within and abutting the subdivision within 350 feet.
3. Layout dimensions and acreage of proposed lots and blocks.
4. Name and location and right-of-way width of existing or proposed streets,
highways, alleys, sidewalks, and pedestrian ways.
5. Ordinary high water mark of all lakes, rivers, streams, and wetlands.
6. Delineation of any wetlands.
7. Delineation of 100 year flood plain.
8. Location and dimensions of existing and proposed public sewer and water
systems.
9. Preliminary grading plan showing existing and proposal contours at a
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 4 – Preliminary & Final Plat Data Requirements Page 1
minimum of 2 feet contours and erosion control measures employed.
10. Existing and proposed storm water drainage system including holding ponds,
drainage easements and drawings of water movements. Data should include
grades, catch basin locations, manholes, hydrants, street pavement width
and type.
11. Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land within 350 feet
identified by name and ownership.
12. Open space, utility and pedestrian easements.
13. Park and trail locations proposed to be dedicated for public use.
14. Existing topography, including contour lines at two foot intervals. Natural
water courses, wetlands, rock outcrops, power transmission poles and lines
and other significant features shall also be shown.
15. Soil survey, grading plan, soil erosion and sediment control plan and
landscaping plan.
16. Tree location map showing existing trees with a caliper of four (4) inches or
greater (measured at breast height) and have a list of the species and
size of tree. The trees shall be identified by a certified forester or other
qualified person using aluminum nails and tags.
17. Statement of proposed use of development including type and number of
structures and units.
18. Proposal building pad elevation, basement and first floor and S type style for
housing development.
19. Statement of adequacy of existing or proposed utilities to accommodate or
serve the proposed development.
20. Statement relative to the relationship of the proposed subdivision with
existing or potential adjacent subdivisions.
21. Statement of estimated costs of proposed required improvements.
22. Other information deemed necessary by the City Administrator, Planning
Commission or City Council.
23. A copy of all existing and proposed private restrictions (restrictive covenants)
shall be submitted.
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 4 – Preliminary & Final Plat Data Requirements Page 2
4.02 FINAL PLAT
The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with provisions of Minnesota State
Statutes and shall include as a minimum the following information:
A. Name of subdivision.
B. Scale, north arrow, and date of plat.
C. All plats shall be drawn on Mylar measuring 20 inches by 20 inches or 30 inches
by 40 inches from outer edge to outer edge. A border line shall be placed onehalf
inch inside the outer edges of the plat on the top, bottom and right hand side
of the plat and two (2) inches inside the outer edge of the left hand side of the
plat.
D. Durable iron monuments shall be set at angle and curve points on the outside
boundary lines of the plat at all block corners and at all intermediate points on the
block lines indicating changes of direction in the lines. The outside boundary
lines of the plat shall be correctly designated showing bearings on all straight
lines, angles at all angle points and central angle and radii and are length for all
curves. All distances shall be shown between monuments as measured to the
nearest hundredths of a foot. If a curved line constitutes the line of more than
one lot in any lot in a block, the central angle for that part of each lot on the
curved line shall be shown. The outside boundary lines shall close by latitude
and departure with an error not to exceed one foot in 7,500 feet.
E. In any instance where a river, stream, creek, lake or pond constitutes a boundary
line within bearings or angles and distances between all angle points and their
relationship to a water line. All distances measured on the survey line between
lot lines shall be shown. The survey line shall be shown as a dashed line.
F. Locations, dimensions and name or number of all existing or proposed lots,
blocks, streets, highways, alleys, parks, trail easements and public lands.
G. All rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds, swamps and wetlands shall be correctly
located and designated.
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 4 – Preliminary & Final Plat Data Requirements Page 3
H. Name and boundary lines of any adjoining platted lands.
I. Location and width of all easements to be dedicated.
J. Name and address of developer and surveyor making the plat.
K. A written instrument of dedication signed and acknowledged by the owner of the
land including a full and accurate description of the land platted, and set forth
what part of the land is dedicated and also to whom and for what purpose the
land portions are dedicated.
L. A written surveyor’s certificate certifying that the plat is a correct representation
of the survey, that all distances are correctly shown on the plat, that all
monuments have been correctly placed in the ground as shown and that all
outside boundary lines are correctly designated on the plat. It should be stated
whether there are no wetlands, streets, or highways to be designated he shall so
state. The certificate shall be sworn to before any officer authorized to
administer an oath.
M. Delinquent tax certification as follows:
No delinquent taxes and transfer entered this _____ day of
__________________.
N. Certification of City approval as follows:
Approved by the City of Chisago City, Minnesota this ______ day of
__________________.
Signed: ___________________________
Mayor
Attest: ____________________________
City Administrator
O. Any additional certification as required by Minnesota State Statutes.
(Adopted: June 1997. Amended: July 2008.)
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 4 – Preliminary & Final Plat Data Requirements Page 4
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
5.00 MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
5.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of good subdivision and site design is to create a functional and attractive
development, to minimize adverse impacts and maintenance costs, and to ensure that a
project will be an asset to a community. To promote this purpose, the subdivision or site
plan shall conform to the following standards which are designed to result in a wellplanned
community without adding unnecessarily to development costs. The design
standards assure that the layout of the subdivision harmonizes with existing plans
affecting the development and its surroundings and are in conformity with the City’s
development objectives for the entire area. Detailed specifications for both the minimum
design standards and the engineering standards may be obtained from the appropriate
utility department (engineering, water, or fire departments).
A. Conformity with the Comprehensive Development Plan, Zoning Ordinance, and
Applicable Rules and Regulations:
1. The proposed subdivision must conform to the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning
Ordinance, and Standards as adopted by the City Council to regulate
development.
B. Land Requirements:
1. Land must be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided. No plan
may be approved if the site is not suitable for having uses of the kind
proposed because of potential flooding, topography or adverse rock
formation.
2. Land having hazards to life, health or property may not be subdivided for
residential purposes until all hazards have been eliminated or unless
adequate safeguards against the hazards are provided by the subdivision
plan.
3. Erosion and sedimentation control plans must be in accordance with the
technical standards and specifications of the Grading Ordinance.
4. Proposed subdivisions must be coordinated with existing nearby local
governments and neighborhoods so that the community as a whole may
develop harmoniously.
C. Streets:
1. Proposed streets must conform to the state road and county highway plans.
2. Streets must be logically related to the topography and have reasonable
grades.
3. Access must be given to all lots and portions of the tract in the subdivision,
and to adjacent unsubdivided parcels unless the topography clearly indicates
Chapter 5 – Minimum Design Standards Page 1
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
that the connection is not feasible. Reserved strips and landlocked areas
shall not be created.
4. The arrangement of streets in the new subdivision must plan for the
continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas without promoting cut
throughs or short cuts that impact residential neighborhoods.
5. If adjoining areas are not subdivided, but may be subdivided in the
foreseeable future, the arrangement of streets in a new subdivision must
make provision for the proper projection of streets into adjoining areas by
carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new subdivision at
appropriate locations.
6. Partial streets will not be permitted.
7. Dead-end streets are prohibited, except or when designed as temporary or
permanent cul-de-sac streets.
8. Private streets and reserve strips are prohibited and no public improvements
may be approved for a private street. All streets must be dedicated for public
use.
9. If a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or planned arterial, a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of the arterial may be required for
adequate protection of residential properties and separation of through and
local traffic. These service streets must be located at a distance from the
major arterial suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land, and for park
purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be considering
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
10. Streets may not be arranged in a way that will cause undue hardship to
owners of adjoining property.
11. Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed 600 feet
in length including a terminal turn around provided at the closed end with a
radius of 60 feet minimum. The length shall be measured along the center
line from the nearest intersection to the center of the cul-de-sac. Use of
permanent cul-de-sacs are discouraged when through streets are
practical.
12. Where a temporary cul-de-sac is required, the turnaround right-of-way shall
be placed adjacent to a plat boundary line and a right-of-way of the same
width as the street carried to said property line in such a way as to permit
future extension of the street in the adjoining tract. At such time as such a
street is extended, the acreage covered by the turnaround outside the
boundaries of the extended street shall revert in ownership to the property
owner facing on the temporary turnaround.
Chapter 5 – Minimum Design Standards Page 2
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
13. Street Design
a. Minimum right-of-way widths and pavement widths (face to face of
curb) for each type of public street or road are as follows:
Type of Street
Right-of-way
Width
Roadway Width
Arterial
120 ft. by traffic
needs As determined
Major Collector 80 feet 44 feet
Minor Collector 60 feet 42 feet
Commercial or
Industrial Service 60 to 70 feet 32 to 44 feet
Local 60 feet 28 to 32 feet
Cul-de-sac 60 feet radius 48’ turnaround
b. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate
width, sufficient additional width must be provided to meet the above
standards.
c. Alternative street standards may be allowed when it can be
demonstrated that the safety and function of the street system will not
be adversely impacted by the alternative standards and that the
development will be attractive and can be accommodated by the
street system.
d. Additional right-of-way and roadway width may be required to promote
public safety and convenience when special conditions require it or to
provide parking space in areas of intensive use.
e. Extensions of existing streets with lesser right-of-way than prescribed
above, may be permitted by modification.
f. Restrictions of Access. Access from minor streets onto state and
county aid highways, is discouraged at intervals of less than five
hundred (500) feet.
g. Street Jog. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one
hundred fifty (150) feet are prohibited.
h. Deflection. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at
any one point by more than ten (10) degrees, they must be connected
by a curve with a radius of not less than one hundred (100) feet.
i. Grades. Centerline gradients must be at least 0.5 percent and may
not exceed the following:
j.
Classification Gradient (in percent)
Thoroughfares and Collector Street 5
Minor Streets 7.5
k. Vertical Curves. Different connecting street gradients must be
connected with vertical curves. Minimum length, in feet, of these
curves shall be twenty (20) times the algebraic difference in the
percent of grade of the two adjacent slopes.
l. Angle of Intersection. The angle formed by any intersecting streets
Chapter 5 – Minimum Design Standards Page 3
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
may not be less than 60 degrees with 90 degree intersections
preferred.
m. Size of Intersection. Intersections of more than four corners are
prohibited.
n. Corner Radii. Roadways of street intersections must be rounded by a
radius of not less than fifteen (15) feet. Roadways of alley-street
intersections must be rounded by a radius of not less than six (6) feet.
Corners at the entrances to the turnaround portions of the cul-de-sac
must be rounded by a radius of not less than fifteen (15) feet.
o. Street Pavement. New developments will require paved streets. The
design of street pavement for all streets covered by this regulation
must be in accordance with the State of Minnesota Highway
Department Road Design Manual No. 5-291 for flexible pavements.
The design thickness of the surfacing elements must be in
accordance with the flexible pavement design standard for road
classifications as follows:
Classification Pavement Design
Axle Load
Thoroughfare, Collector Streets &
Commercial or Industrial Service Streets 10 tons
Local 7 ton minimum
p. Soil Tests. To determine subgrade soil classifications, soil samples
must be collected and analyzed by a licensed testing laboratory.
Reports of the soil analysis must be submitted to the City Engineer
with the pavement plans. Soil samples must be taken along the
centerline of the proposed road at intervals not exceeding 300 feet.
q. Curb and Gutter. Concrete curb and gutter must be constructed on
both sides of streets. The construction must be in accordance with
Standard Specifications for Highway Construction, M.H.D. Spec. No.
2531. Concrete curb and gutter cross sections shall be either M.H.D.
Design No. B618 or M.H.D. Design No. D418.
r. Boulevards. All boulevards must be at least four (4) feet in width and
must have four (4) inches of top soil (black dirt) placed on them and
then be sodded.
14. Permanent cul-de-sac streets, may not exceed six hundred (600) feet in
length.
15. Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, a turnaround
right-of-way must be designed to permit future extension of the street into the
adjoining tract. At the time a street is extended, the acreage covered by the
turnaround outside the boundaries of the extended street will revert in
ownership to the property owner fronting on the temporary turnaround.
Chapter 5 – Minimum Design Standards Page 4
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
16. Alley Design. Alleys may be allowed and are subject to the following
standards:
Classification Right-of-way Width Pavement
Residential (two-way) 24 feet 16 feet
Residential (one-way) 20 feet 12 feet
17. Grades. All centerline gradients must be at least 0.5 percent and shall not
exceed eight (8) percent.
18. Street Names.
a. Names of new streets must not duplicate existing or platted street names
unless a new street is a continuation of or in alignment with the existing or
platted street. In that event, it must bear the same name of the existing or
platted street so in alignment.
19. Street Signs.
a. All street signs must be provided at the expense of the subdivider.
20. Street Trees and Landscaping Plan.
a. On average, three (3) street trees shall be planted per lot. They must be
placed inside the property line and not in the boulevard unless approved
by the City Administrator.
b. The type of species of trees planted must be from the list of trees
approved by the City Council. Trees shall be root structures that are
less likely to interfere with utility lines, break up sidewalks, and cause
other nuisance damage are desirable. Trees must have a trunk diameter
(measured at breast height) of not less than 2 inches caliper.
Approved multiple varieties shall be used.
c. Alternative street tree and landscape standards may be allowed in
planned unit developments with review and approval by the Planning
Commission.
21. Residential Street Lighting.
a. A street lighting plan must be submitted to the City Engineer to
accommodate safe travel and to preserve the character of the
neighborhood. Street lights are required and must comply with city
specifications.
22. Sidewalk and Trail Design. Sidewalks are required and must meet the
following standards:
a. Widths. All sidewalk widths must when installed conform to the following
minimum standards:
Classification Width
Single Family Area 5 feet
Multiple Family Area & Public
Building Sites
6 feet
Chapter 5 – Minimum Design Standards Page 5
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Commercial Areas 8 feet
Industrial Areas 6 feet
b. Grades. Sidewalks shall slope ¼ inch per foot away from the property
line and the profile grade may not exceed 7.5 percent.
c. Sidewalks required. Sidewalks are required on all local collector or
through streets unless an alternative location is approved by the City
Council with recommendations from the Planning Commission.
Sidewalks must be placed in a public right-of-way or utility easement.
d. Provision for handicapped. Sidewalks must be brought to a maximum of
1 ½” above the street grade of all intersections to facilitate movement for
elderly and the handicapped.
e. Multi use walking or biking trails must be eight (8) feet in width with
adequate right-of-way.
f. All required walks must be concrete six (6) inches thick and constructed
to city specifications.
23. Public Utilities.
a. Water Supply. Extensions of the public water supply system must be
designed to provide public water service to each lot as required by the
City Water Department.
b. Sewage Disposal. Extensions of the public sanitary sewer system must
be designed to provide public sewer service to each lot as required by the
City Engineer.
c. In areas where public water and sewer service cannot be provided onsite,
sewer systems and private wells may be utilized only until municipal
services are available, and only if a modification is granted by the City
Council. All on-site systems must meet Minnesota PCA requirements as
administered by the Building Official.
d. All electrical, telephone and other wire or cable transmitted utility lines
and services must be installed underground in a common trench unless
an alternative is approved by the City Engineer.
24. Drainage.
a. All surface and underground drainage systems must be installed to
adequately remove all natural drainage that accumulates on the
developed property. All systems must be in conformance with the
community drainage plan and all piping must provide complete removal
and a permanent solution for the removal of drainage water. The
drainage system may include a storm sewer system or a system of open
ditches, culverts, pipes, catch basins, and ponding areas.
b. The drainage plan must include water quality treatment provisions, at a
minimum, meeting “NURP” pond standards (Phosphorous removal
efficiency of at least 65 percent, capacity of 2.5”, 24 hour storm) with 25
percent increase for sediment and include sufficient storm water holding
capacity to meet the “No Net Increase” design standard for a 100 year
storm.
c. All development areas that drain into School, Margaret and Wallmark
Chapter 5 – Minimum Design Standards Page 6
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
lakes must show how the proposed drainage system will minimize the
impact on those DNR protected wetlands.
25. House Plumbing.
a. When an individual sewage system is used and the septic tank is placed
on a side other than that from which the public sewer line would connect,
it must be required that a capped sewage disposal line is extended from
the point of ground entrance of basement or house to a point five (5) feet
beyond and to the side from which the future sewer connection will most
likely be made. Inside the basement, the elbow must be set up to be
easily reversed for connection to the capped line.
26. Easements.
a. Provide for Utilities. Easements of 10 feet on the front lot lines and 5 feet
on the rear and side lot lines must normally be provided for public utilities.
If underground utilities are being installed, additional easements may be
required.
b. Provided for Drainage. Easements must be provided along each side of
the centerline of any water course or drainage channel to a sufficient
width to provide proper maintenance and protection and to provide for
storm water runoff and installation and maintenance of storm sewers.
c. Dedication. Utility and drainage easements must be dedicated for the
required use.
d. Open space. Easements for the provision and protection of open space
or wetlands may be required.
27. Block Design.
a. Block length and width or acreage within bounding streets must
accommodate the size of residential lots in the area and provide for
convenient access, circulation control, and safety of street traffic.
b. In residential areas, without water frontage, blocks shall not be less than
four hundred (400) feet nor more than fifteen hundred (1,500) feet in
length measured along the greatest dimension of the enclosed block
area, unless modifications are necessitated because of topography or
conformance with an adjoining plat.
c. In blocks over nine hundred (900) feet long, ten (10) foot wide pedestrian
crosswalks may be required through the blocks in locations deemed
necessary to public health, convenience and enjoyment. Suitable
setbacks, paving, landscaping, or fencing may be required.
d. Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the element of
design contained in this section if the nature of the use requires other
treatment. In such cases, off-street parking for employees and customers
must be provided, along with safe and convenient limited access to the
street system. Space for off-street loading must be provided with similar
access. Extension of roads, railroad access right-of-way and utilities
must be provided.
e. Blocks must be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots with minimum
Chapter 5 – Minimum Design Standards Page 7
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
depth as required by the zoning ordinance except when adjoining a lake,
stream, railroad or thoroughfare of where one tier of lots is necessary
because of topographic conditions.
28. Lot Requirements.
a. Side lot lines must be substantially at right angles to straight street lines
or radial to curved street lines or radial to lake or stream shores unless
topographic conditions necessitate a different arrangement.
b. Each lot must front upon a public street.
c. For areas with urban sewer service available, no lot may have less area
or width than is required by the zoning regulations applying to the district
in which it is located. For unsewered areas in all zoning districts, the
minimum lot size shall be 2.0 acres of lot area, except where more square
footage is required by zoning regulations. Exceptions to lot size
standards may be allowed through the planned development review
process.
d. Lots designed for commercial or industrial purposes must provide
adequate off-street service, loading and parking facilities.
e. Building Sites. Each lot must have a total width at the front or rear lot line
of not less than thirty (30) feet.
f. Corner lots must be platted at least twenty (20) feet wider than interior
lots.
g. Butt lots in any subdivision are to be discouraged. Where butt lots must
be used to fit a particular type of design, they must be platted at least ten
(10) feet wider than the average width of interior lots in the block.
h. Through or Double Frontage Lots shall not be permitted except where the
lots abut a thoroughfare or major highway. These must have an
additional depth of twenty (20) feet for screen planting along the rear lot
line.
i. Water Courses. Lots abutting upon a water course, drainageway,
channel or stream must have an additional depth or width as required to
assure wetland setbacks are met.
j. Lots with lakeshore frontage must be designed so that the lot lines
extended maintain the closest approximation to riparian rights for each
lot.
k. Natural Features must be shown for all natural features, such as tree
growth, water courses, historic or cultural sites or other unique site
conditions.
l. Lot Remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after
subdividing of larger tract must be added to adjacent lots.
m. Access to Thoroughfares. In the case where a proposed plat is adjacent
to a limited access highway, other major highway, or thoroughfare, there
must be no direct vehicular access from individual lots. In the platting of
small tracts of land fronting on limited access highways or thoroughfares
where there is no other alternative, a temporary entrance may be granted,
but when neighboring land becomes subdivided and more preferable
access arrangements become possible, temporary access permits will be
eliminated.
n. Political Subdivision Lines. No lot may extend over a political subdivision
Chapter 5 – Minimum Design Standards Page 8
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
boundary.
o. Large Lot Planning. In any area where lots are platted in excess of
32,000 square feet or 180 feet in width at the building setback line, a
preliminary resubdivision plan may be required showing potential and
feasible ways in which the lot or lots may be resubdivided in future years
for more intensive use of the land. The placement of buildings or
structures upon these lots must allow for potential resubdivision.
29. Protected Areas.
a. Where land proposed for subdivision is deemed environmentally sensitive
by the City due to the existence of wetlands, drainage ways, water
courses, floodable areas, steep slopes or other environmental features,
the design of said subdivision must clearly reflect all necessary measures
of protection to insure against adverse environmental impact.
b. All submittals required by the above ordinances must be submitted in
conjunction with the Preliminary Plat.
30. Monuments.
a. All lot corner pipes or iron rods must be a minimum of one half (1/2) inch
in diameter, 18 inches in length, and shall be inscribed with the
registration number of the land surveyor performing the survey as
prescribed in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 505.
31. Inspection.
a. All required improvements must be inspected by the City Engineer during
construction at the expense of the subdivider.
(Adopted: June 1997. Amended: July 2008.)
Chapter 5 – Minimum Design Standards Page 9
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 6 – Required Improvements & Financial Arrangements Page 1
6.00 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS & FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS
6.01 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED
The following improvements and financial arrangements shall be required in all
subdivisions:
A. Prior to the approval of a plat by the governing body, the subdivider must have
agreed, in the manner set forth below, to install, in conformity with approved
construction plans and applicable standards and ordinances, the following
improvements on the site:
1. Survey Monuments. All subdivision boundary corners, block and lot corners,
road intersection corners and points of tangency and curvature must be
marked with survey monuments meeting the minimum requirements of state
law. All U.S., state, county, and other official bench marks, monuments or
triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property must be preserved in
precise position unless a relocation is approved by the controlling agency.
2. Grading. The full width of the right-of-way of each street and alley dedicated
in the plat must be graded according to the approved grading plan.
3. Pavement. All streets and alleys must be improved with concrete or
bituminous surface.
4. Curb and Gutter. Concrete curb and gutter must be installed along both
sides of all streets and alleys that are of an urban design.
5. Sidewalks may be required along both sides of all streets in areas where
residential density equals or exceeds two (2) dwelling units per acre or in
commercial areas.
6. Water Mains. The subdivider is required to install water mains in the platted
area and connect them to the public water system in accordance with city
specifications.
7. Sanitary Sewer. The subdivider is required to install sanitary sewer lines in
the platted areas and connect to the public system in accordance with city
specifications.
8. Drainage Facilities. Drainage facilities and easements must be installed that
will adequately provide for the drainage of surface water. A storm sewer may
be required. Storm water convenience systems shall provide ten year
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 6 – Required Improvements & Financial Arrangements Page 2
protection for streets, with emergency overflow provided. All dwellings and
businesses shall have a minimum of 100 year protection plus 3 feet or 1 foot
of freeboard, if emergency overflow is provided. Drainage way easements or
land dedication may be required when the easements or land is needed for
flood planning managements, property drainage, prevention of erosion,
pedestrian access to water bodies or other public purpose.
9. Parks and Trails. Designated neighborhood or community parks and trails
must be graded and improved as requested by the park dedication policy.
10. Miscellaneous Facilities. Special tree planting, street name signs, lighting,
traffic control signs, oversized utility trunk lines, pedestrian ways and other
improvements may be required to mitigate the impact of a proposed
subdivision.
6.02 PAYMENT FOR INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
A. The required improvements are to be furnished and installed at the sole expense
of the subdivider. If any improvements installed within the subdivision will be of
substantial benefit to lands beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, provision
may be made for causing a portion of the cost of the improvement, to be
assessed against the benefiting properties. The subdivider will be required to
pay for the portion of the whole cost of the improvement that will represent the
benefit to the property within the subdivision.
6.03 DEVELOPER’S AGREEMENT PROVIDING FOR THE INSTALLATION OF
IMPROVEMENTS
A. Prior to the installation of any required improvements and prior to approval of the
final plat, the subdivider must enter into a written contract with the community
that requires the subdivider to furnish and construct the improvements at their
sole cost and in accordance with plans and specifications in accordance with any
conditions of approval.
B. Prior to final plat, no subdivider is permitted to start work on development of any
lot in a subdivision without special approval of the City Council.
6.04 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 6 – Required Improvements & Financial Arrangements Page 3
A. The contract provided for in Section 6.03.A. above requires the subdivider to
make an escrow deposit or, in lieu thereof, furnish a performance bond. The
escrow deposit or performance bond must conform to the requirements of this
regulation.
B. Escrow Deposit. An escrow deposit must be made with the City Administrator in
a sum equal to 125% of the total cost as estimated by the engineer of all the
improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider pursuant to the
contract, that have not been completed prior to approval of the plat. The total
costs shall include expenses of inspection by the City as well as administrative,
legal and engineering costs incurred by the City. The City shall be entitled to
reimburse itself out of the deposit for any cost and expense incurred by the City
for completion of the work in case of default of the subdivider under the contract
and for any damages sustained on account of any breach thereof. Upon
completion of the work and termination of any liability, the remaining balance in
the deposit must be refunded to the subdivider.
C. Performance Bond. As required and approved by the City, the subdivider may
furnish a performance bond with corporate surety, in a sum equal to 125% of the
total cost as estimated by the engineer of all the improvements to be furnished
and installed by subdivider pursuant to the contract, which have not been
completed prior to the approval of the plat. The bond must be approved as to
form by the attorney and filed with the city clerk.
6.05 CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND INSPECTION
A. Construction plans for the required improvements conforming in all respects with
the standards and ordinances of the community must be prepared at the
subdivider’s expense by a professional engineer who is registered in the State of
Minnesota and the plans of construction items must be submitted to the engineer
for approval and for an estimate of the total costs of the required improvements.
Upon approval of the plans approved by the engineer plus two (2) as built prints
and an electronic disc record in a format readable by the City’s CAD software
must be furnished to the city to be filed as a public record.
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 6 – Required Improvements & Financial Arrangements Page 4
B. All required improvements on the site that are to be installed under the provisions
of this regulation must be inspected during the course of construction by the City
Engineer at the subdivider’s expense and acceptance by the city is subject to the
Engineer’s certificate of compliance with the contract.
6.06 IMPROVEMENTS COMPLETED PRIOR TO APPROVAL OF THE PLAT
A. Improvements within a subdivision which have been completed prior to
application for approval of the plat or execution of the contract for installation of
the required improvements may be accepted as equivalent improvements in
compliance with these requirements only if the City Engineer will certify that the
existing improvements conform to applicable standards.
6.07 TRUNK FACILITIES
A. Where larger size water main, sanitary sewer, storm drain or similar facilities is
required to serve areas outside the subdivision, a larger facility must be
constructed. The additional cost is to be borne by the benefiting properties and
assessments are to be determined by the City Council in a proceeding conducted
under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429.
6.08 ALTERNATE INSTALLATION AND INCOMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS
A. The governing body may elect to install any or all of the required improvements
pursuant to a cash escrow agreement or other financial arrangements with the
subdivider or pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429.
B. The City Council may also elect to commence assessment proceedings, utilize
funds of cash escrow agreement, or otherwise to finance and install
improvements, if the improvements are required in order to provide greater
assurance of public health, assure reliability of water supply, provide for economy
of installation, provide more effective fire fighting through hydrants and otherwise
protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare.
(Adopted: June 1997. Amended: Ord. #____.)
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 7 – General Provisions Page 1
7.00 GENERAL PROVISIONS
7.01 PROTECTION OF NATURAL FEATURES
A. The governing body reserves the right to decline approval of any subdivision if
due regard is not shown for the preservation of all natural features such as large
trees, lakes, rivers, and other water courses, scenic points, historical spots and
similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and stability
to the proposed development of the property and community.
7.02 PARKS, OPEN SPACE, AND PARK DEDICATION
A. All subdivisions are subject to the Chisago City Park and Trail Dedication
Requirements and must follow all standards and guidelines required by said
policy. All required dedication shall be made before or as a part of final plat
recording.
7.03 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
A. All subdivisions are subject to environmental review requirements as described in
Chapter 4410 of the Minnesota Environmental Quality Board regulations.
(Adopted: June 1997. Amended: Ord. #____.)
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 8 – Enforcement Page 1
8.00 ENFORCEMENT
8.01 BUILDING PERMITS
A. No building permit may be issued for any construction, enlargement, alteration or
repair, demolition or moving of any building or structure on any lot or parcel until
all the requirements of this subdivision code have been fully met and a final plat
has been recorded. Building permits may be issued with the special approval of
the City Council only after curbs and gutters have been installed and Class 5 is
graded to final grade. No certificates of occupancy shall be issued until
subdivision final improvements are completed and accepted by the City.
8.02 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES
A. Any firm, person or corporation who violates any of the provisions of these
regulations or who sells, leases or offers for sale any lot, block or tract of land
herewith regulated before all the requirements of these regulations have been
complied with, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, is subject
to fine or imprisonment. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist constitutes
a separate offense.
8.03 SEPARABILITY
A. It is hereby declared to the intention that the several provisions of this regulation
are separable in accordance with the following:
1. If any court of competent jurisdiction adjudges any provision of this regulation
to be invalid, the judgment will not affect any other provision of this regulation
not specifically included in the judgment.
2. If any court of competent jurisdiction adjudges invalid the application of any
provision of this regulation to a particular property, building or structure, the
judgment will not affect other property, buildings or structures.
(Adopted: June 1997. Amended: Ord. #____.)
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 9 – Fees Page 1
9.00 FEES
9.01 BASE FEE REQUIRED
To defray the administrative costs of processing requests for subdivisions, a base fee
shall be paid by all applicants in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by resolution
of the City Council.
9.02 STAFF AND CONSULTING TIME
In order to defray the additional costs of processing applications for development, all
applicants shall pay the total costs to staff and/or consulting time for review and in
producing materials for the applicants request and all materials for said requests.
A. “Materials” shall include, but not be limited to, maps, graphs, charts, drawings,
etc., and all printing or reproduction of them.
B. “Staff and/or Consulting Time” shall include any time spent in either researching
for or actual production of materials by City staff or City consultants.
C. The rate schedule for “staff or consulting time” shall be available to the applicant
from the City Administrator prior to staff or consultant review of application for
development.
9.03 PAYMENT OF FEES
Fees shall be payable at the time applications are filed with the City Administrator and
are not refundable unless application is withdrawn prior to referral to the Planning
Commission and prior to any publication required by the applications. A deposit to cover
staff or consulting time and special materials will be estimated and required by the City
Administrator at the time the base fee is paid.
9.04 ADOPTION OF FEE SCHEDULE BY CITY COUNCIL
Fee schedule for subdivision applications shall be set accordingly and adopted by
resolution of the City Council.
Chisago City Subdivision Ordinance
Chapter 9 – Fees Page 2
(Adopted: June 1997. Amended: Ord. #____.)